



















































2 | PUBLIC SAFETY
2.1 | OVERVIEW
Emergency management              Over the past twenty years, seven natural-hazard events
have resulted in the declaration of federal and state emergencies by the U.S. president
and California governor: 1983 landslides, 1985 floods and winter storms, Loma Prieta
earthquake (October 17, 1989), East Bay Hills fire (October 20, 1991), 1995 floods and
winter storms, El Niño storms of 1997 and La Niña storms of 1998. In addition, the
freeze of 1990 constituted a state emergency, but not a federal one. (Declarations of
disaster are necessary to activate federal and state assistance programs.) The
management of emergencies and disasters consists of three distinct phases: (1)
mitigation of potential hazards and pre-event preparedness (and including event
forecasting, response planning, training and public education); (2) response during or
soon after the event, most often by fire, police and medical-services personnel and
trained volunteers (also includes public alerts and notification, evacuation, search and
rescue, and critical, short-term assistance to victims); and (3) post-event recovery, which
includes debris removal, re-establishment of public and private services, financial and
other longer-term types of assistance to victims, reconstruction, and collection and
analysis of data related to the event.

                     PROTECT OAKLAND
                                                                     Violent crime      Violent crime, while not a legal classification, is considered to include
                                                                     various types of felonies such as murder, rape, aggravated assault, burglary, robbery and
                                                                     arson. (Less serious crimes are considered misdemeanors, and include simple assault,
                                                                     disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, vandalism and loitering.) Because of the high
                                                                     human and economic price it exerts, violent crime consistently ranks as one of the
                                                                     public’s major concerns—the mere perception of crime can intimidate individuals and
                                                                     undermine whole neighborhoods. Due to a complex mix of social, demographic and
                                                                     economic factors, national rates of violent crime began to increase substantially in the
                                                                     late 1960s, peaked in the early 1990s, and have declined considerably since then.
                                                                     Nevertheless, the United States still has the unfortunate distinction of being one of the
                                                                     most—perhaps the most—violent and crime-ridden of all industrialized countries.
                                                                     Terrorism      Events in the United States over the last decade or so—the 1993 bombing
Public Safety | 12
                                                                     of the World Trade Center, the 1995 bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal building
                                                                     and the tragic events of September 11, 2001—have made it clear that the United States
                                                                     is not immune to the dangers of terrorism. An inelegant description of terrorism is
                                                                     violence directed against non-combattants with the goal of spreading fear and anxiety to
                                                                     further social or political objectives. This broad description covers acts committed by
                                                                     domestic and foreign-based individuals and political or religious organizations, and even
                                                                     by sovereign nation states. (Because of the assistance and resources that nation states
                                                                     are capable of providing, some experts consider state-sponsored terrorism to pose the
                                                                     greatest threat to the United States.) Terrorism may involve injury to people or damage
                                                                     to property, and may manifest itself through bombings, highjackings, kidnappings,
                                                                     arson, assassinations, threats only, disruption of “lifeline systems” and other critical
                                                                     infrastructure, and the use of conventional, nuclear, biological or chemical weapons.
                                                                     2.2 | INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
                          FEMA is a former independent agency that   Emergency management agencies             The Federal Emergency Management Agency
                         became part of the new U.S. Department of   (FEMA) is charged, at the federal level, with helping the country prevent, prepare for,
                                 Homeland Security in March 2003.
                                                                     respond to, and recover from the full range of natural and human-caused disasters.
                                                                     FEMA provides financial assistance and other resources to regions declared disaster

                                                                                             CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
areas by the president. The California Governor’s Office of Emergency Services (OES)             The main pieces of legislation related to
performs similar services, on a smaller scale, at the state level. The state’s OES assists       emergency management in California are found in
                                                                                                 Sections 8550-8668 of the California Government
local governments in their emergency preparedness, response and recovery efforts;                Code.
serves as the conduit for federal disaster assistance; provides emergency information to
the public; and coordinates the statewide mutual aid system. The local equivalent of
these two agencies is the Oakland OES, a division of the Oakland Fire Department
(OFD). Among its important functions, the Oakland OES serves as the certified unified
program agency (CUPA) for the city, enforcing federal, state and local legislation related
to hazardous materials (see Chapter 5, “Hazardous Materials”), and operates the city’s
Emergency Operations Center (EOC; see the next section, “Analysis”).
Finally, there are several nonprofit organizations, neighborhood associations, and               CORE is a program offering free emergency
religious, civic and business groups in Oakland that are active in the field of emergency        prevention, preparedness and response training to
                                                                                                 individuals, neighborhood groups and other
management. Groups worthy of mention include the American Red Cross, the                         community organizations. CORE participants
                                                                                                                                                       13 | Public Safety
Salvation Army, CORE teams (Citizens of Oakland Respond to Emergencies), Alameda                 learn basic emergency skills and receive hands-on
CARD (Collaborating Agencies Responding to Disasters, which provides for the                     experience in fire suppression, light urban search
emergency needs of vulnerable and underserved populations in Alameda County), and                and rescue, damage assessment and first aid.
                                                                                                 The program’s goal is to increase self-reliance
Oakland Amateur Radio Emergency Services (volunteer organization of licensed                     skills at the individual and neighborhood levels in
amateur radio service operators who support Oakland government officials with                    the event of a major disaster, when the
communication services during emergency conditions).                                             capabilities of official emergency-response
                                                                                                 personnel might be overwhelmed.
Violent crime      The prevention and management of violent crime is primarily a local
responsibility. The U.S. Department of Justice and its state-level equivalent, the
California Department of Justice, are charged with enforcing federal and state statutes,
respectively, on a wide range of criminal offenses, including public corruption, organized
crime, fraud, human trafficking, white-collar crime, domestic violence and
discrimination. However, these agencies generally become involved in violent-crime
offenses only when they involve multiple jurisdictions or are of a significant enough
scale that they exceed the response capabilities of the local law-enforcement agency.
In Oakland, the local law-enforcement agency is the Oakland Police Department
(OPD). In addition to several ancillary units reporting directly to the police chief, OPD
is organized into three bureaus: services, field operations and investigations. The Bureau
of Services is made up primarily of units providing department-wide auxiliary functions
such as administration, accounting, communications, personnel, training and records.
The Bureau of Field Operations includes divisions handling neighborhood services
(including 57 community policing beats), field support (encompassing various

                     PROTECT OAKLAND
                                                                          community involvement and outreach functions), special operations (including airport
                                                                          security, animal services and the canine unit) and traffic operations. Finally, the Bureau
                                                                          of Investigations includes organizational sections specializing in homicide,
                                                                          robbery/assault, property crimes (arson, environmental crimes and auto theft), “special
                                                                          victims” (including missing persons and family violence) and narcotics.
                                                                          Terrorism      Because of terrorism’s cross-border nature, terrorism prevention is largely
                                                                          a responsibility of the federal government. However, before the events of September
                                                                          11, 2001, there was no federal agency with homeland security as its primary objective.
                                                                          To remedy this situation, the government established the Department of Homeland
                                                                          Security (DHS) in early 2003, consolidating 22 separate agencies with relevant
                                                                          responsibilities into the 15th cabinet department. (Merged agencies include FEMA, the
                                                                          Coast Guard, the Secret Service, the Transportation Security Administration and the
                                                                          Customs Service.) DHS’s primary objectives are to prevent terrorist attacks in the U.S.
Public Safety | 14
                                                                          and to strenghten the capacity to respond if attacks do occur. To accomplish its
                                                                          mission, DHS works in partnership with other federal agencies with responsibilities
                                                                          related to homeland security—the Federal Bureau of Investigations and the Central
                                                                          Intelligence Agency among them—and also with state and local governments. In
                                                                          California, the main agency involved in activities related to terrorism prevention and
                                                                          response is the Governor’s OES, while in Oakland it is the Fire Department’s OES.
                      The California Environmental Quality Act is found   California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                    CEQA, a state law, requires
                       in Sections 21000-21177 of the California Public   public agencies in California to identify the significant environmental effects of their
                                                     Resources Code.
                                                                          actions (including the approval of development proposals), and to avoid or mitigate such
                                                                          effects, if feasible. The state’s guidelines interpreting CEQA contain a “checklist” with a
                                                                          wide range of environmental impacts that public agencies, including the City of
                                                                          Oakland, should consider in their evaluation of development projects. Considerations
                                                                          related to public safety include the potential for a project to:
                                                                          ● result in inadequate emergency access;
                                                                          ● impair implementation of or physically interfere with an adopted emergency response
                                                                             plan or emergency evacuation plan; and
                                                                          ● result in substantial adverse physical impacts associated with the provision of, or need
                                                                             for, new or physically altered governmental facilities in order to maintain acceptable
                                                                             service ratios, response times or other performance objectives for fire protection,
                                                                             police protection or other public services or facilities.

                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
2.3 | ANALYSIS
Emergency management             As mentioned in the previous section, the Oakland OES            Regulations establishing the Standardized
operates an emergency operations center (EOC) from which centralized emergency                    Emergency Management System are found in
                                                                                                  Section 8607 of the California Government Code.
management would be performed during a disaster. In the event of a disaster, EOC
staff would manage emergency operations, coordinate operations with other
government agencies, prepare situation and operational reports, receive and disseminate
warning information, provide emergency instructions to the public, and communicate
with the media. The EOC includes an operations area, radio room, kitchen, conference
rooms, bathrooms and office areas. It has the capability to house and feed staff for 72
hours, and sufficient fuel reserve for continuous emergency power to last five days. The
EOC would be activated after a significant earthquake, uncontrolled fire or dam failure,
impending or declared state-of-war emergency, or an emergency situation of such
                                                                                                                                                    15 | Public Safety
magnitude that it will require a large commitment of resources from two or more city
agencies over an extended period of time.
The Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) is a framework for
standardizing emergency-response procedures in California to facilitate the flow of
information and resources among agencies in responding to multi-agency emergencies.
Created in response to the Oakland Hills fire of 1991, SEMS sets standard operating
procedures, terminology, chains of command, communication protocols and equipment
so that various agencies and jurisdictions, even at different levels of government, can act
as a single response entity. The City of Oakland has adopted SEMS, and Oakland OES
has prepared a SEMS emergency plan describing how city agencies would respond to
declared emergencies in the city. The plan covers five functional areas, corresponding to
the five essential functions under SEMS: management, operations, planning/intelligence,
logistics, and finance/administration.
Other information covered in the emergency plan includes procedures for the
preservation and continuity of city government (including lines of succession, temporary
city-government seats, a temporary alternate EOC and preservation of vital records);
coordination with Alameda County, other cities, special districts, and nonprofit and
volunteer organizations; day-to-day management of the EOC; policies for activation of
the EOC and of the five functional sections described above; and organizational and
responsibility charts. General duties and responsibilities are outlined for every party
responsible for emergency response—from the mayor and city council to every unit and

                     PROTECT OAKLAND
                                       branch of the five functional sections—and extensively detailed action checklists are
                                       provided for each party. Finally, the plan’s appendices include such resources as disaster
                                       reporting forms, emergency notification and employee-recall procedures, sample press
                                       releases and public-information notices, and sample resolutions declaring a local
                                       emergency or requesting a state emergency.
                                       Besides the SEMS emergency plan, there are many plans and reports that address
                                       emergency-management operations in Oakland. Copies of most of those documents,
                                       even of those prepared by agencies other than the City of Oakland, are found in the
                                       EOC. These documents include:
                                       ● OES and citywide Power Outages: Response Concept of Operations
                                       ● Oakland Metropolitan Medical Response System Plan
                                       ● Alameda County Multicasualty Medical Response Plan
                                       ● Alameda County Oil Spill Response Plan
Public Safety | 16
                                       ● Emergency operations plans for the Oakland Unified School District, East Bay
                                          Municipal Utility District, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Alameda County Transit
                                          and Bay Area Rapid Transit
                                       In 2000-2002, the City of Oakland, along with the cities of Alameda and San Leandro
                                       and the University of California at Berkeley, installed a network of outdoor warning
                                       sirens to alert the public in the case of emergencies. The sirens would be activated in
                                       the event of major earthquakes, chemical spills, fires, terrorist acts and other large-scale
                                       public-safety incidents to alert the public to tune in to Radio Oakland (530AM), KCBS
                                       (740AM) or KTOP (cable channel 10) for information and instructions. The network
                                       currently covers more than 83 square miles, an area occupied by 555,000 residents, and
                                       includes 27 sirens in Oakland (see Figure 2.1). The sirens’ sound range is approximately
                                       one mile and, in Oakland, coverage includes the most densely populated areas and all
                                       areas determined through an assessment survey to be at high risk for wildfire (namely
                                       the Oakland hills) and for hazardous-materials releases (along the I-880 corridor,
                                       primarily). The sirens are tested at noon on the first Wednesday of each month.
                                       Violent crime     OPD has recently implemented a four-phase Violence Reduction Plan,
                                       which the department hopes will lead to a dramatic and sustainable reduction in violence
                                       in the long term. The plan has five goals: to reduce injuries and deaths, especially from
                                       firearms; to reduce the fear of violent crime; to prevent incidents that discourage the
                                       legitimate use of public places; to improve the city’s image as a safe, orderly place in
                                       which to conduct business, social and recreational activities; and to foster a high level of

                                                                                            CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
public trust and confidence in OPD. The components of the plan’s four phases (and
dates of implementation) are:
● Phase I (October 2003): coordinate and focus OPD resources towards well-defined
   violent-crime objectives.
● Phase II (November 2003): in partnership with the Parole Division of the California
   Department of Corrections, increase supervision of parolees and provide parolees
   with increased access to counseling and support services.
● Phase III (February 2004): in partnership with the Alameda County District
   Attorney’s Office, increase and improve the supervision of individuals on felony
   probation.
● Phase IV (March 2004): in partnership with the U.S. Attorney General’s Office and
   the FBI, dismantle violent street-level narcotics-trafficking groups by conducting
   focused, targeted arrests at selected locations, and carrying out prosecution efforts.
                                                                                                                                            17 | Public Safety
On a separate but related effort, the city’s Violence Prevention Plan, adopted in July
2003, seeks to address the causes of violence and focuses on prevention and
intervention efforts; as such, it is designed to complement the more traditional work of
the police and criminal-justice systems. The plan is built around six policy areas, for
each of which are proposed several strategies and, under each strategy, one or more
objectives, with assigned activities/next steps, partners/participants and target dates.
The six policy areas, and representative strategies and objectives, are:
● Prevention and positive alternatives for youth: keep youth in school, provide
   meaningful after-school activities and connect youth to employment opportunities.
● Breaking the cycle of family violence and sexual assault: improve OPD’s response
   time to emergency calls, create a domestic-violence court and address elder abuse.
● Adult and young offender initiatives: increase counseling for non-arrested offenders,
   provide diversion services to first-time offenders and reduce recidivism among
   parolees.
● Reduce access to illegal weapons: offer monetary rewards for tips on stolen firearms,
   require permits for the puchase of ammunition and ban firearm possession on city-
   owned property.
● Reduce the negative impact of alcohol and drug abuse: identify establishments which
   sell alcohol to minors, develop a public-awareness campaing and increase the
   availability of treatment-on-demand services for alcohol and drug detoxification.
● Community building and problem-solving strategies: develop the capacity of
   neighborhood crime-prevention councils, coordinate city services by neighborhoods
   and educate the public on crime trends and prevention tips.

                     PROTECT OAKLAND
                                       Research in the field of crime prevention has shown that opportunity—in addition to
                                       ability and motive—is essential to criminal activity. Based on this insight, police
                                       departments have shifted efforts and resources toward programs geared at removing the
                                       opportunities for crime to occur. OPD administers a number of such programs,
                                       including public education and training (on topics including personal safety, safety in the
                                       workplace, robbery prevention and theft deterrence); community assistance in security
                                       planning for situation-specific dangers (attacks against delivery trucks, for example); and
                                       the Home Alert, Merchants’ Alert and Business Alert programs and the neighborhood
                                       crime prevention councils, which bring together residents, neighborhood retail
                                       merchants and other businesses, respectively, on a block-by-block or street-by-street
                                       basis to increase communal surveillance and report suspicious activity. One practical
                                       area that has perhaps not received sufficient attention from the city is the potential for
                                       physical planning and design to remove opportunities for crime and, consequently, to
Public Safety | 18
                                       reduce crime rates. Research has shown that, with some exceptions, criminals tend to
                                       target locations rather than victims, and that they tend to select locations where the
                                       opportunities for committing a crime successfully are greatest. Specific areas for
                                       consideration include improved outdoor lighting, safety-friendly landscaping, more “eyes
                                       on the street” (enhanced surveillance of the public space) and the provision of
                                       “defensible space” (a sense of ownership and even territoriality, over common areas).
                                       Terrorism        Early this year, a group of representatives from various jurisdictions and
                                       quasi-governmental agencies in Oakland, the rest of Alameda County, and Contra Costa
                                       County—known as the Urban Area Working Group (UAWG)—came together to
                                       prepare a homeland security strategy for the region. Using guidelines provided by the
                                       State, goals and objectives to prevent and recover from acts of terrorism were developed
                                       for five relevant aspects of homeland security: law enforcement, fire/emergency medical
                                       services, emergency management, public works and general government. More recently,
                                       the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has awarded an Urban Area Security
                                       Initiative (UASI) grant in the amount of $7.8 million to the UAWG for implementation
                                       of six critical- and high-priority objectives in its strategy. The funded objectives are to
                                       enhance regional inter-operable communication systems, enhance regional information
                                       exchange networks, reduce the vulnerability of information systems, reduce the
                                       vulnerability of transportation systems, expand incident management, and improve recall
                                       and mutual aid. Grant-funded activities will be administered by a homeland security
                                       program coordinator at the Oakland city Administrator’s Office.

                                                                                                CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
Also earlier this year, a working group made up of representatives from various Alameda
County agencies and cities, hospitals and utility providers in the county developed a
Countywide Terrorism Response Plan which identifies and integrates planning efforts
for terrorism response throughout the county. The purpose of the plan is to
supplement existing efforts rather than replace them. The plan contains, among other
sections, a strategy for responding to red-level alerts (indicating severe threat conditions)
under the federal homeland security advisory system; a description of available mutual-
aid resources in the event of an attack employing weapons of mass destruction (WMD);
and a strategy for mass immunizations or vaccinations in the event of a bioterrorism
event. Among the plans referenced in the Countywide Terrorism Response Plan are the
Alameda County Coroner Mass Fatalities Plan, the Bioterrorism Response Plan for
Alameda County and the Oakland Metropolitan Medical Response System (MMRS)
Plan. The purpose of the MMRS Plan is to enhance the local response-system
capabilities for meeting the health and medical needs of victims in the event of an
                                                                                                                                                19 | Public Safety
incident involving weapons of mass destruction.
2.4 | POLICY STATEMENTS
    POLICY PS-1       Maintain and enhance the city’s capacity to prepare for, mitigate,
                      respond to and recover from disasters and emergencies.
● ACTION PS-1.1: Continue to maintain the city’s Emergency Operations Center in
  a fully functioning state of readiness.
                                                       OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
● ACTION PS-1.2: Maintain and update as necessary the Oakland Standardized
  Emergency Management System Plan.
                                                       OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
●     ACTION PS-1.2.1: To comply with federal and state law, follow, update, and
      adopt the Oakland Local Hazard Mitigation Plan.
                                               OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES,         IN
                                         CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING,
                                              BUILDING AND NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION

                     PROTECT OAKLAND
                                                                    ● ACTION PS-1.2.2: City staff will study the occurrence, and damage from,
                                                                    windstorms to the residents and businesses of Oakland. If windstorms are found
                                                                    to be a significant environmental hazard, then staff will include strategies to
                                                                    mitigate windstorms in the next update of the Oakland Local Hazard Mitigation
                                                                    Plan.
                                                                                                                      OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                                                    ●    ACTION PS-1.3: Work with hospitals and other appropriate private-sector entities
                                                                    and government agencies to prevent closure of emergency rooms and trauma
                                                                    centers in the city.
                                                                                                                        OFD EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
                                                                    ● ACTION PS-1.4: Continue to collaborate with adjoining jurisdictions on the
                                                                      network of outdoor warning sirens, and to test the sirens on a monthly basis.
                                                                                                                       OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
Public Safety | 20
                             CORE: Citizens of Oakland Respond to   ● ACTION PS-1.5: Continue to offer community training on emergency prevention,
                                                     Emergencies      preparedness and response as part of the CORE program.
                                                                                                                       OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                                                        POLICY PS-2      Reduce the city’s rate of violent crime, in particular the number
                                                                                         of crime-related injuries and deaths, and the public fear which
                                                                                         results from violent crime.
                                                                    ● ACTION PS-2.1: Conduct periodic assessments of the success of the Violence
                                                                      Reduction Plan, and revise the plan as necessary to continue to make progress
                                                                      toward achieving its goals.
                                                                                                                        OPD OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
                                                                                                                         OPD BUREAU OF FIELD OPERATIONS
                                                                                                                                OPD BUREAU OF SERVICES
                                                                    ● ACTION PS-2.2: Implement the various strategies, objectives and activities
                                                                      contained in the Violence Prevention Plan.
                                                                                                           AS IDENTIFIED IN THE VIOLENCE PREVENTION PLAN
                                                                    ● ACTION PS-2.3: Designate a staff person to conduct research and disseminate
                                                                      information on physical planning and design strategies that have been shown to
                                                                      reduce the opportunities for crime.

                                                                                        CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
                                                CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
 POLICY PS-3        Enhance the city’s capacity to prevent and respond to terrorist
                    attacks.
● ACTION PS-3.1: Make effective use of the Urban Area Security Initiative grant to
  implement the critical- and high-priority objectives identified in the homeland
  security strategy for the Oakland/Alameda County/Contra Costa County region.
                                                   OFFICE OF THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
● ACTION PS-3.2: Contribute as appropriate to implementation of the Alameda
  Countywide Terrorism Response Plan, and update as necessary the city’s
  component of the plan, namely the Oakland Metropolitan Medical Response
                                                                                                                                        21 | Public Safety
  System Plan.
                                          OFD EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION PS-3.3: Continue to collaborate, develop relationships and exchange
  information with other local, regional, state and federal agencies and with
  private emergency- and utility-service providers in activities related to terrorism
  prevention and response.
                                                  OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
2.5 | RESOURCES
Agencies consulted
● Federal Emergency Management Agency (www.fema.gov)
● Governor’s Office of Emergency Services (www.oes.ca.gov)
● Oakland Office of Emergency Services
● American Red Cross, Bay Area chapter (www.bayarea-redcross.org)
● Salvation Army, Del Oro division (www.salvationarmydeloro.org)
● Alameda CARD (www.preparenow.org/alameda.html)
Documents consulted

                     PROTECT OAKLAND
                                       ●   “City of Oakland Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) Emgergency
                                           Plan;” Oakland Office of Emergency Services, August 2002.
                                       Other resources
                                       ● California Government Code (leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/calawquery?codesection=gov)
                                       ● California Public Resources Code
                                           (leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/calawquery?codesection=prc)
                                       ●   “California Environmental Quality Act” (ceres.ca.gov/ceqa)
                                       ●   Alameda Local Agency Formation Commission Municipal Service Review, Public
                                           Safety Services (Volume I; draft final)
                                           (www.burrconsulting.com/LAFCo_MSR_Reports_WG.htm)
Public Safety | 22

3 | GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
3.1 | OVERVIEW
Primary hazards        Most, though not all, of the geologic hazards that present the
threat of devastation to life and property are the direct or indirect result of ground
movement due to earthquakes (see below). The primary, or direct, earthquake hazards
are surface-fault rupture and ground shaking. Secondary hazards, associated with
ground shaking, include several forms of ground failure and inundation. (Inundation
hazards, which may or may not be associated with earthquakes, are discussed in Chapter
6, “Flooding Hazards.”) Ground failure is the permanent deformation of the ground
due to its loss of strength or failure of the underlying materials during earthquake
shaking, and includes liquefaction, landslides, mudslides, differential settlement and
subsidence. The likelihood of occurrence of these secondary earthquake effects (with
the exception of inundation) is generally high.
The main geologic hazards include:
● Fault rupture or displacement: a sudden shifting of the ground along the trace of an
   earthquake fault; usually, but not always, occurs at the time of an earthquake, and is
   associated with stronger quakes.

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          ● Ground shaking: movement of the ground caused by the passage of seismic waves
                                            through the earth’s outer crust during an earthquake; it typically is strongest near the
                                            earthquake fault. Ground shaking is the most noticeable phenomenon of seismic
                                            activity and the one people associate most closely with earthquakes; it also represents
                                            the major hazard from an earthquake, in the form of damage to structures. The
                                            intensity of ground shaking at a particular site is affected by the characteristics of the
                                            earthquake, distance from the fault, and the characteristics of the underlying soil.
                                          ● Liquefaction: the rapid transformation of sediment from a solid state into a fluid
                                            state, which causes the soil to lose cohesiveness and become incapable of carrying
                                            significant loads; it causes sediment to behave as quicksand, and results in structures
                                            settling, tipping or—in the case of underground tanks, for example—rising
                                            buoyantly. Its potential to occur is a function of the intensity of the ground shaking
                                            and the underlying geologic conditions. In general, liquefaction is less destructive
                                            than ground shaking; however, in certain areas, it has occasionally resulted in
                                            substantial damage to property from the failure of structural foundations.
                                          ● Landsliding: the rapid down-slope movement of soil, rock and rock debris. Most
                                            slides are natural occurrences, though they can be triggered by improper construction
                                            activities. The main causes of landslides are earthquake-induced ground shaking,
                                            heavy rains and poorly engineered grading and drainage projects. (Improper grading
                                            may alter natural drainage patterns and allow water to collect and loosen soils.)
                                            Factors that determine the extent and severity of a landslide include the steepness of
                                            slope, the presence of weak or poorly consolidated soils, the soil’s water-content level
                                            and the existing grading and drainage patterns.
Geologic Hazards | 24
                                          Less common or less destructive geologic hazards include tectonic creep (slight and
                                          gradual slippage of the ground along seismically active faults, usually in a lateral
                                          direction), subsidence or differential settlement (downward movement of poorly
                                          compacted, non-uniform soil, often as a result of prolonged pumping of groundwater),
                                          lateral spreading or lurching (sideways movement of soil, usually where open banks and
                                          unsupported cut slopes provide a free face, or where artificial fill overlies bay mud), and
                                          soil creep (downslope movement that occurs over years when soil shrinks and swells).
                                          The main geologic hazard not associated with earthquakes is erosion, the wearing away
                                          of the soil mantle by wind, running water or geologic forces.
                                          Earthquakes are the most pervasive safety hazard in Oakland. Unlike fires or floods—
                                          the paths of which can, to some extent, be measured, predicted and contained—
                                          earthquakes are, at present, impossible to predict or contain. Although it is not possible

                                                                                                 CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
to eliminate all the risks associated with earthquakes, it is the intent of the safety element
to use available tools, such as geotechnical studies, appropriate land-use decisions and
adequate building codes, to reduce the risks. Because earthquakes rarely destroy an
entire neighborhood or even city block, the prohibition of construction in a particular
area—with the exception of earthquake fault zones—is a less-effective mitigation
measure than improved building design.
Local geology       The landform of Oakland and the rest of the Bay Area is, in geologic
terms, relatively young. The region sits at the intersection of two of the plates that make
up the earth’s crust, which also makes the area geologically very dynamic. The
movement of these plates over time has shaped the valleys and ridges of the East Bay
hills, while erosion and sedimentation from the San Joaquin/Sacramento Delta have
created the broad alluvial plain on which most of Oakland lies. The area’s predominant
rock group was deposited approximately 100-150 million years ago; known as the
Franciscan formation, it comprises the region’s bedrock. As recently as 10 million years
ago, however, the Oakland Hills still did not exist and the city’s landform was part of a
broad lowland that drained east to an inland arm of the sea. Within only the last five
million years, the faulting and folding of earthquake plates uplifted the present Oakland
Hills and created the trough that is now San Francisco Bay. Volume One of the
technical report for Oakland’s “Open Space, Conservation and Recreation (OSCAR)
Element” contains a map showing the city’s main geologic deposit units; see Figure 1-3
of that document.                                                                                                                                25 | Geologic Hazards
Local topography             Oakland consists of two generally distinct geologic and
topographic zones, separated by the northwest-trending Hayward fault: the lowlands and
the hills (or uplands). The lowlands, to the south and west of the fault, correspond to
the nearly flat coastal landforms that surround the bay, the adjoining tidal flats, and the
gently sloping, rolling terrain further inland. Most of Oakland’s development lies on this
coastal shelf, which varies in width from two to four miles, approximately. Along the
city’s western and southwestern edges, the natural shoreline has been extended by up to
two miles with landfill. The location of the original shoreline is not apparent, and the
filled areas appear to be a natural continuation of the urbanized plain (see Figure 3.1).
The areas around the Bay Bridge approach, the former Oakland Army Base and the
seaport shipping terminals were formerly open water, while lands along the Oakland
Estuary and around San Leandro Bay were formerly marshes and mudflats.

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          The coastal shelf rises gradually to elevations of between 100 and 200 feet. Beyond
                                          these elevations, the land rises abruptly into the Oakland Hills, reaching just over 1,760
                                          feet at Grizzly Peak, northwest of the Caldecott Tunnel. Most of the area above
                                          Highway 13, north of Joaquin Miller Park, is at elevations greater than 600 feet; south of
                                          the park, the hills are significantly lower, with much of the land at only 100-600 feet of
                                          elevation. Since 1960, most the land developed in Oakland has been in the hills, and the
                                          hills still contain most of the city’s remaining vacant land. However, the remaining sites
                                          tend to have severe slope, geologic and access constraints.
                                          Local soils The three primary soil types in Oakland are the bay muds located along
                                          the shoreline and in the landfilled areas; the alluvium and dune-sand deposits in the
                                          flatland and lower hill areas; and the sandstones and shale fragments of the upper hill
                                          areas. Bay mud consists of fine-grained, unconsolidated sand, silt and clay with
                                          abundant organic material; over time, bay muds near the original shoreline have been
                                          overlain with artificial fill, typically consisting of heterogeneous material such as rock
                                          and other debris. Soils in the flatlands have been formed by thousands of years of
                                          hillside erosion, and are characterized by high corrosivity and low erosion potential.
                                          Finally, soils in the upper hills are composed of sandstone and shale materials, while
                                          soils in the lower hills consist of variable soils deposited through erosion, landsliding and
                                          artifical cutting and filling. Volume One of the OSCAR element’s technical report
                                          contains a map of the city’s main soil types; see Figure 1-8 of that document.
                                          Local seismology         The tectonic plates that make up the earth’s crust are in continual
Geologic Hazards | 26
                                          movement. This movement causes strain to build at the plate boundaries, or faults.
                                          Strain accumulates until the plates can no longer sustain it, at which point there is an
                                          energy release. This energy release expresses itself as tectonic creep, fault ruptures,
                                          ground shaking and, more generally, earthquakes. Once the release occurs, the process
                                          of gradual strain build-up begins anew. Major earthquakes result when collisions of the
                                          plates occur at shallow depths or involve larger plates or longer faults, and usually have
                                          their epicenters on or near a fault. Earthquakes are common in California because the
                                          state’s coastline is at the boundary of two tectonic plates. The coastline is part of the
                                          Circum-Pacific seismic belt, which extends the length of the western edge of the
                                          Western hemisphere, and is where over 80 percent of the world’s earthquakes occur.
                                          The City of Oakland lies within the San Andreas fault system, the largest one in
                                          California and the one with potential for the strongest earthquakes. More specifically,
                                          the city straddles the Hayward fault, a “branch” fault of the larger system. The Hayward

                                                                                                CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
fault runs along the southwestern base of the East Bay hills and parallels Highway 13,
making it an approximate physical boundary between the low-lying, urbanized portions
of Oakland to the west and the less developed, upland areas to the east. The fault’s two
segments, each approximately 30 miles long, extend from the Warm Springs district of
Fremont to Oakland, and from Oakland to Point Pinole. The Hayward fault is believed
to accumulate strain at one of the highest rates in the Bay Area, suggesting that it is one
of the faults in the region most likely to generate a large earthquake. In fact, the fault is
one of the most hazardous in the world because of its high “slip rate;” its demonstrated
ability to generate large, surface-rupturing earthquakes; and, most importantly, its
location through a heavily urbanized area. The last major quake on the Hayward fault
occurred in 1868 (see below). A far less active fault, the Calaveras fault, runs down the
San Ramon Vally, parallel to and approximately ten miles east of the Oakland hills crest.
Historic local earthquakes            Earthquakes occur very frequently in the Bay Area,            Earthquake magnitude—the amount of energy
although most are so weak that they can be detected only by seismographs. However,                  released at the quake’s epicenter—is now
                                                                                                    generally reported using the moment magnitude
the Bay Area has been impacted by about a dozen great earthquakes during historic time              scale, the symbol for which is “MW.” This has
and Oakland has been shaken by moderate-to-major earthquakes approximately 60                       functionally replaced the local magnitude scale
times in the recorded history of the area. (Commonly accepted descriptive names for                 (ML), popularly known as the Richter scale.
earthquake are “minor,” “small,” “moderate,” “major” and “great.”) The strongest
quakes in the Bay Area during recent history occurred as follows:
● In 1836, on the Hayward fault and in 1838, on the San Andreas fault; historical data
   are meager for these quakes.
● In 1868, on the Hayward fault, and estimated to have measured 6.8 on the Richter
                                                                                                                                                      27 | Geologic Hazards
   scale. It caused extensive damage to the then-town of Hayward. Fault ruptures
   extended for 30 miles, with horizontal ground displacement of up to three feet.
● The great San Francisco earthquake of 1906, on the San Andreas fault, with a
   magnitude of 8.3 on the Richter scale. It is the deadliest quake in the history of the
   Bay Area, with a human toll of 700 people. Surface fault ruptures extended for 267
   miles, with displacement of up to seven yards (in Marin).
● The Loma Prieta earthquake of October 17, 1989, along the San Andreas fault, and
   measuring 7.1 on the Richter scale. It caused 62 deaths (including 41 in Oakland),
   injured almost 4,000 people, left more than 12,000 homeless, and damaged more than
   18,000 homes and 2,500 businesses. Total property loss is estimated at over $6
   billion; fiscal impacts to the City of Oakland were estimated at $140 million.
Structural hazards       Geologic conditions must be taken into account in the
development of land, as the danger to life and property increases if structures are

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          constructed in ways that are unsuitable. The primary structural hazards are related to
                                          earthquakes, and involve partial or total collapse of a building, falling debris or internal
                                          contents (including elevators, mechanical equipment, heavy furniture and storage racks),
                                          fire or explosion, and disruption of lifelines (transportation, water, sewer, gas, electricity
                                          and telephone). All structures are susceptible to ground shaking, and most earthquake-
                                          related deaths result from structural failure due to ground shaking. The potential for
                                          structural hazards depends on the intensity of the ground shaking and a structure’s
                                          design and construction type.
                                          Generally, structures most vulnerable to damage are those constructed prior to the
                                          adoption and enforcement of building codes requiring seismic- safety measures and
                                          earthquake-resistant design (in general, buildings constructed prior to 1965); structures
                                          that have suffered undetected damage from previous earthquakes; and structures that
                                          were inadequately designed and constructed, and that have been inadequately
                                          maintained. More specifically, hazardous structures and construction types include
                                          unreinforced masonry buildings (URMs), concrete tilt-up slab buildings, inadequately
                                          braced and non-anchored wood-frame construction, “soft-story” buildings (most
                                          commonly two- or three-story buildings with apartments or offices over ground-level
                                          parking) and buildings with parapets or exterior ornamentation (which could fall on
                                          pedestrians). At the other extreme, modern, single-story wood-frame homes are the
                                          most earthquake-resistant structures; in addition, structures built on bedrock can be
                                          expected to sustain less damage. Every major earthquake has provided valuable data for
                                          evaluating and improving upon existing construction techniques. The Long Beach
Geologic Hazards | 28
                                          earthquake of 1933, for example, demonstrated the vulnerability of URM buildings and
                                          the hazards of parapets and unanchored façade decorations; one of the surprises from
                                          the Northridge earthquake of 1993 is that many steel-frame buildings, believed before
                                          the quake to be among the safest structures, suffered welding joint damage.
                                          3.2 | INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
                                          U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)          The USGS, an agency of the federal government,
                                          provides scientific information about the Earth, its biological and mineral resources, and
                                          natural hazards. USGS scientists assess areas of potential natural hazards and the

                                                                                               CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
potential risks to residents of those areas. More specifically, and of particular relevance,
the USGS has identified and mapped areas subject to damaging earthquakes and
landslides, and assessed the probability of occurrence and the potential consequences of
those events.
California Geological Survey (CGS)            Previously known as the Division of Mines
and Geology, CGS develops and disseminates technical information and advice on the
state’s geology, geologic hazards and mineral resources.           Following damaging
earthquakes and landslides in the 1970’s and 1980’s, legislation was passed that focused
CGS’s authority on several fronts, including:
● establishing a “strong-motion instrumentation program,” to record the response of
   rock, soil and structures to ground motion caused by earthquakes;
● enacting the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act, which mandates the
   delineation of zones along traces of hazardous faults;
● enacting the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act, which established a program to identify
   and map seismic hazard zones; and
● the identification and mapping of geologic hazards and estimates of potential
   consequences and likelihood of occurrence.
Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act              This law, passed in 1972 and               The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act is
previously known as the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act, seeks to mitigate the            found in Sections 2621-2630 of the California
                                                                                                   Public Resources Code. The entire act and a full
hazard of surface faulting. The act requires the State Geologist, who also serves as the           report on the state program implementing this act
chief of CGS (see above), to establish regulatory zones known as “earthquake fault                 are contained in CGS Special Publication 42, which
                                                                                                                                                        29 | Geologic Hazards
zones” (EFZs) around the surface traces of potentially or recently active faults and to            may be downloaded from the CGS website, at
prepare and distribute maps of these zones. Cities and counties are required to withhold           www.conservation.ca.gov.cgs.
approval of most kinds of development projects in EFZs until an investigation is
conducted by a licensed geologist determining the precise location of active-fault traces
and assessing the hazard of surface fault rupture in the area. The act prohibits the
construction of most types of structures for human occupancy within 50 feet, generally,
of any active fault.
Seismic Hazards Mapping Act Passed in 1990, this law is similar to the Alquist-                    The Seismic Hazards Mapping Act is found in
Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act but addresses earthquake hazards other than the                 Sections 2690-2699.6 of the California Public
                                                                                                   Resources Code. The entire act and a full report
hazard of surface fault rupture. The law requires the State Geologist to identify and map          on the state program implementing this act are
zones prone to seismically induced liquefaction, ground-shaking, landslides and other              contained in CGS Special Publication 117, which
forms of ground failure resulting from earthquakes. Prior to approving a development               may be downloaded from the CGS website, at
project, affected local governments must require a geotechnical report identifying all             www.conservation.ca.gov.cgs.

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                                                                seismic hazards, and may approve projects only after the nature and severity of the
                                                                                hazards have been evaluated and appropriate mitigation measures have been
                                                                                incorporated. Finally, afftected property owners must disclose to prospective buyers the
                                                                                fact that the property is located within a seismic hazard zone.
                         The California Building Code is published by non-      California Building Code            Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations
                         governmental organizations with sole publication       (“California Building Standards Code”) sets forth the fire, life-safety and other building-
                        and distribution rights, and is not yet available on
                         the Internet. However, it may be examined free
                                                                                related regulations applicable to any structure fit for occupancy statewide for which a
                           of charge at one of many “depository libraries”      building permit is sought. Within Title 24, Part 2 is the California Building Code (CBC),
                        throughout the state, listed on the website of the      which establishes general standards for the design and construction of buildings,
                             California Building Standards Commission, at       including provisions related to seismic safety. The CBC has been revised many times
                                                          www.bsc.ca.gov.
                                                                                over the years to increase the earthquake resistance of structures, often in response to
                                                                                structural lessons learned from major earthquakes in this country and elsewhere.
                          The Field Act consists of sections 17280-17317,       Other state laws and regulations           In addition to the two acts mentioned above,
                        sections 17365-17374 and sections 81130-81149           California has passed numerous laws regulating land-use development and building
                            of the California Education Code. The Private
                           Schools Building Safety Act is found in sections
                                                                                construction with regard to seismic and other geologic hazards. The Field Act, enacted
                         17320-17336 of the same code. The regulations          in 1933 (after the Long Beach earthquake of that year), set strict earthquake-resistant
                          concerning “potentially hazardous buildings” are      structural requirements for new public schools, while amendments to the act require the
                          found in Section 8875 of the Government Code.         replacement or retrofitting of pre-existing public schools. The Private Schools Building
                                                                                Safety Act of 1986 seeks to provide a similar level of earthquake safety to private-school
                                                                                students that is afforded by the Field Act to public-school students. The state has also
                                                                                enacted a law requiring localities to identify all “potentially hazardous buildings”—
Geologic Hazards | 30
                                                                                defined as unreinforced masonry buildings constructed prior to the adoption of local
                                                                                building codes requiring earthquake-resistant design—within their jurisdiction; the law
                                                                                also requires localities to create a mitigation program that, at the very least, notifies
                                                                                owners of potentially hazardous buildings of the status of their buildings.
                        The Alquist Hospital Facilities Seismic Safety Act is   The Alquist Hospital Facilities Seismic Safety Act of 1983 requires that major health
                           found in sections 129675-130070 of the Health        facilities be designed and constructed so as to remain standing and functional following
                           and Safety Code (HSC). The Essential Services
                          Buildings Seismic Safety Act is found in sections
                                                                                an earthquake. The Essential Services Buildings Seismic Safety Act of 1986 establishes
                                 16000-16023 of the HSC, while the State        similar requirements for fire and police stations, emergency operations centers, and
                               Historical Building Code is found in sections    other buildings expected to provide essential services to the public after a disaster; the
                                                              18950-18961.      act also requires that nonstructural components such as communications systems and
                                                                                emergency backup systems, be given “adequate consideration during the design and
                                                                                construction process” to assure continued operation of the facility after a disaster. The
                                                                                State Historical Building Code provides alternative building regulations and standards

                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
for the rehabilitation, preservation and restoration of designated historic structures; the
purpose of the code is to preserve a structure’s original architectural elements and
features while providing for the safety of its occupants.
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                  The state’s CEQA guidelines
propose a wide range of environmental impacts that public agencies should consider in
their evaluation of development proposals. Considerations related to geologic hazards
include the potential for a project to:
● expose people or structures to potential adverse effects, including the risk of loss,
   injury or death involving rupture of a known earthquake fault, strong seismic ground
   shaking, seismic-related ground failure (including liquefaction) or landslides;
● result in substantial soil erosion or the loss of topsoil;
● be located on a geologic unit or soil that is unstable, or that would become unstable
   as a result of the project, and potentially result in on- or off-site landslide, lateral
   spreading, subsidence, liquefaction or collapse;
● be located on expansive soil, creating substantial risks to life or property;
● substantially alter the existing drainage pattern of the site or area in a manner which
   would result in substantial erosion or siltation on- or off-site; and
● be subject to inundation by mudflow.
Local regulations        The City of Oakland has a number of ordinances aimed at                  The city’s regulations regarding soil reports are
mitigating seismic and other geologic hazards. The city’s subdivision ordinance requires          found in Chapter 16.20 of the Oakland Municipal
                                                                                                  Code. The grading, erosion and sedimentation
developers to file soil reports indicating any soil characteristics which may create
                                                                                                                                                      31 | Geologic Hazards
                                                                                                  ordinance is found in section 15.04.780. The
hazards, and identifying measures to avoid soil hazards and prevent grading from                  unreinforced masonry ordinance is found in
creating unstable slopes. The ordinance requires that a state-registered civil engineer           Chapter 15.28, the “earthquake-damaged
prepare the soils report and direct all grading work. The city’s grading, erosion and             structures” ordinance is found in Chapter 15.24
                                                                                                  and the “geologic reports” ordinance is found in
sedimentation ordinance sets forth requirements for grading permits and erosion control           Chapter 15.20. The creek protection ordinance is
and sedimentation control plans, and prohibits the discharge or channel concentrated              found in chapter 13.16. Local amendments to the
flow of storm water. The unreinforced masonry ordinance implements the state’s                    California Building Code are found in chapter
unreinforced masonry building law (or “potentially hazardous building” law; see above)            15.04.
by, among other things, requiring building owners to retrofit their properties within a
specified time. The “earthquake-damaged structures” ordinance establishes regulations
and standards governing the alteration, repair, restoration and rehabilitation of
earthquake-damaged buildings (other than unreinforced masonry buildings) in a “just,
equitable, expedient and practicable” way. The city’s “geologic reports” ordinance
implements the state’s Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (see above). The
creek protection, storm water management and discharge control ordinance has among

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          its purposes to prevent activities that would contribute significantly to erosion or
                                          sedimentation. Finally, the city’s building construction standards are based on the
                                          California Building Standards Code, especially on the CBC (see above); Oakland, like
                                          many other localities in California, has amended the CBC to reflect local conditions.
                                          3.3 | ANALYSIS
                                          Earthquake potential          Based on the geological record, it can be expected that
                                          earthquakes of a certain magnitude will take place in locations where earthquakes of a
                                          similar magnitude have previously occurred. This suggests that the San Andreas,
                                          Hayward and Calaveras faults will experience major earthquakes in the future. On the
                                          basis of research conducted since the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, USGS scientists
                                          have concluded that there is a 62 percent probability of one or more major
                                          earthquakes—defined as having magnitude 6.7 or greater—striking the San Francisco
                                          Bay Area between the years 2003 and 2032. (As shown by the 6.7 Northridge quake in
                                          1994 in Southern California, earthquakes of that magnitude can cause widespread
                                          damage.) Of the Bay Area faults evaluated by the USGS, the Hayward fault received the
                                          highest probability—27 percent—of experiencing such a damaging earthquake, while
Geologic Hazards | 32
                                          the San Andreas and Calaveras faults had probabilities of 21 percent and 11 percent
                                          respectively. Moreover, previous evaluation by USGS and the State Geologist indicates
                                          that the maximum credible earthquake produced by the Hayward, San Andreas and
                                          Calaveras faults would have magnitudes of 7.5, 8.4 and 7.3 respectively. The presence of
                                          these three faults within 10-15 miles of Oakland creates a high cumulative probability of
                                          future earthquakes locally . Of these three faults, the Hayward fault poses the most
                                          serious threat by far to Oakland due to its location through the city, the intensity of land
                                          uses near the fault zone, and the long interval since the last major quake along the fault
                                          (which has resulted in stored potential).
                                          The degree of damage caused by an earthquake depends on an area’s geologic
                                          composition, the number of people and the designated land uses, the prevailing
                                          construction standards, the efficiency of the emergency-response system and even the
                                          time of day and day of the week. (The greatest damage would be caused by an
                                          earthquake occurring in the middle of the day or during the commute period, due to

                                                                                             CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
mass panic, widespread confusion and attempts by individuals to contact family
members, which would overwhelm transportation and communication systems.) A
major earthquake along the Hayward fault—together with landslides, fires and floods
triggered by the quake—could have a catastrophic effect on Oakland. It could cause a
large number of deaths and injuries and extensive property damage reaching into the
hundreds of millions, or into the billions, of dollars; buildings and freeways could
collapse, or be required to be demolished later; and the city’s lifelines—drinking and
waste water, power, telecommunications and transportation systems—could become
severely disrupted. Such a disaster could easily exceed the combined response capability
of the city and state, requiring relief support from the federal government and nonprofit
organizations. The emergency-response phase could last as long as several days, and
could involve search-and-rescue operations to find and assist missing and trapped
persons; the provision of emergency medical care, food and temporary shelter; the
identification and burial of dead persons; the control of disease outbreaks; the removal
of debris and stabilization of imminently unsafe structures; and the re-establishment of
public services and utilities, including the clearance of roads. The recovery phase could
stretch into many years.
Fault displacement Buildings, roads and utility lines usually suffer heavy damage                An active fault is defined as one that has
from any degree of sudden fault rupture or of relatively slow tectonic creep—even of as          experienced displacement during the last 10,000
                                                                                                 years, approximately. A potentially active fault is
little as one inch; well-engineered structures, however, may withstand collapse and              one showing evidence of surface displacement
provide for the life safety of occupants. Because fault displacement involves forces of          between 10,000 and 1.8 million years ago,
such great energy, it is generally not economically feasible to accommodate this                 approximately. In addition to faults classified as
                                                                                                                                                       33 | Geologic Hazards
phenomenon, and the only way to prevent damage to structures and infrastructure is to            active or potentially active, there are faults for
                                                                                                 which displacement activity has not been clearly
employ suitable setbacks from active fault traces. Geologic records show that fault              established.
displacement usually happens in areas where displacement has previously occurred. For
this reason, the ground-displacement hazard is normally confined to a narrow zone
along the traces of earthquake faults considered to be active or potentially active. These
zones have been legally defined by the State Geologist as earthquake fault zones (EFZs;
see previous section). The only EFZ found in Oakland occurs through the Oakland
hills, along both sides of the Hayward fault (see Figure 3.1). Tectonic creep along the
Hayward fault has cracked and offset curbs, streets, fences, railroads, pipelines and
buildings at several locations in the East Bay. More seriously, a high-magnitude
earthquake along the Hayward fault can be expected to produce horizontal ground
displacement of up to several feet, which would have a catastrophic effect on any
structures, roads and utility lines that were built atop or across the fault before the

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          establishment of earthquake fault zones. Much of the land near the Hayward fault is
                                          public open space or is intended for such use in the future.
                                          Ground shaking Typically, ground shaking causes most of the structural damage—
                                          and indirectly, loss of life—resulting from earthquakes. Violent ground-shaking can
                                          cause brick and wood-frame buildings to collapse, streets to crack, and utility lines to
                                          rupture. The intensity of ground shaking and its effects on a structure are a function of
                                          the duration and intensity of the earthquake, the distance to the fault, the properties of
                                          the underlying geologic materials (including cohesion and density of sediments, and the
                                          depth to bedrock) and the building’s design and construction characteristics. Research
                                          has shown that geologic and soil conditions can either amplify or dampen the effects of
                                          ground shaking. Unconsolidated recent alluvium or artificial fill (like those found along
                                          the bay) can amplify the strength and duration of ground shaking, for example,
                                          increasing the risk of structural damage. (Considerable differences were noted in the
                                          amount of ground shaking in San Francisco during the great earthquake of 1906
                                          between areas underlain by fill and areas underlain by bedrock.) While ground shaking
                                          can extend over a wide area, attenuation occurs with distance from the epicenter of an
                                          earthquake; however, little attenuation is observed within about 15 miles of a fault
                                          during a major earthquake.
                                          The state’s Seismic Hazards Mapping Act (see previous section) requires the State
                                          Geologist to compile maps identifying zones subject to seismic hazards such as strong
                                          ground shaking, liquefaction and landslides. Areas with liquefaction and landslide
Geologic Hazards | 34
                                          potential have already been mapped for many parts of the state (see below). However,
                                          the committee created to advise on implementation of the mapping act has determined
                                          that, given the current understanding of the effects of geologic material and structure on
                                          earthquake ground motions, there would be no benefit in establishing “amplified
                                          shaking hazard zones” for purposes of design and construction. The committee’s
                                          opinion was that “[b]uilding codes are currently the primary means of mitigating the
                                          effects of strong earthquake shaking on buildings” and that the need for “special
                                          provisions, beyond those contained in the [Uniform Building Code]…to ensure public
                                          safety…has not been recognized for the hazard of ground shaking.”
                                          The California Geologic Survey has, however, developed a “probabilistic” map of the
                                          relative intensity of ground shaking and damage in California from future earthquakes.
                                          (It is probabilistic in the sense that the analysis considers the uncertainties in the size and
                                          location of earthquakes and the resulting ground motions that can affect a particular

                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
site.) The map classifies the entire state according to nine levels of relative intensity,
ranging from areas “distant from known, active faults [where] in most earthquakes, only
weaker, masonry buildings would be damaged” to areas “near major, active faults [that]
will experience stronger earthquake shaking more frequently [and where] this intense
shaking can damage even strong, modern buildings.” Most of Oakland is found within
the three levels of greatest intensity of ground shaking and damage. (The map may be
viewed at www.conservation.ca.gov/CGS/rghm/pshamap/pshamain.html.)
In addition, the USGS has created a digital map of areas in Oakland and surrounding
cities with the potential to amplify ground shaking from earthquakes. (The map depicts
the hazard at a regional scale and should not be used for site-specific purposes.) The
map is based in part on 210 newly acquired cone-penetration-test (CPT) soundings,
which make Oakland one of the most densely instrumented cities in the country—if not
the most—for purposes of earthquake-related ground shaking (and also liquefaction).
The ground shaking amplification map is available at geopubs.wr.usgs.gov/open-
file/of02-296, as is a map showing the location of the CPT soundings.
Also, the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), the regional land-use
planning agency, has developed maps for all cities in the Bay Area depicting the shaking
intensity likely to result during a “characteristic” earthquake along any of the Bay Area’s
earthquake faults. In general—and with the notable exception of ground shaking
resulting from earthquakes on the Hayward fault (as discussed below)—the maps for
Oakland show that shaking intensities can be expected to be lowest in the hills, which
                                                                                                                                              35 | Geologic Hazards
are underlain by bedrock, and highest on the bay’s edge, which are underlain by poorly
consolidated sediments. Not surprisingly, the strongest ground shaking in Oakland is
expected to occur as a result of earthquakes on the Hayward fault, while earthquakes
originating in more distant faults will produce less intense shaking. According to
ABAG’s maps, a representative earthquake of magnitude 6.9 on the north and south
segments of the Hayward fault would produce “very violent” ground shaking
throughout the Hayward fault EFZ, along Lake Merritt Channel and on the margins of
San Leandro Bay; most of the rest of the city would experience “violent” shaking, with a
smaller area experiencing “very strong” shaking.              (The maps are found at
www.abag.ca.gov/bayarea/eqmaps/pickcity.html ). ABAG has also produced maps for
all cities in the Bay Area showing the expected ground shaking amplification based on an
area’s underlying geologic materials. The maps classify areas according to eight levels of
relative amplification, from “very low” to “extremely high.” In Oakland, predictably,
the closer an area is to the shoreline, the higher is its degree of shaking amplification.
(The maps may be viewed at www.abag.ca.gov/bayarea/eqmaps/mate.html .)

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          Liquefaction The hazard from liquefaction (as with other forms of ground failure)
                                          exists mainly on sandy, silty or muddy soils that are geologically young, saturated with
                                          water and unconsolidated or poorly consolidated. Such conditions tend to be found in
                                          low-lying areas such as marshes, lands adjacent to estuaries and creeks, and areas of
                                          artificial fill. Conversely, areas underlain by hard bedrock and with low water tables
                                          typically have low liquefaction potential. Liquefaction is of significance to Oakland since
                                          much of the city’s waterfront is built on natural and artificial bay fill, and has a high
                                          water table. Sites prone to liquefaction have limited development potential. However,
                                          since liquefaction occurs at shallow depths, it is possible to reduce the liquefaction
                                          hazard by using specialized structural-design measures and construction techniques.
                                          Pursuant to the state’s Seismic Hazards Mapping Act (see previous section), the
                                          California Geological Survey has released official maps showing those areas of the state
                                          where historic occurrence of liquefaction or local geological, geotechnical and
                                          groundwater conditions indicate the potential for liquefaction. The maps are intended
                                          to delineate “zones of required investigation,” or those areas encompassing sites for
                                          which local jurisdictions must withhold development permits until the geologic and soil
                                          conditions of the project site are investigated and appropriate mitigation measures are
                                          incorporated into development plans. The seven seismic-hazard-zone maps covering
                                          Oakland—for the USGS quadrangles of Briones Valley, Hayward, Hunters Point, Las
                                          Trampas Ridge, Oakland East, Oakland West and San Leandro—indicate that most of
                                          West Oakland, North Oakland and East Oakland are prone to liquefaction, as are large
Geologic Hazards | 36
                                          parts of central Oakland (see Figure 3.1).
                                          In addition, the USGS has created a digital map of areas in Oakland and surrounding
                                          cities with the potential to produce surface manifestations of liquefaction such as sand
                                          boils, ground cracks and lateral spreading. (The map depicts the hazard at a regional
                                          scale and should not be used for site-specific purposes.) The map is based in part on the
                                          CPT soundings mentioned earlier. The liquefaction-hazard map is available at
                                          geopubs.wr.usgs.gov/open-file/of02-296.
                                          Also, ABAG has created a map of the Bay Area which classifies land according to five
                                          liquefaction-susceptibility levels: very low, low, moderate, high and very high. These
                                          maps indicate that most of West Oakland, areas surrounding San Leandro Bay and
                                          much of the rest of the city’s shoreline have a “high” or “very high” susceptibility to
                                          liquefaction, while the steep uplands north and east of the Hayward fault zone are

                                                                                                CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
classified as having “very low” susceptibility; most of the rest of the city has been
assigned a “moderate” or “low” susceptibility-level ranking. (This map may be viewed
at gis.abag.ca.gov/website/liq/viewer.htm.) ABAG has also produced maps of the
liquefaction hazard by combining the level of liquefaction susceptibility (see above) with
the probability of earthquake-induced ground shaking that is strong enough to trigger
liquefaction. On these maps, land is classified according to four liquefaction-hazard
levels: very low, moderately low, moderate and high. These maps show that the
liquefaction hazard in Oakland under a representative 7.1 earthquake along the north
and south segments of the Hayward fault is considered “high” throughout most of West
Oakland, downtown and East Oakland, in parts of North Oakland and Fruitvale, and
along the Estuary shoreline; “moderate” in an area centered on the I-580/I-980
interchange; and “moderately low” or “very low” in the rest of the city. (These maps
can be found at www.abag.ca.gov/bayarea/eqmaps/liquefac/pickcityliq.html.)
Subsidence and settlement            Subsidence is the gradual settling of land; it occurs
primarily as a result of the prolonged and excessive withdrawal of groundwater, which
lowers the water table and causes the ground to sink. Subsidence is of little concern in
Oakland, where water is drawn mostly from reservoirs rather than from wells.
Settlement is the gradual downward movement of land and engineered structures due to
the compaction of unconsolidated material underneath. Settlement can occur from
natural soil consolidation, from seismically innduced soil compaction and from excessive
structural loads. Since it usually occurs in areas of poorly consolidated soils, it generally
affects those same areas that are subject to moderate or high liquefaction potential.
                                                                                                                                                37 | Geologic Hazards
Artificial fill—which settles over time, regardless of the quality of the material and
previous degree of compaction—is especially susceptible to settlement. The degree of
settlement depends on the compressibility, depth and density of the soil.
Settlement of a building can occur uniformly or differentially. Uniform settlement can
cause a building to sink, leading to poor drainage and the potential failure of utility
connections. Differential settlement—from variations in soil thickness and compaction
rates—can cause a building to tilt, creating structural and mechanical problems.
Settlement also has the potential to crack roads and utility systems and should be a
consideration in development proposed on landfilled areas especially, and in hillside
areas where slopes have been filled to reduce their gradient. Because of the gradual,
long-term nature of subsidence and settlement, these phenomena do not pose a life-
safety hazard do result in property losses.

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          Slope instability Most sloping land has some landslide potential. The risks tend to
                                          be greatest where a number of contributing factors are present, including slopes over 15
                                          percent, weak, unconsolidated or shallow soils, water saturation, a history of landslides,
                                          active earthquake faults, extensive grading and vegetation removal (from fires or
                                          development activity). The slide itself is usually triggered by an earthquake, heavy rain
                                          or misdirected runoff. Landslides are a relatively common hazard in the East Bay hills,
                                          especially during and soon after heavy rainstorms, when the ground is saturated.
                                          Mudslides—fast, shallow movements of water-saturated earth that flow as muddly
                                          slurries, typically following water courses—are the most common type of landslides in
                                          Oakland; they are also known as debris flows or soil slumps.
                                          More than half of Oakland’s area, including most of its vacant land, consists of gently
                                          sloping or hilly land. Moreover, approximately one-quarter of the city, including all of
                                          the Oakland Hills, contains slopes greater than 15 percent. Slopes of 15-30 percent are
                                          considered developable but are likely to require site modification or special grading or
                                          foundation design to reduce the potential for slope instability. Slopes of that degree are
                                          found in Oakland throughout the southern Oakland Hills, in the roughly triangular area
                                          formed by I-580 and highways 13 and 24, in the vicinity of Mills College and Eastmont,
                                          and on some of the hills around Lake Merritt. Development on slopes exceeding 30
                                          percent is considered difficult and potentially hazardous. Such slopes are concentrated
                                          throughout the Oakland Hills (especially in the northern hills) and within two miles
Geologic Hazards | 38                     south of Highway 13. In these areas there exist isolated slopes as steep as 75 percent.
                                          Landslides in Oakland have usually been triggered not by seismic activity but by heavy
                                          rains, the modification of creek channels, or improper grading and development activity.
                                          Over twenty significant landslides have occurred in Oakland during the last seven
                                          decades or so, generally within a mile-wide band along the Hayward fault (see Figure
                                          3.1). Clusters of slide activity exist in the Eastmont Ridge around King Estates, in
                                          Redwood Heights, in Shepherd and Snake canyons, and in Dimond Canyon and further
                                          downstream on Sausal Creek. Landslides have cracked foundations, structures and
                                          retaining walls, and have damaged roads, sidewalks and trails; also, debris and mud from
                                          landslides have blocked roads, clogged drainage channels and dammed streams and
                                          creeks. A slide near McKillop Road, near the Central reservoir, in the 1930s, swallowed
                                          half a city block; the slide area was subsequently dedicated as Wood Park. Land stability
                                          is a concern in the area of the 1991 firestorm, which burned off much of the surface
                                          vegetation, leaving loose soil, ash and debris. Although interim erosion-control

                                                                                                CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
measures were taken after the fire, there is still a concern about shallow and deep-seated
landslides that could occur under heavy rainfall.
The landslide hazard in the Oakland Hills is exacerbated by the fact that the area is
crossed by the Hayward fault. During a major earthquake on that fault, landsliding,
widespread failure of steep slopes and the collapse of natural stream banks could be
expected in the hills in response to strong ground movements anticipated to occur in the
area. Landslides could block roads, which would hamper evacuation, firefighting and
relief operations within the area. Nevertheless, landslides are not expected to produce a
large-scale disaster; rather, they present a persistent risk of damage to buildings and
infrastructure in areas of potentially unstable slopes. Landslides would affect only
scattered structures located in the direct path, but could result in some loss of life, from
the collapse of structures and tumbling earth, rocks and debris. Although the landslide
hazard cannot be completely eliminated, damage can be minimized by following proper
development practices or by steering development away from areas of unstable slopes.
Sound practices and techniques include drainage provisions to avoid oversaturation of
the soil, setbacks between structures and filled slope areas, retaining walls, and the use of
detailed soil investigations. While efforts have been taken by the city through the
development process to minimize landslide potential, most hillside development
predates the imposition of grading and related requirements. For this reason, older
hillside homes and subdivisions are the most susceptible to damage from landslides. In
addition, development continues to occur on slopes greater than 30 percent, and the
city’s general-plan and zoning designations do not reflect slope differentials. In fact,
                                                                                                                                                39 | Geologic Hazards
there are areas in the city with slopes greater than 50 percent that are still zoned for
residential use.
Pursuant to the state’s Seismic Hazards Mapping Act (see paragraphs on liquefaction,
above, and also previous section), the California Geological Survey has produced official
maps showing those areas of Oakland (and of other parts of the state) where previous
occurrence of landslides, or local topographic, geological, geotechnical and subsurface-
water conditions, indicate the potential for earthquake-induce landslides. As for the
liquefaction hazard, mentioned above, these maps are intended to delineate “zones of
required investigation,” or those areas encompassing sites for which local jurisdictions
must withhold development permits until the geologic and soil conditions of the project
site are investigated and appropriate mitigation measures are incorporated into
development plans. The state’s seismic hazard zone maps indicate that most of the

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          upper Oakland Hills, and also scattered areas of the lower hills, are susceptible to
                                          earthquake-induced landslides (see Figure 3.1).
                                          In addition, USGS has produced a map describing the landslide hazard in Oakland and
                                          Piedmont resulting from an earthquake of magnitude 7.1 on the Hayward fault. The
                                          magnitude of this scenario is associated with complete rupture of the northern and
                                          southern segments of the Hayward fault, an event that has an estimated return period of
                                          approximately 500 years. Also, the modeled hazard corresponds to completely saturated
                                          groundwater conditions resulting from an extreme storm event. Needless to say, this
                                          scenario represents a particularly severe hazard state; the overall hazard would be less for
                                          dry groundwater conditions, though relative patterns of hazard are likely to change. The
                                          map includes six levels of hazard (which should be interpreted on a relative basis): low,
                                          moderately low, moderate, moderately high, high and very high. Most areas of highest
                                          hazard are associated with relatively weak bedrock units east of the Hayward fault, but
                                          some areas of “moderate” to “very high” hazard also exist west of the fault. (This map
                                          can be found at geopubs.wr.usgs.gov/map-mf/mf2379 .)
                                          In advance of major storms anticipated from the 1997-1998 El Niño event, USGS also
                                          created maps delineating the distribution of past landslides throughout the San
                                          Francisco Bay Area (since the best available predictor of future landslides is previous
                                          occurrences). Past landslides are evident in the landscape from their distinctive
                                          topographic shapes (which can persist for thousands of years), and can be recognized
                                          through aerial photography. The maps classify land under four categories: “mostly
Geologic Hazards | 40
                                          landslide,” “many landslides,” “few landslides” and “flat land” (areas of gentle slope at
                                          low elevation that have little or no potential for slope failure). Predictably, the areas in
                                          Oakland classified as “mostly landslide” or consisting of “many landslides” are
                                          concentrated in the upper Oakland Hills, especially north of Joaquin Miller Park. (The
                                          Oakland map may be viewed at wrgis.wr.usgs.gov/open-file/of97-745/oakdl.html .)
                                          Finally, USGS has also created a map estimating the susceptibility to slope failure by
                                          landsliding and earthflow in the metropolitan Oakland area. The model combines four
                                          sources of data for the area to arrive at the susceptibility index: the area’s varying types
                                          of bedrock and geologic units, the topographic shape of the land surface, and
                                          inventories of old landslide deposits and of post-1970s landslides that caused damage to
                                          the built environment. (This map can be found at geopubs.wr.usgs.gov/map-
                                          mf/mf2385 .)

                                                                                               CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
Erosion Erosion is a naturally occurring phenomenon and ordinarily is not hazardous.
However, the rate of erosion can be easily aggravated by development, as vegetation is
removed and impervious-surface coverage increases. Hillside construction usually
requires the movement of earth to ensure that roads, utilities and structures are
stabilized, while on steeper sites grading may require major cutting and filling. Excessive
erosion from these activities can contribute to landslides, siltation of water bodies,
obstruction of storm drains, and the undermining of building foundations. Erosion and
sedimentation from development activities can be greatly reduced if soil disturbance and
tree removal are kept to a minimum, especially during the rainy season, and if disturbed
areas are quickly revegetated. Engineered solutions, such as culverts and retaining walls,
can be effective but also might be less desirable than natural solutions due to their visual
and environmental impacts.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture has classified Oakland into four categories
reflecting erosion potential. The bay plain, or flatlands, where slopes are typically less
than five percent, have “low” erosion potential; in these areas, the greatest erosion risk
exists along streambanks. Areas with “moderate” potential for erosion include those
with slopes between five and 30 percent; in these areas, sheet erosion, gullying,
streambank failure, and slumping may occur, and landsliding on artificial slopes is
possible, especially where the soil is underlain by weathered or highly fractured bedrock.
“High” erosion potential exists in areas with steep terrain, where rainfall averages 25
inches or more, and where the bedrock is deeply weathered or fractured; here,
significant gullying occurs where vegetation has been removed, and the landslide hazard
                                                                                                                                               41 | Geologic Hazards
is usually present. Finally, areas of “extreme” erosion potential are those underlain by
active landslides, with little or no vegetation, and moderate to heavy amounts of rainfall.
Additional information on erosion is found in Chapter 6, “Flooding Hazards.”
Soils   The city’s shoreline areas pose significant development constraints. Areas of fill
and of weak, compressible soils are susceptible to liquefaction in the event of an
earthquake, while settlement in these areas may cause cracking of building foundations
and of roads. In addition, shoreline areas are subject to erosion from wave and tidal
action. Soils in the bay plain are characterized by low erosion potential and tend to be
the best-suited for development. The Oakland Hills are characterized by steep slopes,
weak bedrock, rocky soils and local landslide deposits; soils in the area have relatively
low structural stability, surface and gully erosion is common, and the potential exists for
further landslides in many areas. In general, soils south and west of the Hayward fault
are deep, more fine-textured and less well drained than soils north and east of the fault.

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          The water table is relatively high near the bay and somewhat lower inland; generally, it
                                          can be found within just a few feet of the surface. North and east of the Hayward fault,
                                          the soils are well drained, are shallow to moderately deep, and have moderate
                                          permeability and low-to-moderate water-holding capacity. The groundwater level is
                                          relatively high due to the impervious barrier formed by pulverized materials on the fault
                                          zone.
                                          In the early 1980s, the U.S. Department of Agriculture evaluated the ability of each soil
                                          type in Oakland to support development in the city. Soils were classified as having
                                          “low,” “moderate” or “severe” limitations for development based on their shrink-swell
                                          potential, slope, strength, wetness, depth to bedrock and flooding potential. (Shrink-
                                          swell is a cyclic change in volume that occurs in fine-grained sediments due to the
                                          expansion and contraction of clay caused by wetting and drying.) Most of the local soils
                                          were evaluated as having “severe” limitations in one or more of these categories. In
                                          steeper areas of the city, slope was the most severe constraint, occasionally accompanied
                                          by shrink-swell potential. In the flatland areas, shrink-swell was the most common
                                          severe constraint. The potential for shrink-swell is highest in areas underlain by Bay
                                          Mud and in the fine-grained basin deposits which contain high quantities of expansive
                                          clay derived from the uplands by erosion. The alluvial deposits in the flatlands may also
                                          contain large quantities of expansive clay at the surface. Low soil strength also appears
                                          as a common constraint. Because of the relatively minor economic losses resulting from
                                          shrink-swell behavior and low soil strength, these phenomena are rarely insurmountable
                                          obstacles to development; they do, however, necessitate special design and construction
Geologic Hazards | 42
                                          techniques, which increases development costs. Finally, in historically flood-prone
                                          areas, wetness and flooding were also rated as severe problems. To some extent, these
                                          constraints have been mitigated through development of the city’s drainage system (see
                                          Chapter 6, “Flooding”).
                                          Structural hazards The extent of damage to structures resulting from an earthquake
                                          depends on the magnitude of the event, the distance from the epicenter, the response of
                                          the underlying geologic materials, and the strength and construction quality of the
                                          buildings. It has been shown that weak soil and geologic conditions are a greater seismic
                                          hazard than proximity to an earthquake’s fault and epicenter. Because ground motion
                                          on water-saturated materials is amplified and lasts longer, and also because of the
                                          tendency for unconsolidated materials to deform to a greater degree, structures located
                                          on these materials suffer far greater damage than those built on solid rock. During an
                                          earthquake, buildings constructed on bay mud may experience differential settlement

                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
while those built on landfill may collapse as the soil gives out under them. High-rise
buildings on “poor,” or unstable, soils could experience violent shaking but should not
suffer major damage if built on pile foundations. In areas of high landslide potential,
structural damage could occur from inundation by debris from above or from the loss of
ground support from under a building. Structural damage and collapse could also occur
due to lateral spreading of soils (on stream banks, for example) or due to lurch cracking
(if cracks in ground materials spread into building foundations).
In general, the older the building, the less likely it is to meet provisions in the current
Uniform Building Code (UBC) relating to earthquake impacts and the more likely it is to
suffer damage during an earthquake. (Increasingly stringent earthquake standards have
been included in updates to the UBC since the 1933 Long Beach earthquake.) In
Oakland, older buildings are concentrated downtown and in other older parts of the city,
and many of those buildings are constructed of unreinforced stone, brick, block and
other types of masonry. These unreinforced masonry (URM) buildings are the
structures most prone to collapse from strong ground shaking (or to require demolition
afterward), and have the highest potential to result in death and injury, from collapsing
walls, floors, roofs and parapets. Recognizing this hazard, the state in 1986 passed SB
547, a law requiring cities and counties to prepare an inventory of potentially hazardous
masonry buildings and adopt ordinances to improve or replace these structures.
Oakland’s survey was conducted in 1989. Soon after, owners of such buildings were
notified of the hazard and have since been required, with certain exceptions, to retrofit
their buildings or otherwise reduce the risk of death and injury from their collapse
                                                                                                                                              43 | Geologic Hazards
during an earthquake. There are approximately 870 buildings on the city’s list of
potentially hazardous URM buildings, the majority of which are located downtown and
were built during the first half of the twentieth century. In addition to those URM
buildings, there are thousands of existing buildings that were constructed before the
UBC was in effect.
Other types of buildings that may suffer serious damage are older steel- and concrete-
frame buildings that were not designed to resist earthquake vibrations, and buildings
with concrete frames and tilt-up walls constructed before 1974 (when less-strict building
codes were in place). On the other hand, newer, small steel-frame buildings generally
are the safest non-residential structures, while newer concrete tilt-ups pose a slightly
greater risk. Steel-frame buildings generally perform well under strong shaking, and are
the preferred type of construction for highrises in seismically active areas. Nonetheless,
even on well-designed buildings, non-structural parts such as windows, chimneys, façade

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          panels, ornamental features, light fixtures, mechanical equipment and furniture may
                                          break or fall and injure occupants or people outside the building. Industrial facilities
                                          present special hazards not only to their occupants but also to the surrounding
                                          community because of the potential for the release of hazardous materials used or stored
                                          onsite (see more information under Chapter 5, “Hazardous Materials”).
                                          The majority of single-family or small multi-unit residential buildings in Oakland are
                                          one- or two-story structures of wood-frame construction. These are the structures least
                                          likely to collapse from earthquake shaking due to their low-elevation design and the
                                          inherent flexibility of wood as a building material; serious damage would be rare, even
                                          during strong earthquakes, except where directly affected by ground rupture, landsliding,
                                          or extremely high ground acceleration. Nonetheless, damage could result from even
                                          moderate shaking to relatively inflexible building elements such as chimneys, porches,
                                          stucco and utility lines, and occupants could suffer harm from broken glass and falling
                                          furniture. Also, older residences with inadequate foundation-to-frame connections or
                                          which have been weakened by rot or termite infestation may slip or break from their
                                          footings, rupturing utility connections. In these cases, foundation bolts, shear walls and
                                          other strengthening devices would minimize potential property damage.
                                          While it is impossible to prevent earthquakes, the loss and damage resulting from them
                                          can be minimized through proper design of structures and land-use development.
                                          Given the short supply of developable land in Oakland, it can be expected that future
                                          development will increasingly occur in areas with geologic constrains. For this reason,
Geologic Hazards | 44
                                          geological investigations and greater oversight of engineering practices and construction
                                          techniques will need to become increasingly important elements of the development
                                          process. Since major earthquakes will continue to occur in the Bay Area, structures—
                                          especially in areas of potential soil instability—must be designed to withstand significant
                                          shaking without collapse in order to minimize the loss of life. At the same time, the
                                          safety of existing buildings must be upgraded whenever possible. The most common
                                          method for doing so is to require improvements when building permits are issued for
                                          major additions or repairs. (The UBC requires compliance with all current code
                                          provisions if the work being done exceeds 50 percent of the value of the existing
                                          structure.) Unfortunately, there is no comprehensive and systematic inventory of
                                          “dangerous buildings.” Existing generalized sources of information are inadequate for
                                          even large-area and general assessments of the location and number of hazardous
                                          structures, while sources of information on individual buildings are insufficient for the
                                          diagnosis of structural problems. Nevertheless, it is clear that priority for seismic

                                                                                                CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
structural-safety programs should be given to critical structures (including high-
occupancy buildings and industrial facilities), especially those located in geologically
hazardous areas, and also to older structures and other hazardous building types. It is
particularly important that emergency-related facilities such as hospitals, fire stations and
emergency shelters be designed or strengthened to remain operative following an
earthquake. The proper functioning of these facilities after a disaster is essential in
preventing additional casualties and damage.
Transportation facilities         Roads, railroads and ports play an essential role in
emergency response and recovery by allowing for evacuation and the movement of
emergency vehicles and supplies. Unfortunately, transportation systems are vulnerable
to damage from major earthquakes. Because of their lineal nature, roads and tracks
often cross earthquake faults and areas susceptible to ground failure, and can break and
buckle or become blocked in the event of landslides. On the other hand, while
pavement and road beds might be damaged, at-grade roads (but not tracks) usually
remain passable; in any event, emergency routes can often be improvised. Elevated
structures such as bridges, trestles and freeway overpasses and interchanges would be
affected much more seriously by earthquake-fault rupture, and would be particularly
expensive and time-consuming to repair.
In the event of strong ground motion, bay mud, fill and other weak soils underlying
much of the Eastshore Freeway, approaches to the Bay Bridge and the I-80/I-580/I-880
“maze” could be subject to settlement and subsidence. Damage to I-580 south of Mills
                                                                                                                                                45 | Geologic Hazards
College and to Highway 13, which are built over or near the Hayward fault, could be
extensive under an earthquake centered on that fault; at the same time, those
thoroughfares could become blocked from landslides as natural and cut slopes above fail
in response to strong ground motion. A number of grade-separated structures in the
area, most importantly the Highway 13/Highway 24 and Highway 13/I-580
interchanges, could be damaged if major surface displacement occurs along the Hayward
fault. (Following the experiences of the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake and the 1991
Northridge earthquake, Caltrans has improved the earthquake performance of those
interchanges and of many other highway structures statewide under its jurisdiction.)
Following a major earthquake, transportation across Highway 13/I-580 could be
disrupted, including for emergency vehicles and road closures could make portions of
the Oakland Hills isolated and unreachable for many hours if not a few days. Citywide,
should the freeway system be so impaired as to prvent access from other areas, supplies
could still be delivered through Oakland’s airport and seaport. However, those facilities

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          are themselves vulnerable to damage as they are situated on structurally poor ground,
                                          namely fill overlying bay mud or marshland. Finally, the Bay Area Rapid Transit
                                          (BART) system was designed and built with earthquake impacts in mind, as shown by its
                                          ability to withstand the Loma Prieta earthquake. Nevertheless, in Oakland, BART’s
                                          tracks and overhead structures cross structurally poor soils, so track distortion can be
                                          expected from even a moderately intense earthquake. To minimize the potential for
                                          train derailment, BART has installed seismic-motion sensors along the system, and has
                                          developed procedures to restrict train movement until tracks have been inspected and
                                          any damage has been corrected.
                                          Utility systems        Modern life is made possible by a pervasive network of utility
                                          systems that includes water-transmission and distribution mains, reservoirs and water
                                          tanks, sewer mains, water-treatment and sewage-treatment plants, pipelines,
                                          telecommunications lines and transmission facilities, and gas and electric lines and
                                          substations. As could be expected, these systems are vulnerable to damage from fault
                                          rupture, landsliding, and major ground subsidence and liquefaction induced by ground
                                          shaking. Underground components may break or rupture during major earthquakes;
                                          aboveground elements are also vulnerable, but are usually easier and cheaper to restore.
                                          Most utility lines in Oakland have been built to withstand some degree of fault
                                          displacement without major damage, and are equipped with valves (both manual and
                                          automatic) to control or shut off flows at various points, especially near the Hayward
                                          fault. However, none of the systems crossing the Hayward fault have been subjected to
Geologic Hazards | 46
                                          lateral offsets of more than several inches, and it can be expected that many would fail
                                          under a possible offset of several feet. In the event of a major earthquake, damage to
                                          utility lines and service disruption of up to several days is possible in areas traversed by
                                          the Hayward fault, subject to landsliding or with structurally poor soils. Damage due to
                                          liquefaction and subsidence can be expected to utility facilities constructed atop bay mud
                                          or other saturated soils, most notably some of the facilities at EBMUD’s sewage
                                          treatment plant (located at 2020 Wake Avenue) and the interceptors leading to it.
                                          Utility-service disruption would be minimal in areas subject only to ground shaking as
                                          most utility lines are flexible enough to withstand shaking without significant damage.
                                          All utility providers in the Bay Area have implemented or are in the process of
                                          implementing seismic improvement programs to strengthen and retrofit critical system
                                          facilities; an example is EBMUD’s $189 million program begun in 1995 to reinforce its
                                          reservoirs and major water lines over a ten-year period. It is worth mentioning that
                                          EBMUD has developed water mains on both sides of the Hayward fault to minimize

                                                                                                 CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
potential service disruption through system redundance, and that it has strengthened and
added valves at fault crossings so that flexible lines could be installed quickly if pipes did
rupture.
3.4 | POLICY STATEMENTS RELATED TO GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
 POLICY GE-1          Develop and continue to enforce and carry out regulations and
                      programs to reduce seismic hazards and hazards from seismically
                      triggered phenomena.
● ACTION GE-1.1: Continue to enforce the geologic reports ordinance by requiring
  site-specific geologic reports for development proposals in the Hayward fault
  Special Studies Zone, and restricting the placement of structures for human
  occupancy within fifty feet of the trace.
                                                       f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION GE-1.2: Enact regulations requiring the preparation of site-specific
  geologic or geotechnical reports for development proposals in areas subject to
                                                                                                                                                 47 | Geologic Hazards
  earthquake-induced liquefaction, settlement or severe ground shaking, and
  conditioning project approval on the incorporation of necessary mitigation
  measures.
                                                       f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION GE-1.3: Continue to update the city’s geologic-hazard mapping system
  based on new information from state and federal agencies and site-specific
  investigations.
                                                       f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
 POLICY GE-2          Continue to enforce ordinances and implement programs that
                      seek specifically to reduce the landslide and erosion hazards.

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          ● ACTION GE-2.1: Continue to enforce provisions under the subdivision ordinance
                                            requiring that, under certain conditions, geotechnical reports be filed and soil-
                                            hazards investigations be made to prevent grading from creating unstable
                                            slopes, and that any necessary corrective actions be taken.
                                                                                           f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                          ● ACTION GE-2.2: Continue to enforce the grading, erosion and sedimentation
                                            ordinance by requiring, under certain conditions, grading permits and plans to
                                            control erosion and sedimentation.
                                                                                           f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                          ● ACTION GE-2.3: Continue to enforce provisions under the creek protection, storm
                                            water management and discharge control ordinance designed to control erosion
                                            and sedimentation.
                                                                                      f PWA ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DIVISION
                                                                                          f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                          ● ACTION GE-2.4: Consider establishing area-specific interdepartmental task
                                            forces, with public participation, to recommend changes to the zoning ordinance
                                            to better address hillside development constraints, especially steeply sloping
                                            sites and infrastructure availability.
                                                                                        f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
                                                                                      f PWA ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DIVISION
                                          ● ACTION GE-2.5: Enact regulations requiring new development projects to employ
Geologic Hazards | 48
                                            site-design and source-control techniques to manage peak stormwater runoff
                                            flows and impacts from increased runoff volumes.
                                                                                           f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                          ● ACTION GE-2.6: Design fire-preventive vegetation-management techniques and
                                            practices for creeksides and high-slope areas that do not contribute to the
                                            landslide and erosion hazard.
                                                                                             f OFD SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION
                                           POLICY GE-3        Continue, enhance or develop regulations and programs designed
                                                              to minimize seismically related structural hazards from new and
                                                              existing buildings.

                                                                                     CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
● ACTION GE-3.1: Adopt and amend as needed updated versions of the California
  building code so that optimal earthquake-protection standards are used in
  construction and renovation projects.
                                                f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION GE-3.2: Continue to enforce the unreinforced masonry ordinance to
  require that potentially hazardous unreinforced masonry buildings be retrofitted
  or be otherwise made to reduce the risk of death and injury from their collapse
  during an earthquake.
                                                f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION GE-3.3: Continue to enforce the earthquake-damaged structures
  ordinance to ensure that buildings damaged by earthquakes are repaired to the
  extent practicable.
                                                f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION GE-3.4: Consider developing a program to encourage, assist or provide
  incentives to owners of single-family homes or small apartment buildings in
  retrofitting their buildings for seismic safety.
                                                f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
 POLICY GE-4       Work to reduce potential damage from earthquakes to “lifeline”                                                    49 | Geologic Hazards
                   utility and transportation systems.
● ACTION GE-4.1: Encourage Caltrans to expedite the retrofit of city- and county-
  owned highway overpasses in Oakland identified as candidates for seismic
  strengthening for which Caltrans is the lead agency.
                                          f PWA TRANSPORTATION SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION GE-4.2: As knowledge about the mitigation of geologic hazards
  increases, encourage public and private utility providers to develop additional
  measures to further strengthen utility systems against damage from
  earthquakes, and review and comment on proposed mitigation measures.
                                               f PWA ELECTRICAL SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION GE-4.3: Encourage BART to prioritize its program for retrofitting the
  system’s aerial structures, stations and Transbay Tube for seismic safety over
  expansion of the system.
                                          f PWA TRANSPORTATION SERVICES DIVISION

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          ● ACTION GE-4.4: Continue to designate underground utility districts for the
                                            purpose of replacing aboveground electric and phone wires and other structures
                                            with underground facilities, and use the planning-approval process to ensure
                                            that all new utility lines will be installed underground from the start.
                                                                                            f PWA ELECTRICAL SERVICES DIVISION
                                                                                          f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
                                          3.5 | RESOURCES
                                          Agencies consulted
                                          ● U.S. Geological Survey (www.usgs.gov)
                                          ● California Geological Survey (www.conservation.ca.gov/cgs)
                                          ● California State Mining and Geology Board (www.conservation.ca.gov/smgb)
                                          ● California Seismic Safety Commission (www.seismic.ca.gov)
                                          ● California Building Standards Commission (www.bsc.ca.gov)
                                          ● Association of Bay Area Governments (www.abag.ca.gov)
                                          ● Oakland Public Works Agency (www.oaklandpw.com)
                                          ● Oakland Community and Economic Development Agency
                                              (www.oaklandnet.com/government/ceda/revised/ceda.html)
Geologic Hazards | 50
                                          Documents consulted
                                          ● “Fault-rupture Hazard    Zones in California;” California Department of Conservation,
                                              California Geological Survey, revised 1997
                                              (ftp.conservation.ca.gov/pub/dmg/pubs/sp/Sp42.pdf).
                                          ● “Guidelines for Evaluating and Mitigating Seismic Hazards in California” (Special
                                            Publication 117); California Geological Survey, 1997.
                                          ● “Recommended Criteria for Delineating Seismic Hazards Zones in California”
                                            (Special Publication 118); California Geological Survey, 1999.
                                          ● “Earthquake Probabilities in the San Francisco Bay Region;” Working Group on
                                            California Earthquake Probabilities, 2003; U.S. Geological Survey open-file report 03-
                                            214.
                                          Other resources
                                          ● USGS’ “Geologic    Hazards” (geohazards.cr.usgs.gov)

                                                                        CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
●   U.S. Geological Survey: www.usgs.gov; geologic hazards page:
    geohazards.cr.usgs.gov; San Francisco Bay region landslide folio:
    wrgis.wr.usgs.gov/open-file/of97-745
●   ABAG earthquake maps and information (quake.abag.ca.gov)
                                                                                                                        51 | Geologic Hazards

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          This page intentionally left blank
Geologic Hazards | 52
4 | FIRE HAZARDS
4.1 | OVERVIEW
Characteristics         Fire is a unique hazard in that it can result both from natural
processes and from the intentional or accidental actions of people. There are three main
types of fire hazards: wildfires, which affect open space and development on the urban
fringe; structural fires, which occur in buildings; and industrial fires, which result from
the ignition of hazardous materials. While fires are not entirely preventable, it is possible
to create conditions that reduce the chances of fire and that facilitate efficient response
in case fire breaks out. When a fire does ignite, quick response from firefighters and an
adequate supply of water are essential in minimizing damage.
Key vulnerability factors           General factors that affect an area’s risk from fire
hazards include its location, land uses, distance from fire stations, ease of accessibility by
fire-fighting equipment, and adequacy of water supply. More specifically, the extent,
severity and damage of fires are determined by several key factors affecting vulnerability.
For the three types of fire examined in the safety element, these vulnerabilities include:
● Wildfires: steep and rugged topography, dense and unmanaged vegetation (especially
    woods and brush), accessibility to human activities, exposure to wind and sun,

                    PROTECT OAKLAND
                                        drought conditions, and the presence of above-ground utility lines. The wild-
                                        land/urban interface is an especially hazardous area because it combines a resident
                                        population with large areas of combustible material (including structures), and is
                                        often characterized by sub-standard water supplies and a distant location from fire
                                        stations. The time of the year of high wildfire danger is from May to October, when
                                        temperatures are higher and humidity is lower. The closer to the end of this “fire
                                        season,” the more critical the danger is, as vegetation becomes increasingly dry.
                                      ● Structural fires (excluding industrial buildings, which are discussed below): Especially
                                        vulnerable building and land-use types include high-rise buildings, multi-family
                                        dwellings, and high-density residential neighborhoods; places of mass assembly, such
                                        as schools, stadiums, auditoriums and shopping centers; structures constructed
                                        before current fire and building codes; institutions such as hospitals and jails that
                                        house people of limited mobility; and downtowns and other high-density commercial
                                        districts.
                                      ● Industrial fires: Especially vulnerable facilities include large industrial complexes,
                                        including seaports and airports, and businesses and other “target hazards” with
                                        substantial concentrations of highly combustible and toxic materials. Because of
                                        their nature, industrial fires are covered in the “Hazardous Materials” chapter rather
                                        than in this chapter.
                                      Relationship to earthquakes              While fires usually happen as stand-alone events, the
Fire Hazards | 54
                                      threat of extensive fire damage is greatest following a major earthquake. Strong
                                      earthquakes can rupture gas lines and down electric lines, which can, in turn, spark fires.
                                      The severity of fires occurring under those circumstances would likely be compounded
                                      by the accompanying failure of water mains (which would hamper fire-suppression
                                      efforts) and damage to roads and overpasses (which would restrict the evacuation of
                                      people and access by emergency vehicles). In the past, strong earthquakes in the Bay
                                      Area have been followed by fires requiring the extensive involvement of professional
                                      firefighters, a relationship that is likely to continue.
                                      The 1991 Oakland/Berkeley Hills Fire             A substantial fire occurred in the North
                                      Oakland hills in 1970 that consumed 200 acres and destroyed 37 homes. Regarding this
                                      fire, the city’s original safety element prophetically stated that “fortunately [a] disaster
                                      has not occurred but the potential for such a disaster is still real.” In the morning of
                                      Sunday, October 20, 1991, flames broke out in a residential canyon west of Grizzly Peak
                                      Boulevard and the Caldecott Tunnel. The flames—fueled by record-high temperatures,
                                      five years of drought conditions, freeze-damaged groves of trees, and strong, hot, dry

                                                                                                CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
winds—leapt quickly and easily across parcels. In little more than 15 minutes, the fire
had gone out of control. It is said that during its first three hours, the fire consumed
one house every 11 seconds. It took more than 1,800 fire personnel using over 400
pieces of equipment, including 20 helicopters and airplanes, to subdue the fire. The
conflagration—which became known as the Oakland/Berkeley Hills firestorm, or the
Tunnel fire—was not officially declared under control until 8 am on Wednesday,
October 23; by then, it had become the costliest wildfire in U.S. history, causing 25
deaths, 150 injuries, the destruction of more than 3,000 homes, and approximately $1.5
billion in property damage.
This disaster led to numerous new regulations at the state and local levels. As a result of
the fire, real-estate sellers statewide, for example, are now required to inform
prospective buyers if a residential property lies within a zone of very high fire-hazard
severity. The fire also prompted the state to create the Standardized Emergency
Management System (SEMS; see chapter 2, “Emergency Management”), a framework
for standardizing emergency-response procedures throughout California and facilitating
the flow of information and resources among agencies. At the local level, Oakland and
many neighboring jurisdictions strengthened their building and fire-prevention codes by
placing new or additional regulations on the separation of buildings, ventilation criteria,
roof materials, landscaping, building access, and the installation of automatic fire-
extinguishing systems in public buildings.
                                                                                                                                                55 | Fire Hazards
4.2 | INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
Oakland Fire Department (OFD)              OFD is the agency with primary responsibility
for preventing and suppressing fires in Oakland. Besides fighting accidental fires and
arson, OFD conducts fire-safety inspections and plan checks of buildings and
businesses; provides fire-danger patrols and issues public warnings during times of high
fire danger; conducts vegetation-management inspections; responds to hazardous-
materials spills; oversees the Oakland Office of Emergency Services; issues permits for
fairs, carnivals, pyrotechnic displays and other special events; offers classes to the public
on first aid and cardio-pulmonary resuscitation; provides on-site training to local

                    PROTECT OAKLAND
                                                                          businesses on basic emergency response; and teaches basic personal fire-safety and fire-
                                                                          prevention practices to school children.
                                                                          OFD is often the first agency called in the event of medical and other emergencies.
                                                                          Through its emergency medical services (EMS) division, OFD has been providing
                                                                          round-the-clock paramedic service to Oakland residents since 2000. (Ambulance service
                                                                          is provided by private companies under contract with Alameda County). Every fire-
                                                                          station engine in Oakland has at least one paramedic on staff to provide advanced
                                                                          medical care; in addition, all firefighters are certified emergency medical technicians, able
                                                                          to provide basic care. The EMS division also distributes equipment and supplies for
                                                                          life-support services, and provides training and continuing education to ensure that
                                                                          certification and licensing requirements are current for all OFD personnel. Finally,
                                                                          OFD sponsors California Task Force 4 (CATF-4), a team of firefighters, doctors,
                                                                          paramedics, search-dog handlers, structural engineers and other specialists trained in
                                                                          “urban search and rescue” (US&R). The task force possesses a high level of expertise in
                                                                          medical, rescue and technical skills, and the specialized equipment needed to rescue
                                                                          victims trapped in building collapses, industrial accidents, transportation disasters and
                                                                          other complex situations. CATF-4 is one of eight US&R teams in California and 28
                                                                          nationwide that may be mobilized within hours to respond to emergencies anywhere in
Fire Hazards | 56                                                         the country.
                     Local amendments to the California (or Uniform)      Local regulations      Oakland’s fire-protection standards for construction are based on
                          Fire Code are found in chapter 15.12 of the     Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations (see above), specifically on the California
                     Oakland Municipal Code. The amendment to the
                       California Building Code regarding special fire-
                                                                          Building Code (CBC) and the California Fire Code (CFC). Oakland, like many other
                        related construction requirements is found in     localities in California, has amended these codes to reflect local conditions. A
                             section 15.04.785 of the municipal code.     noteworthy local fire-related amendment to the CBC is the addition of a chapter
                                                                          providing for special construction requirements in fire-hazard areas, in the area damaged
                                                                          by the 1991 Oakland hills fire, and in areas covered by the North Oakland Hill Area
                                        Regulations pertaining to land    Specific Plan. This amendment discusses fire-resistive walls and roofs, the separation of
                                subdivisions related to fire safety and
                              ingress/egress are found in chapters or     buildings to minimize potential fire spread, and automatic fire-extinguishing systems.
                               sections 16.16, 16.20.030, 16.24.040,
                                 16.28.040 and 16.32 of the Oakland       Additionally, the city has enacted a number of provisions pertaining to land subdivisions
                            Municipal Code; regulations pertaining to
                                secondary units are found in sections
                                                                          and secondary units that relate to fire safety and ingress/egress, including the width and
                                  17.102.360; regulations concerning      grade of streets, minimum street-curvature radii, installation of fire hydrants and street
                               building numbers are found in chapter      design in hillside subdivisions. Also, the city’s municipal code has chapters regulating
                               15.40; regulations regarding bedroom       the location, design and assignment of building numbers, and also the use and design of
                            security bars are found in chapter 15.64;
                              and the Oakland Housing Code is found
                                                                          bedrooms that have windows or doors with security bars. Finally, various sections of
                                                     in chapter 15.08.

                                                                                             CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
the housing code call for the use of fire-resistant construction and the provision of
smoke detectors and adequate fire-extinguishing systems or equipment. The Building
Services Division of the city’s Community and Economic Development Agency
(CEDA) is responsible for enforcing the city’s various codes when reviewing
construction projects submitted for official approval.
Inter-agency cooperation           In addition to general mutual-aid agreements (see the
“Emergency Management” chapter), Oakland has entered into agreements with
adjoining jurisdictions for cooperative response to fires.        These agreements help
protect Oakland residents and business situated nearer the fire stations of adjoining
jurisdictions and also from fires originating outside city boundaries. Oakland has
mutual-response agreements for fire protection with Alameda and Contra Costa
counties, the East Bay Regional Park District (EBRPD) and the cities of Alameda,
Berkeley, Emeryville, Piedmont and San Leandro. (EBRPD has its own fire department,
with staff and equipment distributed among five park units, of which Tilden is the
closest to Oakland.) In addition, the OFD is a member of the Hills Emergency Forum
(HEF) and Diablo FireSafe Council (DFC). HEF is a coalition of government agencies
and special districts that coordinate the collection and assessment of information related
to fire hazards in the East Bay hills, and develops fire-safety standards and codes,
incident-response and management protocols, and fuel-reduction strategies. DFC is a
partnership among government and private-sector organizations working to prevention
                                                                                                                                             57 | Fire Hazards
wildfires in Alameda and Contra Costa counties.
California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CDF)                The CDF has
primary responsibility for preventing and suppressing fires on more than 31 million
acres of non-federal wildlands in California. The department also responds to
thousands of non-wildfire emergencies annually, including car crashes, hazardous-
materials spills and medical calls. Among CDF’s several divisions is the Office of the
State Fire Marshal (OSFM), the duties of which include regulating flammable substances
and consumer products; providing statewide guidance on fire prevention in wildland
areas; providing plan review and construction inspections for all state-owned and state-
occupied facilities in California; and regulating intrastate hazardous-liquid pipelines.
CDF, including SFM, enforces most of the state’s fire-related laws (see below).

                    PROTECT OAKLAND
                     State regulations pertaining to wildfire prevention    State laws and regulations The State of California has passed numerous laws to
                     are found primarily in sections 4251-4290, 4291-       address both wildland and structural fires. Wildfire-prevention laws regulate activities in
                           4299 and 4421-4446 of the California Public
                              Resources Code. Regulations concerning
                                                                            areas deemed by the state to be “hazardous fire areas;” the maintenance of buildings and
                       structural-fire prevention are found primarily in    other structures in areas covered by forest, brush or other flammable materials; and the
                         the California Health and Safety Code, mostly      setting and burning of fires on open land. Specific issues addressed include the building
                    under division 2, chapter 3, and under division 12,     of campfires, smoking, the use of fireworks, the provision of firebreaks, the design and
                                                                  part 2.
                                                                            maintenance of roofs and chimney outlets, permits for burning and blasting, and the use
                                                                            of spark-emitting devices. Laws aimed at preventing structural fires establish fire-safety
                                                                            standards for high-rise structures, public-assembly buildings, hotels and motels, and
                                                                            institutional facilities such as hospitals, convalescent homes, child day-care centers,
                                                                            foster homes, group homes, temporary shelters, and prisons and jails. Laws also address
                                                                            the provision of smoke detectors, portable fire extinguishers, and fire sprinklers and
                                                                            other automatic fire-extinguishing systems. In addition, owners must disclose to
                                                                            prospective buyers of real-estate property the existence of any hazards, including
                                                                            location in a fire-hazard severity zone.
                        Part 8 of Title 24 is found on the website of the   California Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 24                Title 24 of the CCR (“California
                      California Building Standards Commission (BSC).       Building Standards Code”) sets forth the fire, life-safety and other building-related
                               Parts 2, 3, 4 and 9 are published by non-
                       governmental organizations with sole publication
                                                                            regulations applicable to any structure fit for occupancy statewide for which a building
                       and distribution rights, and are not yet available   permit is sought. The 2001 triennial edition of Title 24 contains 11 parts, including
                      on the Internet; however, they may be examined        (with brief descriptions):
Fire Hazards | 58
                              free of charge at one of many “depository     ● Part 2, California Building Code: general standards for the design and construction of
                    libraries” throughout the state (listed on the BSC’s
                                                               website).
                                                                               buildings, including provisions related to fire, life safety and structural safety.
                                                                            ● Part 3, California Electrical Code: electrical building standards.
                                                                            ● Part 4, California Mechanical Code: mechanical standards related to the design,
                                                                               construction, installation, and maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, and
                                                                               refrigeration systems and of heat-producing appliances.
                                                                            ● Part 9, California Fire Code (CFC): building standards related to fire safety that are
                                                                               referenced in other parts of Title 24. Topics addressed in the code include automatic
                                                                               sprinkler systems, fire-alarm systems, access by fire-fighting equipment, fire hydrants,
                                                                               explosion-hazards safety, hazardous-materials storage and use, protection for first
                                                                               responders, industrial processes, and many other general and specialized fire-safety
                                                                               requirements for new and existing buildings and premises. The CFC is based on the
                                                                               Uniform Fire Code (UFC), a “model” code adopted through national-level consensus
                                                                               and which does not carry the weight of law (unlike the CFC). The CFC incorporates
                                                                               by reference the text of the latest published UFC, and reflects additions and deletions
                                                                               made to the UFC by the state.

                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)             The state’s CEQA guidelines
propose a wide range of environmental impacts that public agencies should consider in
their evaluation of development proposals. Considerations related to fire hazards
include the potential for a project to:
● expose people or structures to a significant risk of loss, injury or death involving
   wildland fires.
4.3 | ANALYSIS
Fire-fighting response          As mentioned above, OFD is the agency with primary
responsibility for preventing and suppressing fires in Oakland. OFD employs
approximately 500 sworn full-time equivalents (FTE’s) and 70 civilian FTE’s.
Combined daily staffing at all the city’s fire stations totals three battalion chiefs, 32
officers, 25 fire engineers and 75 firefighters over three daily shifts. OFD operates 25
fire stations throughout the city, including one at Oakland International Airport and a                                                       59 | Fire Hazards
fire station in the North Hills, dedicated in 1999 (see Figure 4.1). OFD’s fleet of
equipment includes 25 type-1 engines, four type-3 engines, seven aerial ladders, eight
brush patrols, a fireboat, a heavy-rescue vehicle, two foam units, six airport rescue rigs,
and four hose tenders.
The department receives in the range of 50,000-70,000 emergency and non-emergency
calls a year. Of the emergency calls, approximately three-fourths are for emergency
medical services, with the rest related to utilities, commercial alarms, structural fires
(mostly residential), vehicle and “outside” fires, grass/wild-land fires and other
emergencies. In 2002, fires caused three confirmed deaths in the city and an estimated
$8.75 million in property damage. (In recent years, on average, there have been five fire-
related fatalities annually.) Because fast response is critical in preventing widespread
damage from fires and other emergencies, OFD aims to provide emergency service
within seven minutes of notification 90 percent of the time. Generally, service can be
provided in that time-frame to areas located within 1.5 miles of a fire station. Figure 4.1
shows the 1.5-mile response radii for Oakland’s 25 fire stations; as shown, the vast
majority of the city is covered by these response radii, with the main exceptions being

                    PROTECT OAKLAND
                                      distant corners of the airport and seaport, the Bay Bridge approach, and an area in the
                                      South Hills between Skyline Boulevard and Keller Avenue. (A small area around San
                                      Pablo Avenue and 66th Street is covered by an Emeryville fire station—not shown—at
                                      Hollis and 63rd streets.) The opening of the North Hills fire station in 1999 has
                                      significantly improved the department’s average response time in an area of the city that
                                      is particularly susceptible to wildfires.
                                      Water supply       Oakland obtains most of its water supply from the East Bay Municipal
                                      Utility District (EBMUD). Water flows into Oakland primarily through the Claremont
                                      tunnel from the Orinda water treatment plant, then through several aqueducts and large
                                      transmission mains into smaller distribution mains supplying the entire city; at the same
                                      time, water is stored at various reservoirs located throughout the city.
                                      The adequacy of water supply for firefighting purposes is judged by the fire flow, or the
                                      rate of water flow needed, which is measured in gallons per minute (gpm). The desired
                                      fire flow in an area depends on the area’s land use, degree of fire hazard, exposure of
                                      neighboring buildings, and the size, construction and occupancy of buildings in the area.
                                      Water supply should not be confused with water pressure, which measures the strength of
                                      water flow, in pounds per square inch (psi). To provide more uniform water pressure
                                      regardless of elevation, the distribution of water in Oakland is divided into pressure
                                      zones, each covering a 200-foot elevation range, approximately. Water pressure in a
Fire Hazards | 60
                                      zone ranges from approximately 40 pounds per square inch (psi) at the top of the zone
                                      to 130 psi at the bottom of the zone. In order to maintain minimum residual pressure in
                                      the system while water is flowing, water mains must be adequately sized and fire
                                      hydrants must be adequately spaced. Most water transmission mains in Oakland are at
                                      least 20” in diameter, with a grid of smaller distribution mains serving individual blocks
                                      and hydrants. There are approximately 6,500 fire hydrants in the city, the distribution
                                      and spacing of which are generally governed by fire-code requirements. With a few
                                      exceptions, fire hydrants in Oakland are owned and maintained by EBMUD.
                                      For the 1991 Oakland Hills fire, firefighters used water from many reservoirs in several
                                      pressure zones. However, the water supply from several reservoirs became exhausted
                                      after several hours, and responding fire units experienced difficulty in locating and
                                      maintaining an adequate supply of water. Illustrating the compounding effect of
                                      disasters, power failures shut down water-pumping stations that supplied reservoirs, and
                                      reservoirs were further drained as water lines at hundreds of burned-out homes burst
                                      and poured water into the streets. On a separate note, fire companies from other

                                                                                             CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
jurisdictions experienced difficulty connecting to Oakland hydrants, and operations were
delayed as adapters were distributed. (At the time, Oakland hydrants had three-inch
outlets while most other jurisdictions use two-and-a-half-inch connections and hose
couplings.)
EBMUD periodically conducts hydrant-flow tests in the city to determine the available
water flow and pressure in hydrants and water mains. Contrary to misconceptions
arising from the 1991 fire, water pressure is generally adequate throughout the city.
However, the ability to feed water within certain zones and to certain hydrants is
restricted by older water mains that are not sized for current standards or that have lost
capacity due to deterioration. In addition, optimal “gridding” of water mains is not
possible in the Oakland Hills due to the area’s topography and street layout. Moreover,
enlarging water mains to improve fireflows in low-density areas (such as the hills) is not
always desirable since it could lead to poor water turnover and a resulting deterioration
in water quality.
Since the 1991 firestorm, the city and EBMUD have undertaken several projects to
improve the performance of the water-distribution system for purposes of fighting fires.
For example, Oakland’s hydrants have been retrofitted with universal hose couplings (or
replaced altogether), and OFD has developed a portable water-delivery system—
consisting of large-diameter hose, connections and pumps for drafting water from the
                                                                                                                                             61 | Fire Hazards
bay, lakes, creeks, reservoirs and even storm-drain sewers—in the event of failure of
EBMUD’s water supply. At the same time, the city and EBMUD have improved fire
flows in the Rockridge neighborhood, a project funded through a special assessment
district of area homeowners.
Structural fires The primary factors affecting the risk of structural fire are the age
and condition of the building or structure, its proximity to other structures, and the
methods and materials used in its construction. Generally, older buildings are at higher
risk because they were constructed prior to the adoption of current building standards;
with the few exceptions of buildings that have been extensively remodeled recently,
older buildings do not meet current construction codes. Higher-density development
presents an increased fire risk due to the greater intensity of use and higher chance of
fire spreading from one building to another. Finally, particularly susceptible to fire are
wood-framed buildings, especially those with wood-shingle roofs, methods and materials
that apply predominantly to small, detached single-family homes.

                    PROTECT OAKLAND
                                      The City of Oakland is at higher risk for structural fire than most other jurisdictions in
                                      California because of its relatively old and dense development pattern. The geographic
                                      area of greatest concern is downtown, due to its high land-use densities and
                                      concentration of older, multi-story buildings. (This is, of course, the area from which
                                      development radiated as the city grew.) Because of its high density, downtown is the
                                      area at greatest risk of suffering harm from structural fires, in terms of both human life
                                      and property damage. On the other hand, accessibility by fire-fighting equipment is
                                      excellent, and the area has the most extensive fire-protection coverage, with seven of the
                                      city’s 26 fire stations located within 1.5 miles of the corner of 14th Street and Broadway
                                      (arguably the city’s development center). Elsewhere in the city, there is generally enough
                                      clearance between buildings that structural fires can usually be contained to the structure
                                      of origin. This is especially true in districts of single-family homes.
                                      Two building-occupancy types present special fire hazards: public-assembly buildings
                                      such as schools, stadiums and auditoriums (because of the concentrations of people
                                      found at times in such buildings), and high-rise buildings. High-rise buildings pose
                                      particular access and evacuation challenges: moving firefighters and equipment up
                                      stairways lengthens response time, and chances are higher that occupants could become
                                      trapped. Current statewide fire-safety standards for high-rise structures and public-
                                      assembly buildings require built-in protection such as automatic smoke-detection, fire-
                                      detection and fire-extinguishing systems; fire-resistive methods and materials; and
Fire Hazards | 62
                                      internal-communication systems. (With certain exceptions, standards for high-rises
                                      apply to buildings constructed after July 1, 1974 “having floors used for human
                                      occupancy located more than 75 feet above the lowest floor level having building
                                      access.”) It should be noted that suppressing fires in older high-rise buildings, especially
                                      because they lack automatic fire-protection systems, could prove difficult. However,
                                      OFD has recently expanded its arsenal of fire-fighting equipment for high-rise buildings
                                      to include improved large-diameter-hose nozzles and updated its trainings and drills.
                                      The city has in place a number of strategies to prevent structural fires. OFD’s Fire
                                      Prevention Bureau reviews proposed development projects to ensure that appropriate
                                      fire-mitigation measures are taken. Projects are reviewed for such design, construction
                                      and operational features as adequate water supply and access by firefighting equipment,
                                      adequate emergency exits, sufficient clearance between structures, the use of
                                      noncombustible materials (especially for roofs and exterior walls), the provision of
                                      smoke detectors and fire extinguishers, and compliance with other building code
                                      requirements. The Fire Prevention Bureau also conducts regular inspections of

                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
commercial and multi-dwelling buildings and residential care facilities to determine if
corrective measures are necessary to protect occupants from fire. On a different note,
OFD has in the last several years given away thousands of smoke detectors and
replacement batteries to the public through its “fire-safe city” initiative.
Structural fires have always been, and will always be, an urban hazard in cities around the
world; Oakland is no exception. However, structural fires are relatively easy to contain,
certainly compared to wildfires, and especially given the city’s fire-suppressing
capabilities. It is unusual for a structural fire to spread to other than immediately
adjacent buildings, and it is extremely unlikely that a structural fire could not be
contained within the city block in which it originated (expect, perhaps, following a major
earthquake). While structural fires cause localized damage in Oakland almost daily, they
are highly unlikely to result in widespread damage—again, compared to wildfires. At the
same time, stricter construction codes and other fire-prevention strategies have, over
time, significantly reduced the aggregate structural-fire hazard.
Wildland fires      Wildfires are the most severe fire hazard in Oakland, especially in the
hills, above the Warren Freeway. Because the Oakland hills are a fire-dependent
ecosystem, wildfires occur there every year, especially in late summer and early fall when
the area’s natural vegetation is dry and extremely flammable. While small fires occur
every year, large fires should be anticipated every 10-20 years. The vegetation of the
                                                                                                                                              63 | Fire Hazards
hills ranges from densely wooded forests to open grasslands, making virtually the entire
area vulnerable to fire; the wooded areas pose risks due to the supply of fuel from trees
and the possibility of crown, or tree-top, fires, while the grass- and brush-covered areas
are highly flammable. Adding to the fire risk are the area’s steep and rugged terrain, and
the abundance of non-native vegetation, especially Monterey pine and eucalyptus, which
are not fire-resistant. Most of the wildfires in the hills are minor, and OFD is usually
able to control them easily. Nevertheless, aggravating circumstances can turn even small
fires into disastrous events with breathtaking speed. In the case of the 1991 fire, for
example, the combination of abundant dead vegetation, hot and dry weather, strong
winds and, in some areas, poor accessibility and insufficient water pressure created an
uncontrollable firestorm in much less than an hour.
Most of the severity of Oakland’s wildfire hazard stems from the presence of residential
neighborhoods amidst the large vegetated areas—a condition known as the
“urban/wildland interface.” Contributing to the hazard are the many wooden structures
in the area and, in places, the lack of adequate evacuation routes and access routes for

                    PROTECT OAKLAND
                                      emergency vehicles. Also, as shown on Figure 3.1, the hills are traversed by the
                                      Hayward fault; a significant fault movement could result in the breakage of natural-gas
                                      pipelines, setting off area-wide fires, and could also block roads and damage water lines,
                                      delaying OFD’s response and compromising their fire-suppressing abilities. Finally,
                                      immediately adjacent to the city, to the northeast, are large areas of combustible material
                                      in the form of open spaces in unincorporated Contra Costa County (Orinda Canyon,
                                      primarily) and of the densely vegetated parklands owned by EBRPD: Charles Lee
                                      Tilden, Redwood and Anthony Chabot regional parks; Claremont Canyon, Robert Sibley
                                      Volcanic, Huckleberry Volcanic and Leona Heights Open Space regional preserves; and
                                      Roberts Regional Recreation Area. CDF has developed a rating of wildland fire threat
                                      for the entire state based on the combination of potential fire behavior (derived from
                                      weather, terrain and vegetative-fuel data) and expected fire frequency (derived from 50
                                      years of fire-history data). Under this rating system, areas are assigned one of four fire-
                                      threat ratings: moderate, high, very high and extreme. While most of Oakland is rated
                                      “moderate” for fire threat, scattered parts of the Oakland Hills and most of the area
                                      adjacent to the city to the northeast (mentioned in the paragraph above) have ratings of
                                      “high” or “very high” (see Figure 4.1). Moreover, because the CDF rating does not take
                                      into account the presence of houses and other flammable structures, it most likely
                                      underestimates the fire threat in Oakland (and other urban areas).
                                      Following the 1991 firestorm, the mayors of Oakland and Berkeley convened a series of
Fire Hazards | 64
                                      meetings of a task force on “emergency preparedness and community restoration.” The
                                      task force produced a list of nearly 100 recommended actions to mitigate wildfire
                                      hazards, covering four broad areas: emergency preparedness; communications; forestry
                                      and vegetation; and planning, zoning and design. The city Manager’s office prepared a
                                      detailed response to the task force’s report, describing the status or analyzing the
                                      feasibility of each recommendation. Also, the task force’s report became part of a plan
                                      submitted by the city—as required of recipients of federal disaster aid—to FEMA (and
                                      also to the California OES) in 1992. The plan evaluated the natural hazards of the
                                      disaster area, reviewed past mitigation measures and recommended mitigation actions
                                      for the future. The plan identified several priority projects including implementation of
                                      a vegetation-management program, development of a portable water-supply system,
                                      implementation of a variety of fire-safety improvements at critical city-owned facilities.
                                      In response to the 1991 firestorm, the city enacted special development requirements,
                                      described earlier in this chapter, for new construction in the wildfire-hazard areas. Also,
                                      in 1993, the city established a fire-prevention and suppression assessment district to

                                                                                                CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
fund fuel-reduction, vegetation-management, fire suppression and public education
programs in the Oakland Hills. The assessment district was terminated in 1997.
However, mindful of the continued hazard presented by wildfires, the city council in late
2003 organized a vote among Oakland Hills dwellers for the formation of a new
wildfire-prevention assessment district. The new assessment district was ratified in
January 2004 after a majority of Hills voters approved its formation (see Figure 4.1 for
the boundaries of the new district). The new assessment district will continue work
funded by the previous district, paying for fire-safety inspections of private properties,
vegetation management, roving firefighter patrols on high fire-hazard days, public
education, goat grazing and other services.
OFD’s vegetation-management program requires that owners of both vacant and
developed lots in the area comply with fire-hazard-abatement requirements.
Requirements include the removal of overgrown grass, brush and weeds; the removal of
low-hanging tree branches, and of dead and dying vegetation; and street-address
numbers visible from the road. Most importantly, residents must maintain firebreaks—a
discontinuity of fire fuels—around buildings, structures, right-of-ways and property
lines. (The purposes of a firebreak, or “defensible space,” are to slow the advance of
fire, give structures an opportunity to remain undamaged, and provide a clear path for
firefighting personnel.) Properties found to be out of compliance with the requirements
may have a tax lien placed against them. By 1999, OFD had conducted 21,000
                                                                                                                                                65 | Fire Hazards
vegetation-management inspections.
Despite the city’s efforts, continued work is needed to mitigate the hazard from wildfires
in the hills. Specifically, progress still needs to be made in maintaining an effective fire
break along the urban-wildland interface and defensible space around residential
structures, reducing the build-up of dead vegetation, re-vegetating the area with native
plants resistant to fire and drought, educating area residents about wildfire mitigation,
and providing adequate evacuation routes and procedures (see below). At the same
time, the rebuilding of homes destroyed by the fire means that the number of people
and homes in harm’s way is roughly the same as it was before the fire.
Roadway standards and emergency routes                       Roadway standards—for such
criteria as width, grades, overhead clearance and turning radii—are necessary to provide
for adequate access by fire and emergency vehicles and evacuation of residents. As
mentioned earlier, chapter 16.16 of the Oakland municipal code (“Design Standards”)
establishes regulations related to the design of streets, including alignment, width, grade,
intersection, visibility, curvature radii and tangents; the chapter also includes regulations

                    PROTECT OAKLAND
                                      related to the design of blocks, lots, alleys and pedestrian ways; in addition, section
                                      16.24.040 contains lot-design standards, and chapter 16.32 covers design standards for
                                      private-access easements. Section 16.28.040 requires that in hillside subdivisions, the
                                      dedicated widths of all streets (other than arterial and collector streets) shall be at least
                                      40 feet; and that the paved roadway widths shall be at least 30 feet if there is lot frontage
                                      on both sides the street, or 24 feet if there is lot frontage on one side of the street only.
                                      Finally, section 17.102.360 stipulates that secondary units may be permitted only if all
                                      streets connecting the lot to the nearest arterial street have a minimum pavement width
                                      of at least twenty feet.
                                      Emergency-access and evacuation routes are a concern associated primarily with
                                      wildfires, since these tend to cover much greater areas than structural fires. Limited
                                      accessibility in the hills complicated emergency response and evacuation during the 1991
                                      fire. Many streets in the area are narrow, winding or indirect. During the fire, many
                                      roads in the immediate and surrounding areas became clogged with residents trying to
                                      get out as emergency personnel were trying to get in; congestion was worsened by
                                      “rubberneckers,” parked cars, vehicles abandoned by fleeing residents, fallen power
                                      poles and high-voltage lines, and debris falling from higher elevations. The long-range
                                      planning efforts following the 1991 fire resulted in two main recommendations related
                                      to emergency access and evacuation: to set and enforce minimum unobstructed street
                                      widths (to be implemented by street widenings and parking restrictions, accompanied by
Fire Hazards | 66
                                      new off-street parking); and to designate and sign evacuation and emergency-response
                                      routes. Neither recommendation has been implemented to any significant extent—
                                      other than the designation of evacuation routes—and residents in the hills remain highly
                                      vulnerable to future disasters. Ingress and egress in the Oakland Hills could be
                                      compromised further, and severely, if the fire is the result of a strong earthquake (from
                                      ruptured gas mains or downed power lines), since such an earthquake would likely
                                      damage roads, bridges and overpasses.
                                      It should be mentioned that off-street walkways provide important alternate routes for
                                      emergency evacuation, particularly in hilly areas where street access may be limited or
                                      indirect. According to the city’s pedestrian master plan, there are approximately 200
                                      walkways in the city. They are most common in older neighborhoods with hilly terrain
                                      and long street blocks; the highest concentrations of walkways are found in the
                                      neighborhoods of Upper Rockridge, Montclair, Trestle Glen, San Antonio, Fruitvale and
                                      Eastmont, and along Glen Echo Creek. The pedestrian master plan also mentions that
                                      there are at least 200 undeveloped rights-of-way that are potential sites for additional

                                                                                       CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
walkways. Among the recommendations emerging after the 1991 fire were the
provision of additional pathways and the provision and maintenance of pathway
lighting. However, both recommendations remain largely unimplemented.
4.4 | POLICY STATEMENTS
 POLICY FI-1        Maintain and enhance the city’s capacity for emergency response,
                    fire prevention and fire-fighting.
● ACTION FI-1.1: Periodically assess the need for new or relocated fire stations and
  other facilities, changes in staffing levels, and additional or updated supplies,
  equipment, technologies and in-service training classes.
                                                  f OFD TECHNICAL SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION FI-1.2: Strive to meet a goal of responding to fires and other
  emergencies within seven minutes of notification 90 percent of the time.
                                                    f OFD FIELD OPERATIONS DIVISION
                                                                                                                                       67 | Fire Hazards
● ACTION FI-1.3: Continue to offer fire-prevention and fire-safety presentations
  and training to the public.
                                                    f OFD FIELD OPERATIONS DIVISION
                                                   f OFD SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION
                                                 f OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
● ACTION FI-1.4: Continue to sponsor the formation and training of CORE teams.             CORE: Citizens of Oakland Respond to
                                                 f OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES        Emergencies
● ACTION FI-1.5: Continue to participate not only in general mutual-aid
  agreements but also in agreements with adjoining jurisdictions for cooperative
  response to fires.
                                                    f OFD FIELD OPERATIONS DIVISION
● ACTION FI-1.6: Continue to conduct monthly tests of the alerting and warning
  system’s outdoor sirens, coordinating them to the extent possible with those of
  neighboring jurisdictions.

                    PROTECT OAKLAND
                                                                                     f OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                      ● ACTION FI-1.7: Along with the East Bay Municipal Utility District, review the
                                        extent to which recommendations from the district’s 1994 infrastructure policy
                                        study on needed improvements to the water distribution system were
                                        implemented.
                                                                                        f OFD FIELD OPERATIONS DIVISION
                                       POLICY FI-2       Continue, enhance or implement programs that seek to reduce
                                                         the risk of structural fires.
                                      ● ACTION FI-2.1: Adopt and amend as needed updated versions of the California
                                        building and fire codes so that optimal fire-protection standards are used in
                                        construction and renovation projects.
                                                                                      f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                                                                        f OFD SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION
                                      ● ACTION FI-2.2: Continue to enforce provisions under the local housing code
                                        requiring the use of fire-resistant construction and the provision of smoke
Fire Hazards | 68                       detectors and fire-extinguishing systems.
                                                                                      f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                                                                        f OFD SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION
                                      ● ACTION FI-2.3: Continue to review development proposals to ensure that they
                                        incorporate required and appropriate fire-mitigation measures, including
                                        adequate provisions for occupant evacuation and access by fire-fighting
                                        personnel and equipment.
                                                                                        f OFD SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION
                                      ● ACTION FI-2.4: Compile a list of high-rise and high-occupancy buildings which
                                        are deemed due to their age or construction materials to be particularly
                                        susceptible to fire hazards, and determine an expeditious timeline for the fire-
                                        safety inspection of all such structures.
                                                                                        f OFD SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION
                                      ● ACTION FI-2.5: Continue to conduct periodic fire-safety          inspections   of
                                        commercial, multi-family and institutional buildings.
                                                                                        f OFD SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION

                                                                                        CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
● ACTION FI-2.6: Enforce the chapter of the municipal code regulating the location
  and design of street-address numbers on buildings.
                                                  f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
 POLICY FI-3        Prioritize the reduction of the wildfire hazard, with an emphasis
                    on prevention.
● ACTION FI-3.1: Implement and administer the 2004 wildfire-prevention
  assessment district for the Oakland Hills, and carry out the programs funded by
  the district, including fire-safety inspections of private properties, vegetation
  management practices, roving firefighter patrols on high fire-hazard days, and
  public eduction efforts.
                                                  f OFD SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION
                                                  f OFD FIELD OPERATIONS DIVISION
                                           f PWA TRANSPORTATION SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION FI-3.2: Consistent with the city’s pedestrian master plan, develop
  unused pedestrian rights-of-way in the Oakland Hills as walkways to serve as
  additional evacuation routes, and provide and maintain lighting facilities for new
  and existing walkways.                                                                                                                69 | Fire Hazards
                                           f PWA TRANSPORTATION SERVICES DIVISION
                                               f PWA ENGINEERING DESIGN DIVISION
                                               f PWA ELECTRICAL SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION FI-3.3: Continue to participate in multi-jurisdictional programs and task
  forces, such as the Hills Emergency Forum and Diablo FireSafe Council, that
  work to reduce the threat of wildfires.
                                                    f OFD SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION FI-3.4: Along with EBMUD, review the extent to which recommendations
  from the utility’s district’s 1993 study on its preparation and response to the
  1991 firestorm were implemented.
                                                    f OFD FIELD OPERATIONS DIVISION

                    PROTECT OAKLAND
                                      4.5 | RESOURCES
                                      Agencies consulted
                                      ● California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (www.fire.ca.gov)
                                      ● Office of the State Fire Marshal (osfm.fire.ca.gov)
                                      ● California Building Standards Commission (www.bsc.ca.gov)
                                      ● East Bay Municipal Utility District (www.ebmud.com)
                                      ● East Bay Regional Park District Fire Department (www.ebparks.org/fire/firewx.htm)
                                      ● Oakland Fire Department (www.oaklandnet.com/oakweb/fire/index.html)
                                      ● Diablo FireSafe Council (www.diablofiresafe.org)
                                      ● The Hills Emergency Forum (www.lbl.gov/ehs/hef)
                                      Documents consulted
                                      ● “Fire Hazard Mitigation       Plan for the City of Oakland—Oakland Hills ‘Tunnel Fire’
                                          Disaster Declaration;” Oakland Emergency Services Division, April 1992.
                                      ●   “East Bay Hills Firestorm Response Assessment, Phase I;” East Bay Municipal Utility
                                          District, January 1992.
                                      ●   “East Bay Hills Firestorm Response Assessment, Phase II;” East Bay Municipal
                                          Utility District, July 1992.
                                      ●   “Water Supply Reference Course;” Oakland Fire Services Agency, revised March
Fire Hazards | 70
                                          1997.
                                      ●   “Resource Management Plan for the Caldecott Wildlife Corridor; Alameda-Contra
                                          Costa Biodiversity Working Group;” Caldecott Corridor Committee, September
                                          2001.
                                      ●   “The Tunnel Incident, Oakland 1991—Ten Years After;” The Hills Emergency
                                          Forum, October 2001 (http://www.lbl.gov/ehs/hef/10yrsAfter.pdf).
                                      ●   “Annual Report 2000;” Oakland Fire Department, undated.
                                      ●   “The Oakland Hills Fire Storm: After-Action Report;” Oakland Office of the city
                                          Manager, Emergency Services Division, undated.
                                      Other resources
                                      ● Oakland Wildfire Prevention   Assessment District
                                          (www.oaklandnet.com/government/cmo/wildfireprevention.htm)
                                      ●   “The Oakland/Berkeley Hills Fire”
                                          (www.firewise.org/pubs/theOaklandBerkeleyHillsFire)

5 | HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
5.1 | OVERVIEW
General characteristics The term “hazardous materials” covers a large number of
gaseous, liquid and solid substances that are toxic, flammable, corrosive, reactive,
infectious or explosive. Due to those properties, hazardous materials have the potential
to harm human health or environmental resources, especially if managed improperly.
Hazardous materials can lead to numerous negative impacts to human health such as
kidney and liver toxicity, diseases of the lung, various types of cancer, harm to the
central nervous system, deleterious effects on human reproduction and impairment of
the blood function. Growing community awareness of the threat posed by hazardous
materials has resulted in a complex framework of federal, state, regional and local laws
and regulations, and has made hazardous-materials management an increasingly
important consideration in land-use planning. The various regulations and programs
have detailed planning and management requirements to ensure that hazardous materials
and wastes are used, handled, stored, transported and disposed of properly in order to
reduce or eliminate harm to public health and environmental resources.

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                             Sources         Hazardous materials are generated by a broad range of industrial,
                                             commercial, transportation-related and other activities essential to the functioning of a
                                             technologically complex society; they are even generated by many everyday household
                                             activities. Common hazardous materials and sources include solvents, paint, acids,
                                             plating solutions and other substances produced by heavy- and light-industrial
                                             businesses; waste oil, exhaust emissions and other gases and liquids associated with
                                             transportation-related facilities (including airports, seaports, corporation yards and, more
                                             indirectly, parking lots, streets and freeways); motor oil and other motor-vehicle fluids
                                             used or released by gasoline stations and auto repair and service centers; herbicides,
                                             pesticides and other lawn-care chemicals used on golf courses and other landscaped
                                             areas; and perchloroethylene, used by numerous dry-cleaning establishments. Finally,
                                             common hazardous materials routinely used by individuals and households, in Oakland
                                             and elsewhere, include motor oil and other vehicle fluids, paints, thinners and solvents,
                                             batteries, and chemical cleaning and lawn-care products. Of special concern are
Hazardous Materials | 72
                                             substances classified by federal law as “extremely hazardous materials” and by state law
                                             as “acutely hazardous materials” (AHMs). The most common AHMs are ammonia,
                                             chlorine gas and sulfuric acid.
                                             Methods of exposure            When disposed of or released into the environment—
                                             whether properly or improperly—hazardous materials become hazardous waste.
                                             Disposal or release of, and exposure to, hazardous materials and waste can occur in a
                                             number of ways: illegal dumping into the sewer or storm-drain system, into creeks or
                                             along roadways; industrial accidents or spills on freeways or railroads; a ruptured gas or
                                             petroleum pipeline; leaking underground storage tanks; illegal disposal in household
                                             garbage cans for disposal at conventional landfills; demolition or remodeling of older
                                             buildings containing asbestos, lead-based paint or other hazardous building materials;
                                             contaminated groundwater plumes; application of pesticides or herbicides; and urban
                                             storm-water runoff carrying grease, oil and other pollutants. It should be mentioned
                                             that hazardous waste from households and small businesses—while much less than that
                                             generated by commercial and industrial enterprises—is of particular concern since it is
                                             more likely to be disposed of illegally.
                                             Toxic air contaminants (TACs)            A subset of hazardous materials, TACs are
                                             gaseous, or air-borne, toxins, typically occurring at low concentrations and having
                                             carcinogenic, mutagenic and other significant adverse impacts on human health. The
                                             largest source of TACs is motor-vehicle exhaust from cars, trucks and buses (known as
                                             “mobile sources”). Stationary sources of TACs include industrial processes such as

                                                                                               CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
petroleum refining, incineration and plating operations; commercial establishments such
as gasoline stations and dry cleaners; and residential fireplaces. Government agencies in
charge of controlling air pollution have traditionally focused their efforts on the more
common “criteria” air pollutants, which are governed by federal clean-air standards:
carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, ozone and particulate matter.
However, it is becoming increasingly obvious that TACs—for which nosafe exposure
levels have been established—represent the greater respiratory health threat. Regulation
of TACs is achieved through permit controls on individual stationary sources and,
indirectly, through vehicle-emission standards and fuel specifications.
Hazardous-waste management hierarchy                   The accepted process for managing
hazardous wastes is a hierarchy in which the most desirable option is to reduce or
eliminate the generation of hazardous waste in the first place by reducing the use of
hazardous materials; this process is known as “source reduction” or “pollution
                                                                                                                                               73 | Hazardous Materials
prevention.” This option is followed by, in order of decreasing preferability, recycling of
the remaining waste for reuse; treatment of the remaining waste by methods other than
incineration; treatment by incineration; and, finally, proper and secure disposal of treated
residuals in approved repositories. Each step in the hierarchy has significant advantages
over steps below it: reduced risks of human exposure, environmental release and
liability; reduced costs associated with handling, transportation, treatment and disposal;
and a reduced need to expand treatment and disposal facilities. Barriers to source
reduction include institutional inertia, and lack of information on the part of businesses
and the public on alternatives to hazardous products and on proper disposal methods.
Contaminated sites The use of hazardous materials before the adoption of current
environmental regulations caused long-term contamination of soil and groundwater and
has left a legacy of contaminated sites, especially in older cities such as Oakland. For
this reason, many of the regulations and programs related to hazardous materials and
wastes are designed not only to prevent future pollution but also to clean up pollution
generated in the past. Sites associated with hazardous waste contamination include
landfills, rail yards, certain manufacturing operations, and, most commonly, sites with
leaking underground storage tanks (LUSTs). Sites with LUSTs include gasoline stations,
corporation yards and other places associated with the use, storage or maintenance of
fuels and motor vehicles. The risk of hazardous materials releases from contaminated
sites is serious but typically not immediately life threatening, and depends on the
quantity and toxicity of contaminants, and the available exposure pathways for
contaminants to affect human health.

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                             Brownfields The term “brownfields” describes vacant, abandoned or underutilized
                                             industrial properties with known or suspected contamination on which redevelopment is
                                             inhibited by the uncertainties associated with clean-up costs, long-term liability from
                                             health and safety risks, and onerous or unclear regulatory requirements. Generally,
                                             before a site can be returned to productive use, contamination must be shown not to
                                             pose a risk to human health or environmental resources, or it must be cleaned up in
                                             order to permanently reduce such risk. Clean-up, also known as “remediation,” is
                                             usually a very costly, complicated and time-consuming process, involving many agencies
                                             at different levels of government. The level of remediation required at a given site
                                             depends on the type and extent of contamination and the type of land use that is
                                             planned. It is worth mentioning that any landowner of a contaminated site, whether
                                             responsible for the contamination or not, is liable for the cost of clean-up .
Hazardous Materials | 74
                                             Local risks      Oakland is home to a large number of businesses and facilities that
                                             generate, use, store or dispose of hazardous materials. These operations include high-
                                             tech manufacturers and biotech firms; businesses serving individual consumers, such as
                                             drycleaners and automotive body shops; metal casters and finishers, plastics extruders
                                             and fabricators and other light-industrial concerns; hospitals, laboratories and medical
                                             offices; and corporation yards and other government facilities. These sites are found
                                             throughout the city—as could be expected from such a wide range of land uses—
                                             though they are primarily concentrated in the industrial areas of West and East Oakland.
                                             Safety requirements notwithstanding, the presence of large quantities of hazardous
                                             materials, especially close to populated areas, represents a constant risk. As a relatively
                                             dense city with a large industrial presence and extensive freeway and rail networks,
                                             Oakland faces daily the risks of a transportation-related or other hazardous-materials
                                             incident such as a fire, explosion, spill or accidental gas release. While hazardous-
                                             materials incidents can happen anywhere, certain areas of the city are particularly
                                             vulnerable to these hazards, namely residences near industrial zones and along interstate
                                             highways.
                                             Relationship to other hazards          The Loma Prieta and Northridge earthquakes are
                                             good demonstrations of the relationship that exists between natural hazards and the
                                             risks posed by hazardous materials. Both seismic events resulted in dozens of reported
                                             hazardous-materials releases, many of which, in turn, triggered fires from leaked natural
                                             gas, spilled crude oil and various chemical reactions. Fortunately, extensive damage was
                                             averted through a combination of good fortune and effective disaster response. It can

                                                                                               CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
be expected that future strong earthquakes will result in similar accidental releases of
hazardous materials, and that the potential for serious harm to human health and
property from these releases will continue to be present. Generally, the hazardous
materials that would pose the greatest hazard during a disaster are gaseous ones, because
they could affect large numbers of people by spreading quickly and easily.
Related topics in other elements          Several topics related to hazardous materials
and waste are covered in the open space, conservation and recreation (OSCAR) element
and the land use and transportation element of the Oakland general plan. Chapter 3 of
the OSCAR element (“Conservation”) has sections on earth resources, which discusses
soils contamination from the storage and disposal of toxic substances and from mining
sites; on water resources, which addresses such issues as groundwater pollution, urban
runoff, and sewage collection and treatment; and on air resources, which examines the
impacts of criteria air pollutants—though not of TACs—on air quality. The land use
                                                                                                                                               75 | Hazardous Materials
and transportation element includes as one of its policy goals to improve air quality (by
integrating land use and transportation planning and by promoting alternative
transportation options).
5.2 | INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)                 The EPA is the main regulatory
agency of the federal government on water and air quality, hazardous materials,
environmental justice and other important environmental issues. The major federal laws
that form the legal basis for the EPA’s programs on hazardous materials are:
● Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA): regulates hazardous waste from
   its generation to its ultimate disposal, including transportation, treatment and storage;
   amendments to the law created a comprehensive framework for the management of
   underground storage tanks (USTs).
● Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
   (CERCLA), better known as “Superfund:” regulates the clean-up of closed or
   abandoned sites that are contaminated with hazardous waste; important subsequent
   changes and additions to the Superfund program were made by the Superfund
   Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA).

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                             ● Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA), also known as
                                               Title III of SARA: this disclosure law requires facilities to report on toxic chemicals
                                               and releases in order to help increase the public’s knowledge and access to
                                               information, and help communities improve safety procedures.
                                             ● Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA): enables the tracking of approximately 75,000
                                               industrial chemicals produced or imported into the U.S., and allows the EPA to ban
                                               the manufacture and import of those chemicals that pose unreasonable risks.
                                             ● Clean Air Act (CAA): established a permit program for large stationary sources of air
                                               pollution, created a comprehensive approach to reducing pollution from motor
                                               vehicles, requires industrial plants to develop plans to prevent accidental releases of
                                               HAPs, and established the Chemical Safety Board to investigate such accidents;
                                               amendments to the act passed in 1997 expanded the EPA’s authority to regulate
                                               HAPs from stationary sources.
Hazardous Materials | 76
                                             California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal/EPA)                          Cal/EPA is an
                                             “umbrella” agency made up of the following six boards, departments office charged with
                                             protecting human health and the environment in California:
                                             ● Air Resources Board (ARB): sets air-quality standards and emission standards for
                                                fuels and motor vehicles; establishes control measures for TACs; and assists local air
                                                quality districts with the regulation of stationary air-pollution sources.
                                             ● Department of Pesticide Regulation (DPR): regulates the registration, sale and use of
                                                pesticides.
                                             ● Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC): regulates hazardous waste,
                                                including the clean-up of contaminated sites.
                                             ● California Integrated Waste Management Board (IWMB): manages the state’s solid-
                                                waste stream, regulates landfills and other waste-management facilities, and cleans up
                                                illegal dumps.
                                             ● Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment (OEHHA): evaluates risks
                                                posed by hazardous substances, and develops and disseminates toxicological and
                                                medical information relevant to decisions concerning public health.
                                             ● State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB): in coordination with nine regional
                                                water quality control boards (RWQCBs), develops and enforces water-quality
                                                objectives and implementation plans to protect the beneficial uses of the state’s
                                                waters; the City of Oakland falls within the jurisdiction of the San Francisco Bay
                                                RWQCB.

                                                                                          CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
California regulations California has often taken the lead among states in regulating
the management of hazardous materials. Many significant regulations were enacted in
the 1980s, when awareness of the threat posed by hazardous substances became a
mainstream concern. Most regulations dealing with hazardous materials and waste can
be found under the California Health and Safety Code (HSC). In addition to the HSC
chapters mentioned in the next section (“Unified program”), important chapters and
sections under the HSC include:
● Division 11 (“Explosives”).
● Division 20: Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act of 1986, better known
   as Proposition 65 (chapter 6.6); chapter 6.65 (“Unified agency review of hazardous
   materials release sites”); Underground Storage Tank Cleanup Trust Fund Act
   (chapter 6.75); Hazardous Substance Account Act (California’s equivalent of the
   federal Superfund program; chapter 6.8); and chapter 6.95 (“Hazardous materials
   release response plans and inventory”).
                                                                                                                                                  77 | Hazardous Materials
● Division 26: §39650 et seq. (“Toxic air contaminants”); and Air Toxics “Hot Spots”
   Information and Assessment Act (§44300 et seq.).
● Division 104: California Hazardous Substances Act (§108100 et seq.); California Safe
   Drinking Water Act (§116270 et seq.); Medical Waste Management Act (§117600 et
   seq.); and California Indoor Clean Air Act (§118875 et seq.).
Unified program       In an effort to streamline the management of hazardous materials,       Regulations establishing the unified program are
the state established the unified hazardous waste and materials management program            found under chapter 6.11 of the California Health
                                                                                              and Safety Code (HSC). Regulations concerning
(“unified program”) to coordinate and make consistent the administration, permitting,         the six component programs are found under HSC
inspection and enforcement for six environmental regulatory programs. The unified             division 20, chapter 6.5 (hazardous waste
program is implemented at the local-government level by certified unified program             permitting); chapter 6.67 (above-ground storage
agencies (CUPAs), usually the local fire or environmental-health department. The six          tanks); chapter 6.7 (underground storage tanks);
                                                                                              and chapter 6.95 (hazardous-materials business
regulatory programs brought under the unified program are:                                    plans, and CalARP); and section 80.103 of the
● Hazardous-materials release response plans and inventories (better known as                 Uniform Fire Code (fire-code requirements).
   “business plans” for hazardous materials).
● California accidental release prevention (CalARP).
● Installation, operation and maintenance oversight of underground storage tanks
   (USTs).
● Spill-prevention, control and countermeasure (SPCC) plans for above-ground
   petroleum storage tanks.
● Tiered permitting of hazardous-waste generation and onsite treatment.
● California Uniform Fire Code requirements concerning hazardous-material
   management plans and inventories.

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                             California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                   The state’s CEQA guidelines
                                             propose a wide range of environmental impacts that public agencies should consider in
                                             their evaluation of development proposals. Considerations related to hazardous
                                             materials include the potential for a project to:
                                             ● create a significant hazard to the public or the environment through the routine
                                                transport, use, or disposal of hazardous materials, or through reasonably foreseeable
                                                upset and accident conditions involving the release of hazardous materials into the
                                                environment;
                                             ● emit hazardous emissions or handle hazardous or acutely hazardous materials,
                                                substances, or waste within one-quarter mile of an existing or proposed school;
                                             ● be located on a site which is included on a list of hazardous materials sites and, as a
                                                result, create a significant hazard to the public or the environment;
                                             ● conflict with or obstruct implementation of the applicable air quality plan;
Hazardous Materials | 78
                                             ● violate any air quality standard or contribute substantially to an existing or projected
                                                air quality violation; and
                                             ● expose sensitive receptors to substantial pollutant concentrations.
                                             Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD)                   The BAAQMD is the
                                             regional agency that controls air pollution in most of the nine-county San Francisco Bay
                                             Area. Its regulatory air-toxics program integrates federal and state mandates to reduce
                                             ambient concentrations of TACs and the public’s exposure to them. The BAAQMD
                                             regulates TACs from stationary sources through its permit process; mobile sources are
                                             regulated indirectly through vehicle-emissions standards and fuel specifications. The
                                             main components of the BAAQMD’s air-toxics program are:
                                             ● Pre-construction review of new and modified stationary sources for potential health
                                                impacts, and requirements for the use of the “best available control technology.”
                                             ● Identification of industrial and commercial facilities that could cause TAC “hot
                                                spots” (locally elevated ambient concentrations), evaluation of health risks from these
                                                facilities, specific public-notification requirements for different risk levels, and
                                                requirements for the reduction of risks to below-significant levels.
                                             ● Control measures to reduce emissions from various categories of TAC sources.
                                             ● Annual inventories of TAC emissions from permitted stationary sources.
                                             ● Monitoring of ambient concentrations of TACs through a regional network of
                                                monitoring stations.

                                                                                                  CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan                           Pursuant to state law,
each county is required to prepare a plan for the management of hazardous wastes
produced within the county. Alameda County’s plan is prepared by the Alameda County
Waste Management Authority, an agency that also provides technical assistance to its
member agencies in the implementation of the plan. (The Authority operates under a
joint exercise-of-powers agreement among the county, each of the 14 cities in the
county—including Oakland—and two sanitary districts; also, it operates collectively as
one agency with the Alameda County Source Reduction and Recycling Board.) The
primary focus of the plan is the maximum feasible reduction of hazardous waste
generated in the county in order to minimize the number of hazardous-waste
management facilities needed to manage that waste. The plan sets out goals and
policies; provides a comprehensive overview of current conditions; projects future
conditions based on current and expected trends; and lays out an implementation
program for achieving hazardous-waste minimization. The city’s land use and
                                                                                                                                                             79 | Hazardous Materials
transportation element was amended on July 21, 1998 to incorporate by reference the
goals, policies, facility-siting criteria and other provisions of the plan.
OFD Office of Emergency Services (OES)                Pursuant to approval received from              Regulations concerning the city’s assumption of
Cal/EPA and to an agreement with the County of Alameda, the City of Oakland has                       responsibility for implementation of the unified
                                                                                                      program and other programs related to the
assumed CUPA responsibilities (see above). OES is the designated city office                          management of hazardous materials are found in
responsible for local administration and enforcement of the unified program. In its role,             chapter 8.42 of the Oakland Municipal Code.
OES issues permits for, and inspects, facilities that handle hazardous materials or waste;
oversees the reporting of disclosure forms, risk-management plans, hazardous-materials
assessment reports and remediation plans, and closure plans by such facilities; and
provides information to the public and other city agencies.
Other local regulations        In addition to the ordinances mentioned above, the city                Regulations pertaining to explosives and fireworks
has enacted a number of regulations dealing with issues related to hazardous materials,               are found in chapter 8.06 of the Oakland Municipal
                                                                                                      Code; the disposal of hazardous materials, in
including the use of fireworks, disposal of hazardous materials, property blight,                     section 8.28.130; property blight, in chapter 8.24;
transport of explosives and radioactive materials, designated truck routes, notification of           transport of radioactive materials, in section
spills into surface waters, and electroplating activities. In addition, there are local               8.38.200; designated truck routes, in chapter
amendments to the California Building Code addressing the storage of hazardous                        10.52; notification of spills, in section 13.16.220;
                                                                                                      and electroplating activities, in section
materials and fire-sprinkler standards when code limits on the quantity of hazardous                  17.102.340. Local amendments to the California
materials used or stored are exceeded.                                                                Building Code addressing the storage of hazardous
                                                                                                      materials are found in section 15.04.745; and fire-
Oakland’s hazardous materials area plan State law requires cities that serve as                       sprinkler standards, in sections 15.04.750 and
                                                                                                      15.04.755.
their own lead enforcement agency for the regulation of hazardous materials to prepare

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                             an emergency preparedness and response plan in the event of a disaster related to the
                                             use, storage or transport of hazardous materials. Oakland’s plan, prepared by the city’s
                                             OES, addresses specific emergency-response responsibilities, protocols and procedures;
                                             pre-emergency planning; coordination of response activities with state, federal and other
                                             local agencies; training of response personnel; public-safety and information guidelines;
                                             emergency-response supplies, equipment and resources; and incident critique and
                                             follow-up. Also included in the plan are maps showing the location of facilities with
                                             significant concentrations of hazardous materials, evacuation routes from these facilities,
                                             and the location of “sensitive receptors” such as schools, hospitals and nursing homes.
                                             Oakland’s household hazardous-waste element               As required by state law, the
                                             City of Oakland has prepared a household hazardous waste (HHW) element, which
                                             seeks to ensure that HHW is not mixed with ordinary, non-hazardous solid waste at
                                             disposal. (While called an “element,” this document is not part of the Oakland general
Hazardous Materials | 80
                                             plan.) This element has among its goals to eliminate HHW disposal to landfills, reduce
                                             the generation of HHW, provide adequate opportunities for collection of HHW, ensure
                                             that the management of HHW follows the hazardous-waste hierarchy (see previous
                                             section), and ensure public health and safety and protection of the environment in
                                             managing HHW.
                                             Urban Land Redevelopment (ULR) Program                  In Oakland, many of the large
                                             remaining developable sites were in former industrial use and are likely to require some
                                             level of hazardous-materials remediation. The ULR program is a collaborative effort by
                                             the City of Oakland and the principal agencies charged with enforcing environmental
                                             regulations in Oakland—DTSC, SFRWQCB and Alameda County Environmental
                                             Health—to facilitate the cleanup and redevelopment of contaminated properties in the
                                             city. The program clarifies environmental investigation requirements, standardizes the
                                             regulatory process and establishes Oakland-specific criteria that, when met, adequately
                                             address the risk posed by contamination to human health. The ULR program assists
                                             developers of brownfields to obtain faster regulatory-agency approval of corrective
                                             actions, reduce the cost of implementing corrective actions, provide potential lenders
                                             with greater certainty regarding environmental costs and facilitate communication with
                                             persons who live and work in the vicinity of development sites.
                                             Other agencies     Numerous federal, state, regional and local agencies besides those
                                             mentioned above have responsibility over various aspects of hazardous-materials
                                             management affecting the City of Oakland. The U.S. Coast Guard is the first responder

                                                                                               CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
to spills of oil and other hazardous substances in San Francisco Bay. California OES
tracks accidental releases and dispatches other agencies to respond to emergencies as
needed. The Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM) regulates the safety of intrastate
pipelines transporting hazardous liquids. The California Public Utilities Commission
(CPUC) has safety oversight of heavy-freight railroads and of certain natural-gas and
propane facilities in the state. Caltrans, the California Department of Transportation,
regulates the transport of hazardous materials and waste by highway. The Association
of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) has conducted an inter-jurisdictional process for the
allocation of new hazardous-waste management facilities among the nine Bay Area
counties, based on a “fair share” method. The District Attorney’s Office of Alameda
County handles enforcement actions related to unlawful discharges of hazardous
materials occurring in Oakland.
                                                                                                                                               81 | Hazardous Materials
5.3 | ANALYSIS
Business plan program            This is a disclosure, or “community right to know,”
program designed to make available to the public and regulatory agencies information
on businesses’ hazmat inventories. It requires businesses that handle above a certain
amount of hazardous materials to prepare a “hazardous materials management plan”
(HMMP). Required elements of an HMMP include an inventory of the type, quantity
and storage location of hazardous materials on site; a detailed site and facility map; and a
site-specific emergency-response plan; employee training in safety procedures; and
designation of emergency contact personnel. HMMP’s are collected by OES, which
uses the information to prioritize inspection of facilities according to hazmat risk.
Inspections occur triennially, and are conducted by OES’s hazmat specialists. There are
approximately 1,200 local businesses that have businesses plans on file at OES. It can
be expected that this number—as well as the total amount of hazardous materials
handled in the city—will grow as industrial activity increases in Oakland, especially in the
high-tech sector. Continued monitoring and enforcement of existing regulations will be
required to reduce the risks posed by industrial growth.
CalARP program            The purpose of this program is to decrease the risk of an
accidental off-site release of a hazardous substance. It requires operators that handle

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                             above a threshold quantity of certain regulated hazardous materials to implement an
                                             accidental-release prevention program. Facilities are classified according to three
                                             levels—P1, P2 and P3, from most to least risk-prone—depending on the type and
                                             quantity of hazardous materials present at a site, a facility’s accident history and other
                                             factors reflecting the potential impact of an accidental hazmat release; OFD uses these
                                             program levels to prioritize facility inspections. Of the approximately 1,400 facilities on
                                             OES’s master database of hazmat facilities, 111 have been assigned a P1 ranking (see
                                             Figure 5.1). The majority of these facilities are in West Oakland, in the strip between I-
                                             880 and the estuary, and in the San Leandro Street corridor; the zip codes with the
                                             greatest number of P1-level facilities are 94601 (19 facilities), 94607 (17) and 94621 (15).
                                             In some cases, high-risk facilities are required to prepare and submit risk management
                                             plans (RMPs), which must include a description of current and past practices and
                                             releases, a detailed engineering analysis of the potential accident factors present at a
                                             business, and mitigation measures that can be implemented to reduce this accident
Hazardous Materials | 82
                                             potential; and which must incorporate into their analysis external events such as seismic
                                             activity, and consider the facility’s proximity to sensitive receptors. Of the city’s P1-level
                                             facilities, nine have RMPs on file (see also Figure 5.1).
                                             UST program            Because of the fire hazard they pose, flammable liquids have
                                             historically been stored in USTs. The majority of USTs contain petroleum products
                                             (such as gasoline, diesel, heating oil, kerosene and jet fuel) and are primarily associated
                                             with service stations (although they are also found in connection with hospitals and
                                             other facilities with back-up power supplies). The UST program seeks to prevent
                                             contamination of soil and groundwater from the underground storage of hazardous
                                             materials. Through this program, OES grants permits for new USTs (provided they are
                                             designed to prevent or contain leaks for the lifetime of the tank), inspects existing UST
                                             for leak-monitoring and containment measures, and conducts site investigation and
                                             clean-up, and enforcement actions. There are 164 facilities in Oakland with at least one
                                             UST, of which 33 have at least four tanks and seven have at least five tanks (see Figure
                                             5.1). The zip codes with the greatest number of facilities with USTs are 94607 (27
                                             facilities), 94621 (20) and 94601 (16).
                                             Aboveground storage tank program              This program requires operators of large
                                             aboveground petroleum storage tanks to disclose information about their storage
                                             facilities and to implement a “spill prevention control and countermeasure” (SPCC)
                                             plan. Program inspections are conducted by the SFRWQCB or by OES. There are 225
                                             facilities in Oakland with at least one aboveground storage tank, of which 39 have at

                                                                                               CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
least five (see Figure 5-1) and nine have at least ten (see also Figure 5-1). The zip codes
with the greatest number of facilities with aboveground storage tanks are 94601 (39
facilities), 94607 (34), and 94621 (31).
Hazardous-waste tiered permitting program                  The management of hazardous
waste requires detailed, extensive and costly record-keeping. All businesses and other
non-household entities that generate, store, transport or dispose of hazardous waste
must obtain a U.S. EPA identification number, used to track the waste from its point of
origin to its final disposal (“cradle to grave”). There are approximately 980 facilities on
OES’s master database that generate hazardous wastes. Tiered permitting is a five-level
authorization program for the treatment, storage and disposal of hazardous waste. The
first three tiers— presently administered by OES—are for the regulation of on-site
treatment of small amounts of hazardous waste. The fourth tier, or “standardized
permit,” is for off-site treatment or storage of wastes not requiring a federal permit while
                                                                                                                                               83 | Hazardous Materials
the fifth tier is for full treatment, storage or disposal, requiring a federal permit.
Hazwaste generators must, in general, contract with a licensed hazardous-waste hauler to
collect, transport, treat, store and dispose of their waste. Small businesses may dispose
of their waste through the conditionally exempt small-quantity generator program. Since
there are no Class I (hazardous waste) repositories in Alameda County, wastes generated
in Oakland must be transported outside the county for disposal.
Household hazardous-waste management                In 2000, the Alameda County Waste
Management Authority and Source Reduction and Recycling Board (ACWMA)
conducted a solid-waste characterization study to determine the composition of solid
waste generated by Alameda County, including by each of the county’s 14 incorporated
municipalities. The study estimated that Oakland residents and businesses caused 2,184
tons of HHW to be landfilled in the year 2000 (representing 0.6%, by weight, of the
city’s waste stream). This was a marked increase from 1,453 tons (and 0.3% of the waste
stream) in 1995, estimated by a previous ACWMA study. Based on surveys conducted
at HHW collection events, the Oakland HHW element assumes that one ton of HHW is
dumped illegally into the sewer and storm-drain systems and into the ground for every
4.5 tons disposed of in the garbage, as part of the waste stream. Based on this
assumption, Oaklanders dumped 485 tons of HHW illegally into sewers, storm drains
and the soil in the year 2000.
The proper method for the disposal of household hazardous waste in Oakland is less
than convenient, as residents must generally deliver the material themselves to a

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                             hazardous-waste management facility. Pursuant to its hazardous-waste management
                                             plan (see previous section), Alameda County has developed three permanent facilities
                                             for the collection and recycling of household hazardous-waste, including one in
                                             Oakland, at 2100 East Seventh Street. (The other facilities are located in Hayward and
                                             Livermore.) These facilities collect, identify, sort, store, pack and recycle or dispose of
                                             the most common types of hazardous wastes used by Alameda County residents and
                                             “small-quantity generators.” In addition, there are several private facilities in the county
                                             and around the Bay Area that recycle many types of household hazardous waste,
                                             including household and motor-vehicle batteries, motor oil, oil filters, paint and
                                             solvents. Also, the City of Oakland provides residential curbside collection of used
                                             motor oil. The lack of convenient, low-cost disposal options, combined with ignorance
                                             about the consequences, is the main reason for the illegal disposal of household
                                             hazardous waste.
Hazardous Materials | 84
                                             Toxic air contaminants             The BAAQMD works to control both ambient
                                             background concentrations of TACs and locally elevated concentrations (or “hot
                                             spots”). Unlike for criteria air pollutants, no ambient air-quality standards have been
                                             established for TACs. Nevertheless, the BAAQMD and ARB operate a network of 20
                                             TAC monitoring stations in the Bay Area, primarily as a way to measure the
                                             effectiveness over time of TAC control strategies and to enable population-risk
                                             assessments. Two of the stations are located in Oakland, at 198 Oak Rd. (Davie
                                             Stadium) and at 2419 Filbert St. The BAAQMD has found that ambient background
                                             concentrations of TACs are low throughout the Bay Area. In 2000, the Oakland station
                                             recorded a higher “mean concentration” (or arithmetic average) than the average across
                                             all Bay Area sites for only one of 12 TACs monitored (carbon tetrachloride), and then,
                                             only slightly higher (an average of 11 parts per billion, or ppb, at the Oakland site
                                             compared to an average of 10 ppb across all sites).
                                             The BAAQMD’s air toxics “hot spots” program involves the evaluation of health risks
                                             due to routine and predictable TAC emissions from industrial and commercial facilities,
                                             and requires notification to the public of significant health risks. The number of
                                             facilities in the Bay Area posing health risks that required public notification has
                                             decreased steadily since the inception of the program, from 30 in 1991 to nine in 1993,
                                             two in 1995, and zero currently. (It should be noted that facilities evaluated do not
                                             include dry cleaners and gasoline stations, which are being considered on an industry-
                                             wide basis statewide.)

                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
Additionally, the BAAQMD maintains an annual inventory of TAC emissions from
stationary sources in the Bay Area with emissions above certain thresholds established
for some 113 different TACs. The inventory includes routine releases, and is not
intended to describe the potential for acute hazards from accidental releases.
BAAQMD’s year 2001 inventory lists 53 facilities in Oakland with above-threshold
emissions (see figure 5-1). The zip codes with the most facilities are 94601 and 94610
(seven facilities each) and 94605, 94611 and 94621 (five each). Of the 53 facilities,
almost two thirds (35) are dry cleaners exceeding threshold emission levels only of
perchloroethylene (or “perc”). Notable emitters of particular TACs in Oakland in 2001
included:
●   American Brass & Iron Foundry, which was the largest emitter of beryllium and of
    chlorinated dioxins and furans in the Bay Area, the second-largest emitter of arsenic,
    and the fourth-largest emitter of cadmium and manganese.
                                                                                                                                              85 | Hazardous Materials
●   Dollar Cleaners the fourth-largest emitter of perc (out of 882 reported emitters).
●   EBMUD, the largest emitter of acrolein, second-largest of chloroform and
    dichlorobenzene, and eighth-largest of ammonia and benzene.
●   Integrated Environmental Systems, the second-largest emitter ofhydrogen chloride.
    (This firm has since its closed its facility in Oakland.)
●   Mountain View Cemetery Association, the fourth-largest emitter of chlorinated
    dioxins and furans.
●   Owens-Brockway Glass Container, the largest emitter of lead and selenium, and
    second-largest of cadmium.
●   Rolls-Royce Engine Services, the third-largest emitter of trichloroethylene.
●   Lesaffre Yeast and Fleischmann’s Yeast, respectively the largest and second-largest
    emitters of acetaldehyde. (These firms have since closed their plants in Oakland.)
Public perceptions to the contrary, the majority of TACs in the Bay Area are generated
not by stationary sources but by mobile sources: automobiles and light trucks, for
example, emit over a third of TACs while refineries, in contrast, generate only two
percent. (Also, growing evidence indicates that exposure to diesel emissions from
vehicles in the form of particulate matter result in cancer risks that dwarf measured risks
from all other TACs combined.) Indirectly, the largest generators of TACs are major
traffic thoroughfares; in Oakland, these are interstate highways 80, 580, 880 and 980,
and state routes 13 and 24. Oakland’s role as the Bay Area’s transportation hub and its
location at the intersection of several interstate highways, makes the city especially
vulnerable to TAC exposure from mobile sources. The biggest obstacle to local

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                             improvements in air quality will be regional increases in traffic—much of which will be
                                             funneled through the city—from new land-use developments. While the city’s
                                             environmental review process and the BAAQMD’s permitting requirements ensure that
                                             the air-quality impacts from stationary sources are kept at acceptable levels, reducing the
                                             impacts from mobile sources will require fundamental changes in travel behavior. Local
                                             governments have a role in reducing public exposure to TACs by encouraging such
                                             changes. The air-resources section of the city’s OSCAR element contains several
                                             policies to improve air quality by encouraging transportation alternatives and land use
                                             patterns that reduce automobile dependence (see Appendix A). Envision Oakland, the
                                             city’s land use and transportation element, includes among its policy goals to integrate
                                             land use and transportation planning, to promote alternative transportation options, and
                                             to improve air quality. (Policies related to these goals are too numerous to have been
                                             listed in Appendix B, which lists only those policy statements from the land use and
                                             transportation element that are most directly related to issues in the safety element.)
Hazardous Materials | 86
                                             Contaminated sites and brownfields Through its Superfund program, the U.S.
                                             EPA maintains the “Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
                                             Liability Information System” (CERCLIS), a nationwide database of approximately
                                             11,200 hazardous-waste sites, potential hazardous-waste sites, and sites on which there
                                             are ongoing remedial activities. There are 23 CERCLIS sites in Oakland (see Figure
                                             5.1), six each in the 94621 and 94607 zip codes, four in 94603, two in 94619 and one
                                             each in 94608, 94609, 94613, 94625 and 94626. In addition, and as part of the
                                             CERCLIS database, the EPA maintains the “National Priority List” (NPL), an inventory
                                             of the most seriously contaminated sites throughout the country. The NPL currently
                                             includes approximately 1,200 sites, of which one is located in Oakland: AMCO
                                             chemical, at 1414 Third Street (see Figure 5.1).
                                             In addition, the California DTSC maintains a “Site Mitigation and Brownfields Reuse
                                             Program” database which lists sites where hazardous substances have been released or
                                             where the potential for a release exists. The database inventories sites under six
                                             categories:
                                             ● CalSites properties, or state Superfund sites: properties where hazardous-substance
                                                releases have been confirmed and are, therefore, considered to pose the greatest
                                                threat to the public or the environment. The CalSites database currently lists 28 such
                                                properties in Oakland (see Figure 5.1), of which eleven are in the 94607 zip code,
                                                four in 94601, three in 94603, two each in 94604, 94608 and 94609, and one each in
                                                94605, 94606, 94621 and 94625.

                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
●   School-property evaluation program: proposed and existing school sites that are
    being evaluated by DTSC for possible hazardous materials contamination; there are
    14 such properties in Oakland.
●   Voluntary cleanup program: low-threat-level properties for which project proponents
    have requested that DTSC oversee investigation or cleanup and have agreed to cover
    DTSC's costs; the database includes 45 such properties in Oakland.
●   Referred to another local or state agency: properties with unconfirmed contamination
    and, because they were determined not to require DTSC action or oversight, have
    been referred to another state or local regulatory agency; there are 28 such properties
    in Oakland.
●   Needing further evaluation: properties suspected, but not yet confirmed, of being
    contaminated; the database lists 10 such properties in Oakland.
●   No further action determination: properties that do not pose a problem to the
    environment or to public health; of such properties, 15 are in Oakland.
                                                                                                                                              87 | Hazardous Materials
Finally, the SWRCB maintains an online database, called GeoTracker, that provides
regulatory data about leaking underground fuel tanks (LUFTs, the majority of which are
located at operating or former gas stations), fuel pipelines and public drinking-water
supplies. GeoTracker reports 770 facilities in Oakland with LUFTs, of which 312 have
an “open” status (meaning that there is an ongoing investigation or remediation of a fuel
release to the underlying soil or groundwater) and 458 have a “closed” status (meaning
that they have been investigated and met regulatory cleanup requirements.) While active
(or “open”) LUFTs are scattered throughout the city, the most significant
concentrations are in West Oakland, downtown, along San Pablo Avenue, Highway 24,
Broadway and MacArthur Boulevard, and in the area between International Boulevard
and the estuary (especially along International, San Leandro Street and Hegenberger
Road).
In addition to the above-mentioned known hazardous-waste sites, contamination could
exist on other formerly industrial sites. Records of previous activities usually do not
document use of hazardous materials; however, activities such as rail transportation,
paint products manufacturing, metal plating and transformer work could well have
resulted in site contamination. In addition, Oakland has many older buildings with
asbestos, lead paint, PCBs and other materials that are potentially hazardous if disturbed.
Special demolition and disposal requirements could be necessary to reduce the risk of
airborne contaminants if such buildings are renovated or if the sites on which they sit
are redeveloped.

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                             Transportation       The transportation of hazardous materials through populated areas
                                             constitutes a potential significant public-safety hazard. A hazardous-materials spill,
                                             release or other transport-related accident can endanger life and property, and
                                             contaminate surface water and groundwater. Oakland’s role as the Bay Area’s
                                             transportation hub makes it particularly vulnerable to truck and rail accidents involving
                                             hazardous materials. Oakland is traversed by four interstate highways (I-80, I-580, I-880
                                             and I-980) and three transcontinental railroad lines; also, the city is home to the Port of
                                             Oakland, one of the world’s largest gateways for ocean-borne cargo and the Bay Area’s
                                             top destination for truck and rail traffic, and for hazardous materials in general (see
                                             Figure 5.1). The transport of hazardous materials is closely regulated by the federal and
                                             state governments to minimize the potential for releases of hazardous materials; due to
                                             the interstate-nature of commercial and industrial transportation, the City of Oakland is
                                             able to regulate transport on city streets only. Generators of hazardous waste, in
Hazardous Materials | 88
                                             particular, are required to track the transport of their wastes to the ultimate disposal
                                             location through the use of “manifests,” forms which indicate the types and amounts of
                                             hazardous wastes being transported.
                                             Highway transportation of hazardous materials represents a much greater threat than
                                             railroad transportation, because of the higher volume of truck traffic than of railroad
                                             traffic and because trucks, unlike trains, do not travel on segregated rights of way. The
                                             main route for hazardous-materials transport through Oakland is I-880, both because it
                                             provides a direct connection to the Port of Oakland and because it runs through most
                                             of the heavy-industrial areas of southeastern Alameda County. Secondary to I-880 as
                                             hazardous-materials routes through Oakland are I-80 and I-980. (I-580 presents little
                                             threat, as trucks are prohibited on this highway through Oakland and San Leandro.)
                                             The proximity of downtown Oakland and other densely populated neighborhoods of
                                             the city to these routes suggests the potential for a disastrous transportation-related
                                             accident involving hazardous-materials. (To minimize the number of people exposed to
                                             safety risks, areas along designated truck routes should ideally be low-occupancy land
                                             uses; in practice, this is very difficult as truck routes are generally major arterials that also
                                             offer ease of access for commercial and residential uses.) The risk of transportation-
                                             related accidents is mitigated by the many federal and state safety precautions, and by the
                                             fact that accidents on freeways are likely to be detected and reported quickly. In the
                                             event of a spill or other accidental release, OFD would be the first responder, while
                                             Caltrans would assume responsibility for the subsequent clean-up.

                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
Pipelines The proximity to populated areas of pipelines carrying hazardous liquids is
a potential safety threat. Intense earthquake-induced ground-shaking, for example,
could damage pipelines, creating the potential for fires, explosions and the
contamination of groundwater. Pipelines for the transportation of liquefied natural gas
(LNG), crude oil and refined-petroleum products traverse Oakland, including residential
and commercial areas of the city. (Due to safety concerns, the state’s Office of the State
Fire Marshal, which regulates intrastate pipelines carrying hazardous liquids, no longer
disseminates pipeline-mapping data for public use.) Pipelines which present a particular
hazard are those that cross active and potentially active fault lines, unstable slopes and
areas underlain by soft mud. The public-safety threat presented by a pipeline rupture or
spill would depend on the proximity of the incident to populated areas and on the liquid
being transported. (Petroleum products are generally believed to be more hazardous
than LNG because they are transported at higher pressures and, when released, flow
along the ground, rather than rise and dissipate, as LNG would do; also, petroleum fires
                                                                                                                                              89 | Hazardous Materials
are more likely to spread to nearby properties than natural-gas fires, which burn
vertically.) Under state and federal laws, local pipeline operators must provide local fire
departments with a contingency plan for pipeline emergencies; file leak-mitigation and
emergency-response plans with the state; and report pipeline accidents to fire
departments and the California OES, which, in turn, notifies the State Fire Marshal for
immediate dispatching of employees with technical expertise. In recognition of the
hazards posed by pipelines, federal and state laws require that pipelines undergo periodic
pressure testing and incorporate means of leak detection, corrosion prevention, valve
protection and internal inspection.
Emergency response            Emergency incidents involving hazardous materials can
threaten human life, damage property, contaminate the environment, require the
evacuation of nearby populations and block off major transportation routes. Potential
hazards include accidental releases of toxic substances, industrial fires and explosion of
petroleum products and other chemicals. In Oakland, OFD is responsible for on-scene
management of hazardous-materials incidents (though public-works staff respond to
small-scale spills and complaints about illegal dumping.) Responding fire engines are
assisted by OFD’s hazardous materials response team, which is dispatched to the scene
with a van from fire station #3 equipped with specialized apparatuses and personal-
protection equipment. The hazmat team includes specialists from the city’s OES, and is
able to provide technical expertise in the areas of isolation, identification of chemicals,
hazard assessment, containment, mitigation, decontamination and disposal.

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                                                                   The high toxicity of many hazardous materials and the specialized nature of hazmat
                                                                                   incidents require adequate response protocols. Oakland’s hazardous materials area plan
                                                                                   for emergency response (see previous section) outlines specific procedures for an
                                                                                   organized response to hazmat emergencies. The document contains guidelines and
                                                                                   instructions on plan activation; fire and police dispatch; immediate response; situation
                                                                                   assessment; evacuation, crowd and traffic control, and sheltering; notification to the
                                                                                   public, regional, state and federal agencies, and medical facilities; internal and mutual-aid
                                                                                   coordination and communication; training, drills and exercises; maintenance of supplies
                                                                                   and equipment; and incident critique and follow-up. The plan also lists the specific
                                                                                   responsibilities of city departments and county, state, federal and non-governmental
                                                                                   agencies that could be expected to play a role in the event of a hazmat incident. The
                                                                                   Oakland neighborhoods most vulnerable to a hazmat-related emergency are West
                                                                                   Oakland, downtown, and areas alongside I-880. Sites with noteworthy concentrations
                                                                                   of hazardous materials include the airport, the seaport, and EBMUD’s wastewater
Hazardous Materials | 90
                                                                                   treatment plant (at 2020 Wake Avenue, in West Oakland). A specific concern involves
                                                                                   an accident at the wastewater treatment plant resulting in the release of chlorine gas,
                                                                                   which is classified as an acutely hazardous materials. It should be mentioned that the
                                                                                   parties responsible for hazmat releases are liable for the cost of response.
                                 The zoning ordinance is found under Title 17      Zoning     One of the biggest challenges related to hazardous materials in Oakland is the
                                  (“Planning”) of the Oakland municipal code.      incompatible mixture of heavy-industrial and residential land uses. Since land-use
                             Regulations governing the M-30 and M-40 zones
                            are found under chapters 17.70 and 17.72 of the
                                                                                   zoning is a local-government responsibility, cities can play a key role in reducing public
                                   code, respectively; activity types, including   exposure to hazardous materials by separating residential populations from areas of
                               general and heavy manufacturing, are defined        hazardous-materials uses. Under the city’s zoning ordinance, which regulates densities,
                                                         under chapter 17.10.      intensities and specific land uses, the zones most closely associated with the use of
                                                                                   hazardous materials are M-30 (“general industrial”) and, especially, M-40 (“heavy
                                                                                   industrial”). As shown on Figure 5.1, most M-30 and M-40 zones are found in the areas
                                                                                   of the airport and seaport, along I-880 and San Leandro Street, and in West Oakland.
                                                                                   Additionally, the city’s S-16 zoning designation (“industrial-residential transition;” see
                                                                                   also Figure 5.1) is an overlay that provides transition areas between incompatible uses,
                                                                                   mostly in West Oakland, by limiting the impacts of new industrial development on
                                                                                   adjacent residential zones; it prohibits such activities as automotive repair, certain
                                                                                   transport and warehousing operations, general manufacturing, and industrial hazardous-
                                                                                   waste transfer and storage.
                                                                                   In areas of incompatible land uses between residential and business users, residents
                                                                                   suffer from noise, emissions, toxins, odor, glare and other industrial impacts while

                                                                                                 CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
industry suffers from complaints and restrictions over their operations. The land use
and transportation element (LUTE) sets out a number of “good neighbor” criteria to
address land-use conflicts. These include the development and enforcement of codes
and guidelines, targeted relocation of facilities, a gradual transition to low-impact
businesses and mediation of disputes. The LUTE singles out three areas as having
incompatible and conflicting land uses: the West Clawson neighborhood in West
Oakland; Lower Fruitvale; and San Leandro Street between High Street and the city of
San Leandro, particularly along Railroad Avenue near Pearmain Street.
In certain areas of the city, residential and industrial uses developed gradually around
each other over decades. Meanwhile, as the city’s supply of developable land shrinks,
there is the potential for residential uses to encroach into areas dominated by industrial
activities. Over the long term, appropriate zoning is a much more effective strategy in
reducing conflicts than requiring hazmat facilities to incorporate mitigation measures,
                                                                                                                                                 91 | Hazardous Materials
most of which are expensive and of limited benefit. Future zoning decisions must be
sensitive to the potential conflicts of siting industrial operations near residential areas
and other “sensitive receptors,” such as schools, hospitals, and nursing homes, or of
developing land within industrial areas with sensitive uses. (Sensitive receptors are
facilities that house children, the elderly, the acutely or chronically ill and others who are
especially susceptible to the effects of pollution; residential areas are considered sensitive
because people are often at home for extended periods.)
The city is also considering a revision of its zoning ordinance to add a “health and safety
protection” overlay zone, the purpose of which would be to ensure that activities which
use or store hazardous materials on a regular basis are located in appropriate locations
and do not endanger public health or the environment. The overlay zone would apply
to all areas within “housing and business mix” districts (as designated on the general
plan land use map) and to some light-industrial and general-industrial zones and
“industrial-residential transition” zones that are within 300 feet of a residential,
institutional or open-space zones. Businesses in the overlay zone planning to store and
use hazardous materials would be required to obtain a clearance from OFD prior to
obtaining a zoning clearance or commencing operation or any alteration of activity. In
addition, the overlay zone would prohibit outright electroplating businesses and business
that manufacture, store or use explosives or that store hazardous materials or chemicals
as a primary activity.

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                             5.4 | POLICY STATEMENTS
                                              POLICY HM-1       Minimize the potential risks to human and environmental health
                                                                and safety associated with the past and present use, handling,
                                                                storage and disposal of hazardous materials.
                                             ● ACTION HM-1.1: Continue to exercise unified-program responsibilities, including
                                               the issuance of permits for and inspection of certain industrial facilities,
                                               monitoring the filing of disclosure forms and risk-management plans,
                                               hazardous-materials assessment reports and remediation plans, and closure
                                               plans by such facilities.
                                                                                            f OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
Hazardous Materials | 92
                                             ● ACTION HM-1.2: Continue to enforce provisions under the zoning ordinance
                                               regulating the location of facilities which use or store hazardous materials.
                                                                                          f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
                                                                                            f OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                             ● ACTION HM-1.3: Consider adopting a health and safety protection overlay zone
                                               or set of procedures to ensure that new activities which use or store hazardous
                                               materials on a regular basis near residential zones do not endanger public
                                               health or the environment.
                                                                                          f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
                                             ● ACTION HM-1.4: Continue to participate in the Alameda County Waste
                                               Management Authority and, as a participant, continue to implement policies
                                               under the county’s hazardous-waste management plan to minimize the
                                               generation of hazardous wastes.
                                                                                        f PWA ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DIVISION
                                             ● ACTION HM-1.5: Continue to implement the city’s household hazardous-waste
                                               element (including educating residents about waste-disposal options and the
                                               consequences of illegal disposal) in order to reduce the generation of household
                                               hazardous waste and the amount of such waste that is disposed
                                               inappropriately.
                                                                                        f PWA ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DIVISION

                                                                                      CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
● ACTION HM-1.6: Through the Urban Land Redevelopment program, and along
  with other participating agencies, continue to assist developers in the
  environmental clean-up of contaminated properties.
                                             f PWA ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION HM-1.7: Create and maintain a database with detailed site information
  on all brownfields and contaminated sites in the city.
                                             f PWA ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DIVISION
 POLICY HM-2       Reduce the public’s exposure to toxic air contaminants through
                   appropriate land use and transportation strategies.
● ACTION HM-2.1: Continue to enforce performance standards controlling the
                                                                                                                                      93 | Hazardous Materials
  emission of air contaminants, particulate matter, smoke and unpleasant odors.
                                                  f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION HM-2.2: Continue to discourage the development of sensitive receptors
  adjacent to significant sources of air contaminants and encourage industry to
  adopt best-available control technologies to reduce air contaminants.
                                               f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
● ACTION HM-2.3: Continue to support the efforts of the Bay Area Air Quality
  Management District’s air-toxics program, including the review and permitting
  of stationary sources, identification of emitting facilities, promulgation of
  categorical control measures, and monitoring and inventory of emissions.
                                             f PWA ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION HM-2.4: Ensure implementation of policies and actions in the land use
  and transportation element designed to integrate land use and transportation
  planning and to promote alternative transportation options (see Appendix B);
  and policies in the open space, conservation and recreation element designed to
  encourage transportation alternatives and land use patterns that reduce
  automobile dependence (see Appendix A).
                                               f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
● ACTION HM-2.5: Review and comment         on regional and state air-quality plans
  and also on environmental impact           reports for development projects in
  neighboring jurisdictions; and for the    latter, request mitigation measures for
  any significant negative impacts on the   city’s air quality.

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
                                                                                           f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
                                              POLICY HM-3       Seek to prevent industrial and transportation accidents involving
                                                                hazardous materials, and enhance the city’s capacity to respond
                                                                to such incidents.
                                             ● ACTION HM-3.1: Continue to enforce regulations limiting truck travel through
                                               certain areas of the city to designated routes, and consider establishing time-
                                               based restrictions on truck travel on certain routes to reduce the risk and
                                               potential impact of accidents during peak traffic hours.
                                                                                       f PWA TRANSPORTATION SERVICES DIVISION
                                             ● ACTION HM-3.2: Continue to support the prohibition of trucks on I-580 through
Hazardous Materials | 94
                                               Oakland.
                                                                                       f PWA TRANSPORTATION SERVICES DIVISION
                                             ● ACTION HM-3.3: Support state and federal legislative efforts that seek to
                                               increase the safety of transporting hazardous materials.
                                                                                             f OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                             ● ACTION HM-3.4: Continue to rely on, and update, the city’s hazardous materials
                                               area plan to respond to emergencies related to hazardous materials.
                                                                                             f OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                             ● ACTION HM-3.5: Continue to offer basic emergency-response education and
                                               training to local businesses.
                                                                                             f OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                             5.5 | RESOURCES
                                             Agencies consulted
                                             ● U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (www.epa.gov)
                                             ● California Environmental Protection Agency (www.calepa.ca.gov)

                                                                                     CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
●   California Air Resources Board (www.arb.ca.gov)
●   California Department of Pesticide Regulation (www.cdpr.ca.gov)
●   California Department of Toxic Substances Control (www.dtsc.ca.gov)
●   California Integrated Waste Management Board (www.ciwmb.ca.gov)
●   California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment (www.oehha.ca.gov)
●   California State Water Resources Control Board (www.swrcb.ca.gov)
●   S.F. Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board (www.swrcb.ca.gov/rwqcb2)
●   Bay Area Air Quality Management District (www.baaqmd.gov)
●   Alameda County Waste Management Authority (www.stopwaste.org)
●   Oakland Office of Emergency Services
●   Oakland Community and Economic Development Agency
    (www.oaklandnet.com/government/ceda/revised/ceda.html)
Documents consulted
                                                                                                                                     95 | Hazardous Materials
● “Toxic Air Contaminant     Control Program Annual Report 2000;” Bay Area Air
    Quality Management District, December 2001.
●   “2000 Solid Waste Characterization Study;” Alameda County Waste Management
    Authority, December 2001.
●   “Hazardous Materials Area Plan for Emergency Response;” Oakland Fire Services
    Agency, April 1997.
●   “Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan;” Alameda County Waste
    Management Authority, November 1995.
●   “Household Hazardous Waste Element;” City of Oakland, July 1992.
Other resources
● California CUPA Forum (www.calcupa.net)
● DTSC site mitigation and brownfields reuse program   database
  (www.dtsc.ca.gov/database/Calsites/Index.cfm)
● GeoTracker (www.geotracker.swrcb.ca.gov)
● Oakland Urban Land Redevelopment program (www.oaklandpw.com/ulrprogram)

                           PROTECT OAKLAND
Hazardous Materials | 96
                                             This page intentionally left blank
6 | FLOODING HAZARDS
6.1 | OVERVIEW
Characteristics Flooding is the inundation of normally dry land as a result of a rise
in the level of surface waters or the rapid accumulation of storm-water runoff; it
becomes a hazard when the flow of water has the potential to damage property and
threaten human life or health. Flood risks are greatest, and flood hazards most severe,
in winter, when water bodies are usually full and soils saturated. Flooding is primarily a
natural process and, therefore, difficult to prevent. However, land-use and development
decisions have a significant effect on the frequency and severity of floods; in general,
urbanization increases the risk of flooding by increasing stormwater runoff and, to a
lesser extent, erosion. Flooding can take many forms—river floods, storm-related flash
floods and coastal floods, for example—and be caused by many reasons, including
heavy rains, melting snow, inadequate drainage systems, hurricanes, and failed dams and
levees.
Relationship to other hazards             While flooding is most often caused by excess
runoff from heavy rainfall or snowmelt, it can also result from the interaction with other
natural hazards:

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          ● Earthquakes can create floods indirectly by generating tsunamis and seiches;
                                            damaging flood-control equipment; and causing dams, levees and channel banks to
                                            fail.
                                          ● Landslides—themselves often triggered by earthquakes—can block water courses,
                                            resulting in upstream flooding. Also, large masses of earth that break loose and slide
                                            into a reservoir can cause catastrophic flooding by making the reservoir overflow.
                                          ● Subsidence—tectonic-related or caused by the pumping of groundwater, oil or gas—
                                            increases the risk of flooding by lowering ground levels.
                                          ● Fires strip away vegetation, which makes hillsides contribute to flooding by reducing
                                            their ability to absorb water.
                                          Specific flood hazards         As suggested above, flooding can occur for many reasons.
                                          The safety element examines flooding hazards resulting from the following five causes
                                          (with a brief description of each):
Flooding Hazards | 98
                                          ● Excessive stormwater runoff from heavy rain. When rainfall exceeds the absorption
                                             rate of the soil or the water-storage capacity of the watershed, the excess rainfall
                                             flows downstream. This is the flood hazard with the greatest potential to affect
                                             Oakland. While it is impossible to prevent excess stormwater runoff, proper
                                             engineering and land-use planning can be used to minimize the potential adverse
                                             effects on areas subject to flooding and reduce off-site flooding and erosion.
                                          ● Tsunamis. Often incorrectly referred to as tidal waves, tsunamis are waves caused by
                                             an underwater earthquake, landslide or volcanic eruption. Because San Francisco Bay
                                             is a mostly enclosed body of water, severe damage from tsunamis in Oakland is
                                             unlikely. However, this hazard needs to be considered not only to meet state
                                             mandates but also because of the potential for wave damage along the waterfront.
                                          ● Seiches. A poorly understood phenomenon, seiches (pronounced “SIGH-chaise”)
                                             are waves in an enclosed or semi-enclosed body of water such as a lake, reservoir or
                                             harbor. (They are analogous to the sloshing of water in a bucket when shaken.)
                                             Seiches are usually caused by unusual tides, winds or currents but could also be
                                             triggered by earthquake-induced ground motion. Seiche waves, while rare, can have
                                             devastating effects on nearby people and property. The occurrence of devastating
                                             seiches in Oakland is highly unlikely but, again, needs to be considered.
                                          ● Failure of dams and other water-holding structures. This is an unlikely hazard but
                                             needs to be considered due to the potential for large-scale damage. Dam failures are
                                             one of the greatest natural threats to life and property because of the large volumes
                                             of water, numbers of people and area of land typically involved.

                                                                                             CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
●   Rise in sea level. While there is continuing debate over global warming, many people
    believe that it is causing an accelerated rise in sea levels. Such a phenomenon would
    lead to flooding in coastal communities worldwide, including Oakland.
Oakland’s storm-drainage system              In undeveloped areas, water drains through
natural swales, ditches and streams. As land is developed, this system is usually replaced
with underground stormwater drains and earthen or concrete-lined ditches. In Oakland,
stormwater runoff is collected through a combination of creeks and other natural
watercourses (especially in the hills), and human-built drainage structures (see Figure
6.1). The creeks generally flow in a roughly parallel, southwesterly direction from their
headwaters in the Oakland/Berkeley hills, following steep natural channels segmented
by many short culverts until they reach flatter, more-developed areas. From there, most
creeks flow through underground culverts until their point of discharge. The major
surface drainage-ways in Oakland follow the channels of the following creeks (from
                                                                                                                                             99 | Flooding Hazards
north to south): Temescal, Glen Echo, Trestle Glen, Sausal, Peralta, Courtland,
Seminary, Lion, Arroyo Viejo, Elmhurst, Stonehurst and San Leandro. Runoff from
Temescal Creek drains through Emeryville, directly into San Francisco Bay, while runoff
from the other creeks drains first into the Oakland Estuary; runoff from Glen Echo and
Trestle Glen creeks drains into Lake Merritt before entering the Oakland Estuary.
6.2 | INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)                     The NFIP is a program
administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that provides
federally backed flood insurance to homeowners, renters and business owners in certain
communities. The insurance is available for properties in communities that have chosen
to implement zoning and building measures to reduce damages from future floods.
FEMA’s “flood-insurance rate maps” (FIRM’s), delineating a community’s flood plains,
form the basis for the regulation of development in flood plains and the rating of flood-
insurance policies. Oakland, like most cities and counties in California, participates in
the NFIP. To remain in the program, the city, among other measures, requires that all
new construction and major improvements to existing structures proposed within flood
plains be built at or above flood-elevation levels.

                         PROTECT OAKLAND
                         State regulations for the supervision of dams and     State’s Division of Safety of Dams (DSOD) The mission of the DSOD, a unit of
                         reservoirs are found in sections 6000-6501 of the     the state’s Department of Water Resources (DWR), is to prevent the loss of life and
                                                     California Water Code.
                                                                               destruction of property resulting from the failure of a dam or reservoir. As part of its
                                                                               charge, the DSOD inspects sizable non-federal dams and reservoirs in the state annually
                                                                               to ensure that they are operating adequately. Corrective action is required of dams
                                                                               found to be deficient. The division also reviews and considers for approval plans and
                                                                               specifications for the construction of new dams and for the enlargement, alteration,
                                                                               repair or removal of existing dams.
                          The Dam Safety Act is found in section 8589.5 of     State’s Dam Safety Act           This state law requires owners of dams to prepare maps
                                        the California Government Code.        showing the approximate extent of inundation in the event of a dam failure. Based
                                                                               upon a review of these inundation maps, the state’s Office of Emergency Services
                                  Emergency procedures cover areas to be       (OES) designates those areas where death or personal injury would result from the
                          evacuated, evacuation routes and traffic control,
Flooding Hazards | 100
                            shelters, transportation for people with special   partial or total failure of a dam. Under the law, affected cities and counties are required
                                needs, security of the area, assignment of     to adopt emergency procedures for the evacuation and control of populated areas
                                    responsibilities, and resources needed.    located below dams. Also, sellers of real-estate property known to be located in an area
                                                                               of potential inundation from dam failure must disclose this information to potential
                                                                               buyers. Inundation maps are kept on file with OES and DWR.
                          The California Environmental Quality Act is found    California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                 The state’s CEQA guidelines
                           in sections 21000-21178 of the California Public    propose a wide range of environmental impacts that public agencies should consider in
                                                         Resources Code.
                                                                               their evaluation of development proposals. Considerations related to flooding hazards
                                                                               include the potential for a project to:
                                                                               ● substantially alter the existing drainage pattern of the project site or area, or
                                                                                  substantially increase the rate or amount of surface runoff, resulting in flooding on-
                                                                                  or off-site;
                                                                               ● create or contribute runoff water in excess of the capacity of existing or planned
                                                                                  stormwater drainage systems;
                                                                               ● place housing, or structures which would impede or redirect flood flows, within a
                                                                                  designated 100-year flood-hazard area;
                                                                               ● expose people to a significant risk of injury or death, or structures to a significant risk
                                                                                  of damage or loss, from flooding (including as a result of dam failure); and
                                                                               ● expose people or property to inundation by seiche, tsunami or mudflow.
                                                                               Alameda County           Flood    Control     and     Water     Conservation       District
                                                                               (ACFCWCD)  The         district, a unit of the Alameda County Public Works Agency, is

                                                                                             CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of the major storm-
drainage facilities throughout Alameda County. The ACFCWCD is divided into ten
flood-control zones, each covering a different drainage basin; Zone 12—created as a
result of the October 1962 floods—provides flood protection to the cities of Oakland
and Emeryville. To reduce the risk of flooding, the district designs and builds structures
to meet the existing and projected need for flood control. In Oakland, such projects
have included the channelization of large portions of the city’s main creeks, and
construction of the Lake Merritt pump station, which regulates the water level in the
lake. In coordination with the federal government, the ACFCWCD also maps flood
plains in the cities and unincorporated areas of the county.
Stormwater Quality Management Plan (SQMP)                   The 1987 amendments to the
federal Clean Water Act require that cities reduce discharges from municipal storm
drains by obtaining permits under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
                                                                                                                                             101 | Flooding Hazards
(NPDES). To meet this requirement, 17 local agencies, including Oakland and the other
13 cities in Alameda County, formed the Alameda Countywide Clean Water Program
and have obtained joint NPDES permit coverage since 1991. Compliance with the
permit hinges on implementation by each member agency of performance standards for
stormwater pollution control measures outlined in the SQMP. Performance standards
related to flood control in the SQMP for the 2001-2008 period include the cleaning, as
necessary, of storm drainage facilities and requiring development projects to implement
effective erosion and sediment-control measures.
Oakland Public Works Agency (PWA)                   The PWA has several responsibilities
related to flood control, primarily the construction and maintenance of the local storm-
drain system. Whereas the ACFCWCD builds, operates and maintains the major trunk
lines and flood-control facilities along the city’s creeks, the PWA is responsible for the
public storm drains that ultimately feed into the county’s system. The PWA also
regularly cleans and clears obstructions from storm drains and creeks to ensure the free
flow of water; through its “maintain-a-drain” campaign, encourages city residents and
businesses to keep neighborhood storm drains free of debris; and, in conjunction with
the Oakland Fire Department, distributes sandbags during the rainy season to mitigate
flooding. Finally, PWA is developing a master plan to address the city’s storm-drainage
infrastructure needs in a comprehensive manner. The master plan will identify
deficiencies in the storm-drainage system and develop prioritized recommendations for
rehabilitating the system in order to reduce localized flooding; it will also provide data
that will allow Oakland to address development impacts on the storm-drain system.

                         PROTECT OAKLAND
                           The creek protection, storm water management        Local regulations          Oakland’s creek protection, storm water management and
                                and discharge control ordinance is found in    discharge control ordinance contains several provisions to reduce flooding risks.
                         chapter 13.16 of the Oakland municipal code; the
                           erosion and sedimentation ordinance is found in
                                                                               Requirements include that natural waterways be kept free of obstacles and that
                          section 15.04.780; and flood-related regulations     hydrology reports be obtained for development proposals within a creek floodway or
                                pertaining to land subdivisions are found in   riparian corridor, or near the top of a creek bank. In addition, the erosion and
                                        sections 16.20.010 and 16.24.070.      sedimentation ordinance prohibits the issuance of grading permits for sites located in a
                                                                               designated flood-hazard area unless the grading plan provides for measures to mitigate
                                                                               the projected flood hazard. Finally, the city has enacted provisions pertaining to land
                                                                               subdivisions requiring that subdivisions be designed to minimize flood damage; that
                                                                               streets and lots be laid out to provide for approved drainage facilities; that street grading
                                                                               and improvements include catch basins, pipes, culverts and storm drains; that public
                                                                               utilities be constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; that water-supply
                                                                               systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
Flooding Hazards | 102
                                                                               systems; and that tentative parcel maps contain provisions for drainage and flood
                                                                               control.
                                                                               6.3 | ANALYSIS
                                                                               Storm-induced flooding          The most common flood hazards in Oakland are all
                                                                               associated with excess stormwater runoff from heavy rain: the overtopping of stream
                                                                               banks, the failure of stormdrains, and the erosion of creek banks from high-velocity
                                                                               water flows. Oakland experienced its worst-ever flooding conditions during the storm
                                                                               of October 12 and 13, 1962. Runoff from the storm caused extensive property damage
                                                                               throughout cities in the East Bay. Following this storm, and at the request of the
                                                                               Oakland city Council, the ACFCWCD created Flood Control Zone 12 to construct
                                                                               needed flood-control and storm-drainage facilities, and to provide ongoing flood
                                                                               protection to the cities of Oakland and Emeryville. In the 1960s and 1970s, the
                                                                               ACFCWCD increased, at great expense, the carrying capacity of Oakland’s drainage
                                                                               system by widening, deepening, straightening and lining in concrete more than a dozen
                                                                               creeks, streams and channels, including Lake Merritt’s tidal channel. Thanks to these
                                                                               infrastructure projects, creek-related flood hazards have been dramatically reduced

                                                                                             CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
throughout the city . Similarly, Lake Merritt was a major source of flooding until the
construction of the flood-control pump station under 7th Street in 1967.
To assess and manage risks consistently across the country, FEMA adopted the “100-
year flood” as the standard basis for flood-hazard evaluation (to determine flood-
insurance requirements), with the “500-year flood” indicating additional areas of flood
risk in a community. A 100-year flood is an event of a magnitude that, on average, is
expected to be equaled or exceeded once during any 100-year period—that is, a one in
one hundred, or one percent, chance. Similarly, a 500-year flood is an event of a
magnitude that, on average, is expected to be equaled or exceeded once during any 500-
year period—that is, a one in five hundred, or 0.2 percent, chance. It should be noted
that the 100-year and 500-year flood plains are theoretical constructs, since in many
cases there is insufficient historical flood data to judge flood frequency accurately.
                                                                                                                                             103 | Flooding Hazards
FEMA’s flood-insurance rate map for Oakland assigned the “Zone C” designation to
the vast majority of the city. This is FEMA’s designation carrying the lowest flood
potential or hazard, and represents “areas of minimal flooding.” Several areas covering a
small but not insignificant portion of the city were assigned the “Zone B” designation,
generally representing areas between the limits of the 100-year and 500-year flood plains
(see Figure 6.1). As the 100-year and 500-year terms imply, the probability of severe
flooding in these areas is highly unlikely, though it is higher than in “C” zones. Zone B
areas are primarily found in the flat, industrial parts of East Oakland, generally east of
Fruitvale Avenue; they include the area from 34th Avenue to Hegenberger Road on the
bay side of the BART alignment; the area south of Arroyo Viejo Creek below
MacArthur Boulevard; the area east of Sausal Creek below MacArthur; and land along
Temescal Creek west of Highway 24.
Finally, a very few areas, covering only a small fraction of the city, were assigned the
“Zone A” designation, representing “special flood hazard areas” that would be
inundated by a 100-year flood. These areas are almost entirely within, or immediately
adjacent to, creek channels, specifically those of Temescal, Glen Echo, Trestle Glen,
Sausal, Peralta, Arroyo Viejo and San Leandro creeks. In most “A” zones, the 100-year
flood would be contained within the existing channels or underground culverts; in the
rest, 100-year floods would generally result in shallow flooding in the form of sheet-
flow, with very few locations experiencing flooding depths in excess of one foot. In
flood-prone areas, ACFCWCD continues to pursue priority projects to improve flood
protection. One of the agency’s projects currently underway is enlargement of the

                         PROTECT OAKLAND
                                           underground storm drains along Lakeshore Avenue between Lake Merritt and Prince
                                           Street.
                                           Much of the city’s storm-drainage system was built in the 1930s and has reached or
                                           passed its serviceable life span. Moreover, most parts of the system were not designed
                                           to accommodate the level of development that has taken place since. Meanwhile, parts
                                           of Oakland, including significant portions of North and East Oakland, have no storm-
                                           drainage system, and instead rely on local streets to carry stormwater runoff. As a result,
                                           localized flooding—observable as sheet-flow in the streets, primarily in the flatter areas
                                           of the city close to the shoreline—occurs following large storms. As mentioned earlier,
                                           the city is developing a storm-drainage master plan with the goal of reducing localized
                                           flooding. As part of the master plan, the city is surveying every inlet and manhole
                                           structure in Oakland, and identifying historic storm-related problem areas. A
                                           computerized hydraulic model based on this inventory database will be used to simulate
Flooding Hazards | 104
                                           storm events, assess the capacity of the storm-drainage system and identify its
                                           deficiencies. Scheduled for completion in early 2004, the master plan will recommend a
                                           prioritized capital-improvement program for the short-to-medium term, and a
                                           maintenance program for the long term. Full implementation of the master plan will
                                           require significant funding and, most likely, a dedicated funding source.
                                           Of all flood hazards discussed in the safety element, excess storm-water runoff has the
                                           greatest potential to affect Oakland. Nevertheless, Oakland is not a particularly flood-
                                           prone community. The city has neither the large rivers nor open coastline that can
                                           result in devastating storm-induced flooding. As mentioned above, recurring flooding is
                                           usually confined to small areas of the city. In addition, it can be expected to occur
                                           generally as shallow, sheet-flow flooding only, and as such would not present a direct
                                           threat to life or cause significant damage to structures.
                                           Tsunamis      Tsunamis are not an uncommon occurrence on the California coast. In
                                           1964, a tsunami associated with an Alaskan earthquake caused eight deaths and $11
                                           million in damage at Crescent city (Del Norte County). In the 100 years between 1868
                                           and 1968, 19 tsunamis were recorded at the Golden Gate tide gauge, with a maximum
                                           wave height of 7.4 feet. Most often, tsunamis are generated by large offshore
                                           earthquakes in the Pacific Ocean, producing waves that reach the California coast many
                                           hours after the earthquake. Tsunamis can also be generated by local earthquakes, in
                                           which case the first waves could reach shore mere minutes after the ground stops
                                           shaking, giving authorities no time to issue a warning. The West Coast and Alaska

                                                                                            CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
Tsunami Warning Center in Palmer, Alaska, operated by the National Weather Service,
is responsible for issuing warnings about potential tsunamis along the West Coast of the
United States. Warning times vary depending on the distance to the causative
earthquake. For most tsunamis approaching the coast, several hours are available to
evacuate residents and undertake other emergency preparations.
The scarcity of data makes it difficult to estimate the tsunami hazard in Oakland.
However, past tsunamis have resulted in little damage around San Francisco Bay. The
hazard in the bay is much smaller than along the Pacific Coast, as the bay is an enclosed
body of water. (Available data indicate that tsunami wave heights diminish to about half
from the Golden Gate to the Richmond shoreline.) Also, locally generated tsunamis, for
which there would be little warning time, are much less likely than distant-source
tsunamis: there are no geologic structures offshore of central California capable of
producing tsunamis; also, large tsunamis appear to be the result of vertical displacement
                                                                                                                                            105 | Flooding Hazards
of the sea floor, whereas faulting movements in the Bay Area are mainly in a horizontal
direction. (Records at the time of the San Francisco earthquake of 1906 showed the
height of the wave measured at Fort Point as no more than six inches.)
Flooding from tsunamis would affect low-lying areas along San Francisco Bay and the
Oakland Estuary, especially filled areas that are only a few feet above sea level. The
areas of Oakland that would most likely be inundated by a tsunami having a wave height
of 20 feet are shown on figure 6.1, as determined by the U.S. Geological Survey; such a
tsunami is estimated to arrive at the Golden Gate once every 200 years. Areas that
could be flooded with several feet of water include the Bay Bridge landing, the outer and
middle harbor of the Port of Oakland’s seaport, the San Leandro Bay shoreline
(including Martin Luther King, Jr. Regional Shoreline) and the Oakland International
Airport’s shoreline. Areas along the inner harbor, Brooklyn Basin and the tidal channel
would be sheltered by the island of Alameda. The likelihood of large-scale devastation
in Oakland resulting from tsunamis appears to be small, especially as there would usually
be ample time to evacuate residents at risk.
Seiches     There is no data on the local occurrence or impact of seiches, as none has
ever been recorded in the Bay Area. Given the absence of local data—and that seiches
are, in general, poorly understood—an accurate assessment of the hazard posed by
seiches is difficult. Damage from a seiche would depend primarily on the size, depth,
elevation, proximity to development and, if human-made, structural condition of the
body of water in which the seiche occurs. Outside the Bay Area, earthquake-generated

                         PROTECT OAKLAND
                                           seiches have on occasion damaged dams and water-storage tanks. In addition, isolated
                                           damage to adjacent and down-slope structures has been observed from seiches
                                           occurring in swimming pools and in small, shallow lakes and ponds.
                                           In Oakland, the only threat of large-scale damage from seiches appears to come from
                                           downstream flooding that would be caused by large volumes of water overtopping a
                                           dam or reservoir, a hazard that is examined in the following section. (Lake Merritt, with
                                           depths greater than two or three feet only near its center, is likely too shallow to be able
                                           to generate devastating seiches.) The likelihood of large-scale devastation in Oakland
                                           resulting from seiches appears to be minuscule.
                                           Dam failure         According to inundation maps developed by dam owners to fulfill
                                           requirements of the Dam Safety Act, there are 13 active dams, reservoirs and clearwells
                                           that, in case of failure, would cause flooding in Oakland. (Additionally, there are small
Flooding Hazards | 106
                                           ponds and water tanks scattered throughout the city, the failure of which could result in
                                           the sudden release of a sizable volume of water. Failure of such a facility in the Oakland
                                           hills could cause isolated damage to structures downhill.) These 13 facilities, listed by
                                           owning entity, are:
                                           ● Central, Claremont, Dingee, Dunsmuir, Estates and 39th Avenue reservoirs, the dams
                                               at Lake Chabot and at Upper San Leandro reservoir, and the Upper San Leandro
                                               filtration plant no. 1 and no. 2 clearwells (owned by the East Bay Municipal Utility
                                               District, or EBMUD). As part of its seismic improvement program, EBMUD will
                                               have upgraded and strengthened all its reservoirs by 2005. Upgrade measures include
                                               the addition of seismic anchors and the installation of pre-stressed wire around tanks.
                                               EBMUD has also identified reservoirs at risk due to landslides and incorporated
                                               landslide-mitigation improvements at these sites. EBMUD also has a dam safety
                                               program, carried out in cooperation with the DSOD, to confirm that its facilities are
                                               safe for continued operation.
                                           ● Lake Temescal dam (owned by the East Bay Regional Park District). This dam was
                                               last inspected by the state’s Division of Safety of Dams in July 2002. At the time, it
                                               presented no issues necessitating corrective action and was “judged satisfactory for
                                               continued operation.”
                                           ● Lower Edwards and Upper Edwards reservoirs (owned by the Mountain View
                                               Cemetery Association). These reservoirs were removed from the jurisdiction of the
                                               Division of Safety of Dams in 1983 because their capacity does not reach regulatory
                                               thresholds.

                                                                                                CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
As shown on Figure 6.1, most of these facilities are located in North and East Oakland,
within a half mile south and west of I-580 and State Highway 13. The map also shows
the potential inundation areas for each facility. This information, based on inundation
maps prepared by dam owners, represents the best estimate of where water would flow
in case of total failure of a dam with a full reservoir; generally, flood waters would follow
existing stream beds or drainage courses. Flooding from dam failure, while unlikely,
could have catastrophic impacts on portions of North and East Oakland. The dam and
reservoir failures resulting in the largest flooded areas in Oakland would be those of
Central reservoir and of Lake Chabot, Lake Temescal and Upper San Leandro reservoir
dams. Of particular concerns are the Lake Temescal dam, since it straddles the main
trace of the Hayward fault, and the Lake Chabot dam, which is located only one-quarter
mile east of the fault. In the event of dam failure, Lake Temescal’s waters would follow
the Temescal stream course, inundating an area one block wide north of Highway 24 to
College Avenue that would then broaden to several blocks wide west of College. Failure
                                                                                                                                                107 | Flooding Hazards
of the Lake Chabot dam (and of the Upper San Leandro reservoir dam) would inundate
much of the Brookfield Village district and the industrial areas near the airport (as well
as a large portion of San Leandro). The risk posed by dam failures is mitigated by the
regulatory safeguards in place and should be weighed not only against the extremely rare
occurrence of dam failure in the United States but also against the significant benefits
provided by water-storage facilities.
Sea-level rise Studies indicate that sea levels are rising around the world due to the
“greenhouse effect,” or the long-term global warming of the earth’s surface from heat
trapped in the atmosphere by greenhouse gases. Global warming is raising sea levels by
melting some of the earth’s glaciers and polar ice caps, and by causing the thermal
expansion of ocean water. Sea-level rise can be expected to result in the tidal flooding
of low-lying property, damage to coastal roads and other infrastructure, erosion of
beaches, loss of coastal wetlands, and the contamination of drinking water from
saltwater intrusion, among other effects.
A 1987 study by the San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission
estimates that water levels in San Francisco Bay will increase by 4-5 inches by the year
2037, and by 1-5 feet by 2100, depending on the acceleration of this phenomenon.
Based on those estimates, it can be assumed that bay water levels at Oakland will rise by
approximately one foot over the next 50 years—an adequate time horizon for purposes
of the safety element since few structures exceed such a life-span. Only very-low-lying
areas would be flooded by such a rise in water levels; in Oakland, such areas are found

                         PROTECT OAKLAND
                                           south of the High Street Bridge, along the San Leandro Bay shoreline, and include, most
                                           notably, the EBRPD’s Martin Luther King, Jr. Regional Shoreline. Because the rise in
                                           bay water levels will occur gradually and very slowly, it will not threaten human lives and
                                           will allow far-sighted owners of shoreline property to take necessary protective action.
                                           6.4 | POLICY STATEMENTS
                                            POLICY FL-1          Enforce and update local ordinances, and comply with regional
                                                                 orders, that would reduce the risk of storm-induced flooding.
Flooding Hazards | 108
                                           ● ACTION FL-1.1: Amend, as necessary, the city’s regulations concerning new
                                             construction and major improvements to existing structures within flood zones
                                             in order to maintain compliance with federal requirements and, thus, remain a
                                             participant in the National Federal Insurance Program.
                                                                                                f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                           ● ACTION FL-1.2: Continue to require that subdivisions be designed to minimize
                                             flood damage by, among other things, having lots and rights-of-way be laid out
                                             for the provision of approved sewer and drainage facilities, providing on-site
                                             detention facilities whenever practicable and having utility facilities be
                                             constructed in ways that reduce or eliminate flood damage.
                                                                                                f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                           ● ACTION FL-1.3: Comply with all applicable performance standards pursuant to
                                             the 2003 Alameda countywide National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
                                             municipal stormwater permit that seek to manage increases in stormwater run-
                                             off flows from new-development and redevelopment construction projects.
                                                                                           f PWA ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DIVISION
                                           ● ACTION FL-1.4: Continue to enforce the grading, erosion and sedimentation
                                             ordinance by prohibiting the discharge of concentrated stormwater flows by
                                             other than approved methods.
                                                                                                f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                                                                               f PWA ENGINEERING DESIGN DIVISION

                                                                                    CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
● ACTION FL-1.5: Continue to enforce provisions under the creek protection, storm
  water management and discharge control ordinance designed to keep
  watercourses free of obstructions and protect drainage facilities.
                                          f PWA ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DIVISION
 POLICY FL-2       Continue or strengthen city programs that seek to minimize the
                   storm-induced flooding hazard.
● ACTION FL-2.1: Continue to repair and make structural improvements to storm
  drains to enable them to perform to their design capacity in handling water
  flows.
                                               f PWA ENGINEERING DESIGN DIVISION
                                                                                                                                    109 | Flooding Hazards
● ACTION FL-2.2: Continue maintenance efforts to keep storm drains and creeks
  free of obstructions—while retaining vegetation in the channel, as appropriate—
  to allow for the free flow of water.
                              f PWA SEWER AND STORM DRAIN MAINTENANCE DIVISION
● ACTION FL-2.3: Continue the “Maintain-a-Drain Campaign,” which encourages
  residents and businesses to keep storm drains in their neighborhood free of
  debris.
                              f PWA SEWER AND STORM DRAIN MAINTENANCE DIVISION
● ACTION FL-2.4: Continue to provide sandbags and plastic sheeting to residents
  and businesses in anticipation of rainstorms, and to deliver those materials to
  the disabled and elderly upon request.
                              f PWA SEWER AND STORM DRAIN MAINTENANCE DIVISION
 POLICY FL-3       Seek the cooperation and assistance of other government
                   agencies in managing the risk of storm-induced flooding.
● ACTION FL-3.1: Upon completion of new flood-control projects, request that
  FEMA revise its flood-insurance rate map of the city to reflect flood risks
  accurately.
                                                f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION

                         PROTECT OAKLAND
                                           ● ACTION FL-3.2: To reduce the cost of flood insurance to property owners, work
                                             to qualify for the highest-feasible rating under the Community Rating System of
                                             the National Federal Insurance Program.
                                                                                           f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                           ● ACTION FL-3.3: Meet annually with the Alameda County Flood Control and Water
                                             Conservation District to establish jointly the district’s capital improvement
                                             program for most effectively reducing the remaining threat of storm-induced
                                             flooding.
                                                                                          f PWA ENGINEERING DESIGN DIVISION
                                           ● ACTION FL-3.4: Encourage the ACFCWCD to continue maintaining adequately
                                             those watercourses, storm drains and other flood-control facilities for which it
                                             has legal responsibility.
                                                                          f PWA SEWER AND STORM DRAIN MAINTENANCE DIVISION
Flooding Hazards | 110
                                           ● ACTION FL-3.5: Refer development proposals adjacent to floodways and
                                             floodplains to the ACFCWCD for its review and comment.
                                                                                           f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
                                            POLICY FL-4       Minimize further the relatively low risks from non-storm-related
                                                              forms of flooding.
                                           ● ACTION FL-4.1: Request from the state Division of Safety of Dams a timeline for
                                             the maintenance inspection of all operating dams in the city.
                                                                                           f OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                           ● ACTION FL-4.2: Review for adequacy, and update if necessary, procedures
                                             adopted by the city pursuant to the Dam Safety Act for the emergency
                                             evacuation of areas located below major water-storage facilities.
                                                                                           f OFD OFFICE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                           ● ACTION FL-4.3: Inform shoreline-property owners of the possible long-term
                                             economic threat posed by rising sea levels.
                                                                                           f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION

                                                                                        CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
● ACTION FL-4.4: Stay informed of emerging scientific information on the subject
  of rising sea levels, especially on actions that local jurisdictions can take to
  prevent or mitigate this hazard.
                                                  f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
6.5 | RESOURCES
Agencies consulted
● Federal Emergency Management Agency (www.fema.gov)
● California Division of Safety of Dams (damsafety.water.ca.gov)
                                                                                                                                        111 | Flooding Hazards
● S.F. Bay Conservation and Development Commission (www.bcdc.ca.gov)
● Alameda County Flood Control and Water Conservation District
    (www.co.alameda.ca.us/pwa/flood.shtml)
●   Alameda Countywide Clean Water Program (www.cleanwaterprogram.com)
●   Oakland Public Works Agency (www.oaklandpw.com)
Documents consulted
● “Maps Showing Areas of    Potential Inundation by Tsunamis in the San Francisco Bay
  Region, California;” United States Geological Survey, 1972.
● “Stormwater Quality Management Plan, July 2001-June 2008;” Alameda Countywide
  Clean Water Program, 2003 (www.cleanwaterprogram.com/ACCWP_SWQMP_all.pdf).
● “Sea Level Rise: Predictions and Implications for San Francisco Bay;” San Francisco
  Bay Conservation and Development Commission, revised 1988.
Other resources
● FEMA’s National   Flood Insurance Program (www.fema.gov/fima/nfip)

                         PROTECT OAKLAND
Flooding Hazards | 112
                                           This page intentionally left blank
7 | HAZARDS BY AREA
Planning areas Chapters 3-6 have analyzed four types of environmental hazards that
have the potential to affect Oakland: geologic hazards, fire hazards, hazardous materials
and flooding hazards. Each of those chapters contains one or two maps showing, in a
generalized manner, the areas within Oakland that for various reasons are at particular
risk from those hazards. Based on the analysis presented in those chapters, it is clear
that the various neighborhoods, districts and areas of Oakland have distinct
environmental-hazard profiles. The “Hazards by Area” chapter aggregates the identified
hazards and correlates them with six distinct areas of the city (see below); also, the
chapter provides an overview of the primary land use characteristics for each of the six
areas and identifies the major environmental hazards of each area. For the purpose of
analyzing and mitigating environmental hazards, the city has been divided into the
following planning areas:
● West Oakland (including the seaport)
● Central Oakland
● East Oakland (including the airport)
● North Oakland
● The Lower Hills
● The Upper Hills

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          As explained in Chapter 1 (“Introduction”), all the maps in Protect Oakland, including the
                                          ones in this chapter, are generalized in nature and are not definitive on a site-specific
                                          basis. For this reason, it is likely that there are sites within areas shown on a map as
                                          being susceptible to a particular hazard in which that hazard is not present; conversely, it
                                          is also likely that there are sites outside an environmental-hazard area, as shown on the
                                          maps, that do present risks for that particular hazard. For development purposes, site-
                                          specific engineering, geotechnical, soils and other analyses are necessary to determine the
                                          level of risk on a give site for any environmental hazard.
                                          West Oakland        This is essentially the same planning area as that identified by the
                                          same name in the Oakland land use and transportation element. Its boundaries are
                                          roughly I-580 to the north, the Inner Harbor to the south, I-980 to the east, and San
                                          Francisco Bay to the west (see Figure 7.1). The area of West Oakland includes the
                                          various residential neighborhoods west of downtown such as Oak Center, South
Hazards by Area | 114
                                          Prescott and West Clawson, as well as the seaport, the area of the former Oakland Army
                                          Base and the approach to the Bay Bridge.
                                          West Oakland boasts a rich history, beginning with its selection as the terminus of the
                                          transcontinental railroad more than a century ago, and serving as one of the nation’s
                                          ship-building centers during World War II. Over half of West Oakland’s land area was
                                          created last century by the filling in of former San Francisco Bay marshland, and during
                                          that time the area’s development has been shaped profoundly by transportation facilities
                                          and functions, a still-visible force: today, West Oakland is home to the fourth largest
                                          seaport in the country and is criss-crossed by a web of interstate highways and railroads.
                                          Because of its role as a transportation hub, West Oakland has developed a large number
                                          of industrial businesses and facilities. However, it is important not to lose sight of the
                                          fact that West Oakland is also home to approximately 25,000 residents and to some of
                                          the city’s oldest residential districts. The city’s general plan predicts little change in the
                                          population of the area through 2015 (an increase of just over four percent) but the
                                          strongest job growth of any planning area in the city (almost 38 percent), especially in
                                          the manufacturing and wholesale sectors.
                                          Not surprisingly, given the area’s history, the main environmental hazards of concern in
                                          West Oakland are related to the presence of hazardous materials and of large areas of
                                          Bay fill. As mentioned in Chapter 5 (“Hazardous Materials”), zip code 94607—which is
                                          largely synonymous with West Oakland—has the largest number of state Superfund
                                          sites and of facilities with underground storage tanks of all Oakland zip codes; is tied for

                                                                                               CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
the largest number of sites on EPA’s CERCLIS database of hazardous-waste sites; and
has the second-largest number of P1-level facilities under the CalARP program and of
facilities with aboveground storage tanks. Compared to the rest of the city, West
Oakland must be considered to have a much higher-than-average risk of exposure to
hazardous materials (including transportation-related and other accidental hazmat
releases) and of industrial fires. Moreover, the area has some of the city’s starkest
incompatibilities between heavy-industrial and residential land uses, especially in the
West Clawson neighborhood. Due to its underlying soils, the area is also at higher-than
average risk for a variety of seismic hazards, namely liquefaction, settlement and strong,
if not violent, ground shaking. Finally, the location of low-lying areas at the water’s edge
make the area more susceptible than most other parts of the city to various forms of
inundation, namely tidal flooding, tsunami run-ups, and sea-level rise.
Central Oakland This area combines the “Central/Chinatown” planning area of the
                                                                                                                                               115 | Hazards by Area
land use and transportation element and the parts of the “San Antonio, Fruitvale, and
Lower Hills” planning area from the same element that are below I-580 (in other words,
the San Antonio and Fruitvale neighborhoods but not the Lower Hills district). The
area of Central Oakland is bound by I-580 to the northeast, High Street to the southeast,
the Inner Harbor to the southwest, and I-980 to the west (see Figure 7.2). The area
includes the central business district, Old Oakland, Jack London Square, Chinatown,
Lake Merritt, the San Antonio and Fruitvale districts and a variety of smaller
neighborhoods such as Adams Point, Pill Hill and the Gold Coast.
Central Oakland is the city’s densest and most heavily populated area, with
approximately 150,000 residents, and it contains well over half the city’s jobs. As its
name implies, the area also represents the heart of Oakland, and it houses most of the
city’s major landmarks, including Lake Merritt, downtown, Jack London Square, city
Hall, city Center, the Alameda County courthouse, the Oakland Museum and the Kaiser
Convention Center. The San Antonio area—formerly the town of Brooklyn—was
annexed into the city in 1872; Fruitvale was annexed in 1909. Ethnically, these two
districts are remarkably diverse: according to the 1990 census, in only three of the area’s
18 census tracts did any single ethnic group comprises more than 50 percent of the
population. For the Central/Chinatown planning area, the general plan predicts
vigorous growth in both population and employment (14 and 31 percent, respectively),
and a strong shift in employment from the manufacturing and wholesale sectors to retail
and services. For the San Antonio, Fruitvale and Lower Hills area, the general plan

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          predicts only modest growth in both population and employment (six and three percent,
                                          respectively).
                                          Central Oakland is especially susceptible to hazardous materials exposure, a variety of
                                          seismic hazards, structural hazards and storm-induced flooding (see Figure 7.2). The
                                          94601 zip code—which is almost synonymous with Fruitvale—has the largest number
                                          of P1-level facilities under the CalARP program, of facilities with aboveground storage
                                          tanks and of facilities with above-threshold emissions of toxic air contaminants; the
                                          second-largest number of state Superfund sites; and the third-largest number of facilities
                                          with underground storage tanks. Like West Oakland, Fruitvale must be considered to
                                          have a much higher-than-average risk of exposure to hazardous materials and of
                                          industrial fires compared to the rest of the city. The fact that the area is traversed by I-
                                          880 makes it especially susceptible to transportation-related accidents involving
                                          explosions, spills and gaseous releases of hazardous materials. Moreover, lower
Hazards by Area | 116
                                          Fruitvale has striking incompatibilities between heavy-industrial and residential land
                                          uses. The area’s underlying geology also makes it prone to a variety of seismic hazards,
                                          including strong ground shaking, liquefaction and settlement. Structural fires are a
                                          concern in downtown due to the concentration in the area of highrises, large assembly
                                          spaces, and older buildings with little physical separation among them; damage to
                                          structures from earthquake-induced ground shaking is also a concern due to the many
                                          unreinforced masonry buildings in the area. Storm-induced flooding, while much less of
                                          a threat in recent decades (thanks to flood-control engineering measures), still has the
                                          potential to affect areas surrounding Lake Merritt. Finally, collapse of the Central
                                          Reservoir would inundate a large portion of the planning area.
                                          East Oakland      This is essentially the same planning area as that identified by the same
                                          name in the land use and transportation element (with the exception of the area
                                          generally above MacArthur Boulevard, which the safety element has classified as part of
                                          the Lower Hills; see below). The boundaries of East Oakland are I-580/MacArthur
                                          Boulevard to the northeast, the city of San Leandro to the southeast, the estuary’s tidal
                                          channel and San Leandro Bay to the southwest, and High Street to the northwest (see
                                          Figure 7.3). The area includes the neighborhoods of Melrose, Seminary, Elmhurst and
                                          Brookfield Village, and also the Coliseum area and Oakland International Airport.
                                          Most of East Oakland was originally developed in the first half of the last century.
                                          Development declined markedly after World War II, and for the last several decades the
                                          area has struggled to retain and attract businesses and to rehabilitiate its aging housing

                                                                                                CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
stock. Nevertheless, East Oakland has some of the city’s—if not the Bay Area’s—top
assets, including Oakland International Airport, professional sports and other
entertainment at the Coliseum complex, protected open space and recreational
opportunities along the waterfront, and easy access to freeways and BART. According
to the general plan, the population of East Oakland—including the area above
MacArthur Boulevard—is approximately 105,000, and is expected to grow slowly
through 2015, by just under 3.5 percent. The number of jobs in the area, however, is
expected to soar (by almost 27 percent), especially in manufacturing and retail.
The main environmental hazards of concern in East Oakland are exposure to hazardous
materials and a variety of seismic and flooding hazards. The 94601 zip code, which is
burdened with facilities and sites involving hazardous materials (see above), spills into
East Oakland; in addition, the 94621 zip code—which is centered on the Coliseum, and
includes the airport—is tied for the largest number of sites on EPA’s CERCLIS
                                                                                                                                                117 | Hazards by Area
database of hazardous-waste sites; has the second-largest number of facilities with
underground storage tanks; and the third-largest number of P1-level facilities under the
CalARP program, of facilities with aboveground storage tanks, and of facilities with
above-threshold emissions of toxic air contaminants. The San Leandro Street corridor,
between High Street and the city of San Leandro, is one of the three parts of the city—
the other two are lower Fruitvale and the West Clawson neighborhood in West
Oakland—with the most serious incompatibilities between industrial and residential
uses. Due to its underlying geology, parts of East Oakland—and especially the airport,
much of which is built on fill—is susceptible to strong earthquake-induced ground
shaking, liquefaction and settlement. Also, due to its low-lying elevation, East Oakland
is vulnerable to a variety of flooding hazards: large swaths of area fall within the 500-year
floodplain; pockets of land exist within the 100-year floodplain; much of the area would
be inundated from failure of the Lake Chabot or Upper San Leandro dams or the
Dunsmuir reservoir; and most of the area’s shoreline falls within the tsunami run-up
zone.
North Oakland        Again, this is essentially the same planning area as that identified by
the same name in Oakland’s land use and transportation element. Its boundaries,
roughly, are the city of Berkeley to the north, I-580 to the south, Mountain View
Cemetery and the city of Piedmont to the east, and the city of Emeryville to the west
(see Figure 7.4). Annexed to the city in 1897, this is a densely populated and largely
residential area that includes the Claremont, Temescal and Rockridge districts; it has a
population of approximately 48,000 people. North Oakland derives its land use form

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          from the main thoroughfares that radiate from downtown along historic streets and
                                          former streetcar routes: San Pablo Avenue, Martin Luther King, Jr. Way, Telegraph
                                          Avenue, College Avenue, Broadway and Piedmont Avenue (from west to east); also,
                                          more than other parts of the city, North Oakland experiences benefits and impacts from
                                          neighboring jurisdictions since the area abuts the cities of Emeryville, Berkeley and
                                          Piedmont. The Oakland general plan indicates low population and jobs growth for the
                                          area through 2015 (of between three and four percent for both), but predicts a marked
                                          shift in employment from manufacturing to retail.
                                          From an environmental hazards perspective, North Oakland should be considered one
                                          of the safest areas of the city. The area skirts or avoids most of the city’s primary
                                          environmental hazards, including the Hayward fault zone, the wildfire hazard area, areas
                                          of landslide potential and areas of filled soil. On the other hand, a large percentage of
                                          the area’s land is susceptible to dam-failure inundation, mainly from the potential failure
Hazards by Area | 118
                                          of the Lake Temescal dam but also from failure of the Claremont reservoir.
                                          Lower Hills         This area is bound by Highway 13/I-580 to the northeast, I-
                                          580/MacArthur Boulevard to the southwest, and the North Oakland neighborhoods of
                                          Rockridge and Temescal to the west (see Figure 7.5). This planning area does not have
                                          an equivalent in the land use and transportation element; rather, for purposes of this
                                          document and to reflect its distinct environmental hazards profile, it has been carved out
                                          of several land use and transportation areas. The Lower Hills area includes the
                                          neighborhoods of Trestle Glen, Oakmore and Dimond, and several large open spaces
                                          and institutional uses such as Mountain View Cemetery, Claremont Country Club, the
                                          Montclair golf course, Mills College and King Estates Park. The Lower Hills are
                                          significantly lower and less steep than the Upper Hills (see below), and are separated
                                          from each other by the Hayward fault.
                                          The Lower Hills are conspicuously hazard-prone, and are at higher-than-average risk for
                                          wildland fires, landslides, fault rupture, ground shaking and infrastructure hazards
                                          resulting from earthquakes. Much of the area consists of sloping terrain, is blanketed by
                                          relatively dense vegetation and is developed with wooden structures, three factors that
                                          greatly increase the wildfire hazard. At the same time, the sloping terrain and the area’s
                                          location beside the Hayward fault create a substantial landslide risk. Furthermore, the
                                          presence of the Hayward fault imposes significant hazards including fault rupture, strong
                                          or violent ground shaking, and disruption to the area’s transportation and utility systems.

                                                                                               CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
Upper Hills This is essentially the same planning area as the “North and South Hills”
area in the land use and transportation element (with the exception of the area generally
below Highway 13 north of Joaquin Miller Road, which the safety element has classified
as part of the Lower Hills; see above). The area is bound, roughly, by unincorporated
Contra Costa County and the open spaces of the East Bay Regional Park District
(EBRPD) to the north and east, Highway 13/I-580 to the south and west, and the city
of Berkeley to the west (see Figure 7.5). The Upper Hills includes the neighborhoods of
Forest Park, Montclair, Piedmont Pines, Millsmont, Eastmont, Oak Knoll and Sheffield
Village, and several large open spaces and institutional uses such as the undeveloped
lands of UC Berkeley, Claremont Canyon Regional Preserve, Grizzly Peak Open Space,
Joaquin Miller Park, Merritt College, Leona Heights Open Space Regional Preserve,
Sequoyah Country Club, Knowland Park and the Lake Chabot golf course.
Along with the bay, estuary and Lake Merritt, the Upper Hills—substantially higher and
                                                                                                                                               119 | Hazards by Area
steeper than the Lower Hills—are Oakland’s defining natural feature. They provide a
spectacular backdrop for the city and a divide between the city’s urban areas and the
greenbelt to the north and east formed by the EBRPD’s system of open spaces and rural
Contra Costa County. Most of the land in the area is zoned for residential or open
space uses, and the area is known for its dramatic views, forested character, winding
streets and hillside architecture. The area north of Joaquin Miller Road, perhaps more
than any other part of the city, has a development pattern dictated by topography and
natural features, and it is this area that was affected almost exclusively by the 1991
firestorm. The area south of Joaquin Miller Road is, in general, the city’s most newly
developed section and has the most suburban character and most of the city’s vacant
land. According to the general plan, the population of the Upper Hills—including the
area below Highway 13 north of Joaquin Miller Road—is approximately 42,000, and is
expected to grow by almost 15 percent through 2015. The area has the lowest number
of jobs in the city—under 9,000—but that number is expected to increase by 20 percent,
with most growth centered in the retail and services sectors.
The Upper Hills are exposed to the same hazards as the Lower Hills but to an even
greater extent, in most cases. The wildfire hazard must be considered even greater in
the Upper Hills due to the area’s denser vegetation and steeper terrain, and its adjacency
to the EBRPD’s parks and open spaces. The landslide hazard, too, must be considered
greater, since the Upper Hills are higher and steeper than the Lower Hills. Finally, the
area’s relative isolation makes it particularly vulnerable to the disruptive effects that an
earthquake along the Hayward fault would have on the area’s transportation and utility

                        PROTECT OAKLAND
                                          systems, which could seriously compromise the ability of emergency personnel to
                                          respond to a disaster in the Upper Hills.
Hazards by Area | 120
1 | INTRODUCTION
1.1 | OVERVIEW
Profile of Oakland         The City of Oakland, California, is located on the eastern shore
of San Francisco Bay, in northwestern Alameda County. It covers an area of
approximately 53 square miles, with an average elevation of 42 feet. The city is bounded
by the cities of Emeryville and Berkeley to the north/northwest, unincorporated Contra
Costa and Alameda counties to the east/northeast, the city of San Leandro to the south,
the Oakland Estuary to the south/southwest, and San Francisco Bay to the west; the
island city of Alameda is located across the estuary, while the city of Piedmont is an
enclave within Oakland, near Lake Merritt (see Figure 1.1). With a population of
approximately 410,000 people, Oakland is the eighth most-populous city in the state; it
is also the largest city in Alameda County, in terms of both area and population, and is
also the county seat. Oakland is also one of the most ethnically diverse cities in the U.S.,
with each of the four main ethnic/racial groups—blacks, non-Hispanic whites,
Hispanics and Asians/Pacific Islanders—making up more than 15 percent of the
population.

                   PROTECT OAKLAND
                                Oakland’s land uses                       Oakland is one of the oldest cities in the state, having been incorporated in 1854. The
                     (according to general plan classifications; in       city’s importance increased after 1869, when it became the western terminus of the
                    number of acres and percent of total city area)
                                                                          transcontinental railroad. Oakland grew rapidly during the first half of the 20th century,
                   Hillside residential               6,155     18.3%     adding nearly 100,000 residents between 1940 and 1945 alone as it became one of the
                   Detached-unit residential          5,910     17.6%     hubs for the industrial war effort during World War II. Mirroring the fate of many
                   Mixed-housing type residential     4,905     14.6%     other older American cities, Oakland’s population and economic importance declined in
                   G’ral industry & transportation    4,488     13.3%
                   Resource conservation              3,148      9.4%
                                                                          the decades following the war as suburbanization lured families and jobs away. The
                   Urban park and open space          2,375      7.1%     decline has been reversed during the last two decades, largely as a result of new waves of
                   Business mix                       1,720      5.1%     immigration from Latin America, China and southeast Asia.
                   Urban residential                  1,018      3.0%
                   Institutional                        873      2.6%
                   Estuary policy plan area             738      2.2%     The city’s major natural features are San Francisco Bay, the Oakland Estuary, Lake
                   Central business district            578      1.7%     Merritt, and the hills along the city’s northeastern boundary. Downtown is a few blocks
                   N’borhood center mixed use           472      1.4%     inland from the estuary and immediately west of Lake Merritt; most residential districts
                   Community commercial                 454      1.4%
                   Regional commercial                  479      1.4%
                                                                          are to the north, east and southeast of downtown; and industrial areas are to the west
Introduction | 2
                   Housing and business mix             309      0.9%     and southeast, along I-880. Notable large-scale land uses include the chain of open
                                                                          spaces in the hills, Oakland International Airport, and the seaport (one of the country’s
                   Total                33,622 acres (52.53 sq miles)     largest and busiest). The airport and seaport, combined with several interstate highways
                                                                          and passenger and freight rail lines that pass through the city, make Oakland the
                                                                          transportation hub of Northern California.
                         The regulations on the preparation of general    Introduction to general plans            California state law requires that each city and
                        plans are found in Sections 65300-65307 and       county adopt a general plan to guide its physical growth and development. The general
                    65350-65362 of the California Government Code.
                           The State of California Governor’s Office of
                                                                          plan represents a community’s vision of its future and is a statement of its values,
                         Planning and Research publishes a document       priorities, needs and concerns. More specifically, it is a jurisdiction’s official policy
                      titled “General Plan Guidelines,” which explains    document regarding the future location of housing, business, industry, transportation
                          and interprets the legal requirements for the   facilities, parks and other land uses; the conservation of natural resources; and the
                                          preparation of general plans.
                                                                          protection of the public from safety hazards. As official policy, it forms the basis for
                                                                          land-use decisions made by a jurisdiction’s planning commission and its city council or
                                                                          county board of supervisors. State law dictates that any general plan meet certain legal
                                                                          criteria: the plan must be thorough, addressing the broad range of planning-related
                                                                          issues relevant to the community; it must be geographically comprehensive, covering all
                                                                          public and private land within a jurisdiction’s boundaries as well as any outside territory
                                                                          that bears relation to its planning; it must have a long-term outlook, projecting
                                                                          conditions and needs well into the future; and it must be internally consistent, meaning
                                                                          that there are no conflicts among its many parts.

                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
Policy statements        At the heart of every general plan is a set of goals, principles,
objectives, directions, policies, recommendations, strategies, actions and other
statements which are often collectively referred to as policy statements. The purpose of
policy statements is to provide direction for a city or county, and guide the
development-related actions and decisions of its officials. Policy statements attempt to
reconcile the diverse interests of a community, and are normally based on background
technical information and issue analyses developed as part of the general-plan process.
Policy statements fit within a hierarchical framework based on the level of importance,
specificity and time perspective of each type of statement. (Goals, for example, tend to
be slow-changing, more-abstract expressions of community values; they are higher in the
hierarchy than implementation actions, which are quantifiable, have relatively short time
spans and address highly specific issues.) There is no standard framework or hierarchy
for organizing and categorizing policy statements, so general plans differ widely in this
area.
                                                                                                                                              3 | Introduction
The general plan elements           State law requires that a general plan address locally
relevant planning issues categorized under seven mandatory “elements,” or subject
categories. These elements are: land use, circulation, housing, conservation, open space,
noise and safety. In addition, many cities and counties adopt “optional” elements
covering issues of local interest. In order to reflect local interests and circumstances,
each city and county determines the relative importance to its local planning of the
various issues, and the degree of specificity and level of detail of discussion accorded to
each issue. There is no requirement that the elements appear as discrete sections; cities
and counties may combine elements, and may prepare the general plan as a single
document, with sections or chapters not necessarily corresponding to the seven
elements.
The safety element         The purpose of a safety element is to reduce the potential risk
of death, injuries, property damage and economic and social dislocation resulting from
large-scale hazards. By law, a safety element must address the following issues:
seismically induced surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunamis, seiches,
and dam failure; slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides; subsidence,
liquefaction and other seismic and geologic hazards; flooding; wild-land and urban fires;
and evacuation routes, military installations, peak-load water supply requirements and
minimum road widths and clearances around structures, as those items relate to
identified fire and geologic hazards. (Also, safety elements must include maps of known

                   PROTECT OAKLAND
                                                                         seismic and other geologic hazards.) Some cities and counties include additional hazards
                                                                         of local interest such as crime and hazardous materials.
                                                                         Oakland’s general plan         While most cities and counties adopt their general plan as a
                                                                         single document, the Oakland general plan is made up of several separate elements,
                                                                         adopted at different points in time. The current elements of the general plan are, from
                                                                         most to least recent:
                                                                         ● Protect Oakland, the safety element (2004)
                                                                         ● “Housing Element” (2004)
                                                                         ● Envision Oakland, the land-use and transportation element (1998); amended in 1998 to
                                                                            incorporate the “Alameda County Hazardous Waste Management Plan;” in 1999 to
                                                                            include the “Estuary Policy Plan” and the city’s “Bicycle Master Plan;” and in 2002 to
                                                                            include the city’s “Pedestrian Master Plan”
                                                                         ● “Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element” (1996)
Introduction | 4
                                                                         ● “Historic Preservation Element” (1994); amended in 1998.
                                                                         ● “Noise Element” (1974)
                                                                         ● “Scenic Highways Element” (1974)
                                                                         1.2 | THE SAFETY ELEMENT
                     In preparing Protect Oakland, staff conducted a     Organization       The safety element contains seven chapters. In order, they are: this
                    thorough review of the safety elements from the      introductory chapter, five chapters dealing with each of five broad safety-related issues
                     following jurisdictions: the counties of Alameda
                        and Contra Costa, and the cities of Alameda,
                                                                         (public safety, geologic hazards, fires, flooding and hazardous materials), and a chapter
                      Berkeley, Emeryville, Fremont, Hayward, Long       aggregating hazards by area of the city. Each of the issue-specific chapters contains an
                           Beach, Los Angeles, Oakland (the original     overview of the particular issue; an outline of the institutional framework, including
                             version), Palo Alto, Piedmont, Pittsburg,   laws, regulations and programs; an analysis of critical aspects of the issue; a set of policy
                          Sacramento, San Francisco, San Jose, San
                       Leandro, South San Francisco and Union city.
                                                                         statements specific to the issue; and a list of resources, including the names of the key
                                                                         agencies consulted for information and a bibliography. (Internet addresses are given for
                                                                         many of the resources used to prepare the safety element. It is worth noting that a large
                                                                         percentage of such addresses become invalid every year, as web pages cease to exist or
                                                                         are moved to other locations on the Internet. It was felt that providing Internet
                                                                         addresses would nevertheless be useful because many web pages do remain valid for

                                                                                                 CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
years and also because the safety element will be consulted most frequently in the few
months after its publication.)
Each chapter also contains one or more maps illustrating critical aspects of the issues
covered in a particular chapter. It is important to note that, of necessity, these maps are
generalized, and are not definitive on a site-specific basis. (This occurs because
information on environmental hazards generally does not exist on a parcel-by-parcel
basis for large areas, and because the purpose of general plan elements is to present
information that is adequate primarily for large-scale planning analyses.) The maps in
the safety element are useful tools for large-scale planning overviews and preliminary
assessments but are not a substitute for more detailed investigations required for the
development of specific sites. Because the information on the maps is generalized, it is
likely that there are sites within areas shown on a map as being susceptible to a particular
hazard in which that hazard is not present; conversely, it is also likely that there are sites
                                                                                                                                                 5 | Introduction
outside an environmental-hazard area, as shown on the maps, that do present risks for
that particular hazard.          For development purposes, site-specific engineering,
geotechnical, soils and other analyses are necessary to determine the level of risk on a
given site for any environmental hazard.
Policy statements        The safety element uses a hierarchical, three-layer framework to
organize policy statements. In the framework’s hieararchy, at the top are goals (see
below), or broad, general ends which the city hopes to achieve by implementing the
safety element. Goals are related to safety hazards overall rather than to any specific
issue, and they form the basis for policies, the next level of the hierarchy. Policies,
which are less general than goals, identify specific areas in which the city will direct
efforts in order to attain its goals. Below the policies are actions, detailed and
implementable steps that, if feasible, the city will undertake in order to carry out the
policies and, ultimately, the goals. There is at least one action supporting every policy,
and each action lists the city agency (or agencies, in a few instances) expected to assume
the leading role in implementing that action.
Goals    Goals are broad, comprehensive directions or end conditions; they simply state
the desired results without concern for the specific actions necessary to reach them.
The safety element has established three goals related to safety hazards for the city:
● To protect the health and safety of Oakland residents and others by minimizing
   potential loss of life and injury caused by safety hazards;

                   PROTECT OAKLAND
                                                                       ● To safeguard Oakland’s economic welfare by reducing potential property loss,
                                                                         damage to infrastructure, and social and economic dislocation and disruption
                                                                         resulting from safety hazards; and
                                                                       ● To preserve Oakland’s environmental quality by minimizing potential damage to
                                                                         natural resources from safety hazards.
                                                                       The update process        Oakland’s original safety element, was adopted in 1974. Since
                                                                       then, Oakland’s land-use patterns have changed, its population and economy have
                                                                       expanded, and the city has experienced two devastating natural disasters (the 1989 Loma
                                                                       Prieta earthquake and the 1991 Oakland Hills fire). Oakland is particularly prone to
                                                                       environmental hazards—especially earthquakes, wildfires and landslides—and will no
                                                                       doubt experience them again. While safety hazards cannot be eliminated, the city’s
                                                                       administration believes that by incorporating, analyzing and disseminating new
                                                                       information as part of an updated safety element, it can develop mitigation actions to
Introduction | 6
                                                                       reduce the damage to human life, property and the environment resulting from such
                                                                       hazards. The process to update the environmental hazards element consisted of several
                                                                       phases: determining the issues to be covered in the element, research into existing
                                                                       conditions, analysis of background data, formulation of policy statements, review of the
                                                                       draft element by government-agency staff and the public, and official adoption of the
                                                                       final element.
                                                                       A scope of work for the safety element was presented to the Planning Commission in
                                                                       April 2003 and to the Public Safety Committee of the City Council in May 2003. A
                                                                       preliminary draft of the safety element was unveiled in August 2004, with a community
                                                                       meeting held at City Hall on August 25, 2004. The draft safety element was formally
                                                                       circulated for public review and comment (along with an initial study and negative
                                                                       declaration for the project) between September and October 2004; also, as required by
                                                                       state law and selected regulations, the City referred the draft element to various relevant
                                                                       government entities. On October 20, 2004, the Oakland Planning Commission
                                                                       approved the negative declaration and recommended adoption of the safety element to
                                                                       the City Council. The Public Safety and Community and Economic Development
                                                                       committees considered the element on November 9, 2004, and forwarded it to the full
                                                                       City Council. The safety element was adopted by the City Council a week later, on
                                                                       November 16, 2004.
                   The regulations for the implementation of general   Implementing the safety element            This element, as mentioned previously,
                     plans are found in Sections 65400-65404 of the    includes a framework of policies and strategies developed to guide public decision-
                                        California Government Code.

                                                                                               CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
making regarding land-use development with regard to safety hazards. Those policy
statements will be used by the Oakland city council, planning commission and other
officials and staff as they evaluate proposed land-use changes and regulate general
development and specific projects. The official decisions and actions taken by city staff
and elected and appointed officials will need to be consistent with the policy statements
in order for those decisions and actions to comply with state law. While consistency is
required, “tensions” among policy statements, and among elements, are inevitable, and
will need to be weighed against each other through the decision-making process on
particular development and land-use proposals. It is expected that the policies and
strategies in the safety element will be implemented through such tools as the zoning
and subdivision ordinances, building and housing codes, specific plans, redevelopment
plans, development agreements, annual budgeting, and the capital-improvement
program.
                                                                                                                                               7 | Introduction
The City will adopt and implement the strategies in a Local Hazard Mitigation Plan,
which reduce the impacts of natural and man-made disasters, under the requirements of
the Federal Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000. On March 20, 2012, the City Council
adopted the Oakland Local Hazard Mitigation Plan, which serves as an “implementation
appendix” to the Safety Element of the Oakland General Plan (and is included in the
Safety Element as Appendix F). Specifically, the 360 strategies in the adopted Local
Hazard Mitigation Plan are a set of actions the City is taking, or is considering taking, to
reduce the risks of disasters on Oakland residents, businesses and essential government
services. The Fire Department’s Office of Emergency Services will be the lead City
agency responsible for evaluating the Plan on a regular basis, as necessary, to comply
with federal and state laws, and for preparing future editions of the Local Hazard
Mitigation Plan.
1.3 | RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ELEMENTS
Need for consistency         As stated earlier, all parts of the safety element must be
consistent not only with each other but also with other elements of the Oakland general
plan. As summarized below, areas of certain other elements of the city’s general plan
overlap with the safety element. These areas of overlap are consistent across elements.

                   PROTECT OAKLAND
                                     In addition, efforts have been made to ensure that the safety element is consistent with
                                     other safety-related planning efforts at the city, in neighboring jurisdictions, and at the
                                     regional, state and federal levels. This section describes the safety-related components
                                     of the plans and programs that were considered in the preparation of the safety element.
                                     Plans and programs specific to one or more safety hazards are discussed in the issue-
                                     specific chapters.
                                     Original safety element           Because Oakland’s original safety element is almost thirty
                                     years old, very little of the information in it reappers in the updated element. However,
                                     the original element did influence the content and organization of the current document.
                                     The original element—which has been replaced by Protect Oakland as the city’s official
                                     safety element—includes six chapters:
                                     ● “Information,” with a one-page overview of the element.
                                     ● “Background,” containing general information on seismic activity (including a map of
Introduction | 8
                                        earthquake faults in the Bay Area) and fire and flooding hazards.
                                     ● “Identifying Environmental Hazards,” with a more detailed look at geologic, fire and
                                        flooding hazards, including maps of zones around fault traces, critical fire areas, and
                                        areas subject to potential landslides, flooding and inundation by tsunamis.
                                     ● “Structural Hazards,” describing the effects of earthquakes on residential,
                                        commercial, industrial and public structures, and on utility and transportation
                                        facilities; includes maps of Oakland’s census tracts classified according to the number
                                        of potentially hazardous structures within them.
                                     ● “Areas of Hazards and Risks,” relating the most significant identified hazards to five
                                        areas of the city—the Oakland hills, East Oakland, West Oakland, Central Oakland
                                        and the shoreline—and illustrated with a comprehensive hazards map.
                                     ● “Policies and Programs,” with policies and programs related to geologic, seismic, fire
                                        and flooding hazards, “general considerations,” and safety during emergencies.
                                     Open space, conservation and recreation (OSCAR) element                   The OSCAR
                                     element contains numerous objectives, policies and actions related to safety from
                                     environmental hazards, including on the conservation of hazard-prone parks and other
                                     open space; development of hillside sites; erosion and soil loss from new development;
                                     mitigation of hazards associated with soil contamination; maintenance of graded slope
                                     and retaining walls; geo-technical study requirements for major developments in hazard-
                                     prone areas; development of a land-stability database; development on filled soils;
                                     periodic revision of the grading ordinance; prevention of hazardous spills; clean-up of
                                     waterfront toxic hot spots; household hazardous waste disposal; creek management and

                                                                                                 CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN | SAFETY ELEMENT
maintenance and other flood control measures; fire prevention; and the improvement of
air quality. The OSCAR element also includes a map of areas where the predominant
slope is 30 percent or steeper. The safety-related objectives, policies and actions in the
OSCAR element are reproduced in Appendix A.
Envision Oakland          Envision Oakland is Oakland’s land-use and transportation element
(LUTE). It contains several policies related to environmental hazards, including on the
cleanup of contaminated industrial properties; mitigation of land-use conflicts (especially
between industrial and residential uses, and particularly in West Oakland and the
Fruitvale waterfront); zoning and development considerations toward natural features;
infrastructure limitations with regards to emergency response; subdivision of land in the
hills; development and staffing of public-safety facilities and services; undergrounding of
utility lines; and criteria for siting hazardous-waste facilities. The safety-related policies
in Envision Oakland appear in Appendix B.
                                                                                                                                                 9 | Introduction
Housing element         The 2004 update of Oakland’s housing element discusses several
issues related to safety hazards. These include the presence of lead-based paint in the
housing stock; provision of emergency shelters for short-term housing; redevelopment
of vacant and underutilized sites formerly in industrial use; enforcement of building
codes, including the Dangerous Building Code; and programs for the rehabilitation of
the existing housing stock, including correction of major code deficiencies, emergency
repairs, and abatement of lead-based paint hazards. Safety-related policies and actions in
the housing element are included in Appendix C.
Historic preservation element                Among other topics, the city’s historic
preservation element describes provisions of Oakland’s earthquake repair ordinance and
unreinforced masonry building ordinance related to historic structures. It also
acknowledges the demolition and rehabilitation of buildings damaged in the 1989 Loma
Prieta earthquake, the seismic retrofitting of unreinforced-masonry and other older
buildings, and the need for more effective code enforcement to stabilize, secure and
rehabilitate deteriorated significant older properties. Finally, it contains policies and
actions dealing with historic preservation in response to earthquakes, fires or other
emergencies, in relation to seismic retrofit and other building-safety programs, and in
relation to substandard or public-nuisance properties. The safety-related policies and
actions in the historic preservation element are reproduced in Appendix D.

                    PROTECT OAKLAND
                                      Other safety elements          The decisions and actions of other local jurisdictions have
                                      the potential to impact the City of Oakland. Below is a list of jurisdictions adjacent to
                                      Oakland; the chapter or element of the general plan of those jurisdictions that most
                                      closely corresponds to Oakland’s safety element; and the date of adoption of the general
                                      plan or element. (Because each jurisdiction decides how to organize its general plan,
                                      safety-related issues often appear under more than one chapter or element.)
                                      ● Alameda County: “Seismic Safety and Safety Elements” (1982;
                                          elib.cs.berkeley.edu/cgi-bin/doc_home?elib_id=934)
                                      ●   City of Alameda: “Health and Safety Element” (Chapter 8 of the general plan; 1991;
                                          www.ci.alameda.ca.us/planning/pdf/GPchap8.pdf)
                                      ●   City of Berkeley: “Disaster Preparedness and Safety Element” (2002;
                                          www.ci.berkeley.ca.us/planning/landuse/plans/generalPlan/safety.html)
                                      ●   Contra Costa County: “Safety Element” (Chapter 10 of the general plan; 1996;
                                          elib.cs.berkeley.edu/cgi-bin/doc_home?elib_id=1792)
                                      ●   City of Emeryville: “Public Health and Safety” (Chapter V of the general plan; 1993)
Introduction | 10
                                      ●   City of Piedmont: “Safety Element” (Chapter VII of the general plan; 1996)
                                      ●   City of San Leandro: “Environmental Hazards” (Chapter 6 of the general plan; 2002;
                                          www.ci.san-leandro.ca.us/pdf/slgptxtchap6.pdf)
                                      1.4 | RESOURCES
                                      Agencies consulted
                                      ● Governor’s Office of Planning and Research (www.opr.ca.gov)
                                      ● Oakland Community and Economic Development Agency, Planning         and Zoning
                                          Division (www.oaklandnet.com/government/ceda/revised/planning.html)
                                      Documents consulted
                                      ● General Plan Guidelines;   Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, October 2003
                                          (www.opr.ca.gov/planning/PDFs/genplan.pdf).
                                      Other resources
                                      ● California Government      Code (leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/calawquery?codesection=gov)

NOISE ELEMENT
CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
Draft for public review; March 2005

NOISE ELEMENT
CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
City of Oakland
Community and Economic Development Agency
Planning and Zoning Division
250 Frank H. Ogawa Plaza, Suite 3315
Oakland, CA 94612
510 | 238.3941
www.oaklandnet.com
Draft for public review; March 2005
CREDITS
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL                                       PLANNING COMMISSION
Jerry Brown, mayor                                           Nicole Y. Franklin
                                                             Colland Jang, vice-chair
Henry Chang, vice-mayor (at-large)                           Clinton Killian
Jane Brunner (District 1)                                    Suzie W. Lee
Nancy Nadel (District 3)                                     Michael Lighty
Jean Quan (District 4)                                       Mark A. McClure, chair
Ignacio De La Fuente (District 5)                            Anne E. Mudge
Desley Brooks (District 6)
Larry Reid (District 7)
                                                             COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
  Cover photo: Trail in Joaquin Miller Park, by Barry Muniz; Claudia Cappio, Director of Development
  courtesy of the Oakland Convention & Visitors Bureau
                                                             Margaret Stanzione, Strategic Planning Coordinator
                                                             Niko Letunic, project manager
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTIONS                                                                                                       FIGURES
TABLE OF CONTENTS ....................................................................................... i    Figure 1: Noise monitoring locations ............................... after page 14
CHAPTER 1: Introduction ........................................................................... 1          Figure 2: Roadway noise contours .................................... after page 14
CHAPTER 2: A noise primer ....................................................................... 3            Figure 3: Railroad noise contours ...................................... after page 14
CHAPTER 3: Institutional framework ........................................................ 7                  Figure 4: Existing (2003) noise contours for Oakland
CHAPTER 4: Local noise environment ................................................... 11                        International Airport operations ...................................................... 15
CHAPTER 5: Noise­land use compatibility ............................................ 15                        Figure 5: Projected noise contours for Oakland International
CHAPTER 6: Policy statements ................................................................ 19                 Airport operations in Year 2010 ...................................................... 16
CHAPTER 7: Resources ............................................................................. 23
APPENDIX A: Noise-related            policy statements from other
  elements of the Oakland general plan ............................................. 25
APPENDIX B: Tables from the technical report .................................... 29
APPENDIX C: Oakland City Council resolution adopting the noise
  element ................................................................................................. 41

                         NOISE ELEMENT
Table of Contents | ii
                                         This page intentionally left blank
1 | INTRODUCTION
Legislative mandate Â California state law requires that each city and county adopt          Â California Government Code, §65300-65303.4
a general plan to guide its physical growth and development. The general plan is a           and §65350-65362; §65302(f) for noise element
                                                                                             requirements. The Governor’s Office of Planning
policy document that forms the basis for a jurisdiction’s official decisions regarding the   and Research issues General Plan Guidelines, a
future location of housing, business, industry, transportation facilities, parks, open space document interpreting the legal requirements for
and other land uses, the conservation of natural resources, and the protection from          the preparation of a general plan; Appendix C of
environmental hazards. General plans must address locally relevant planning issues           that document contains guidelines for the
                                                                                             preparation of the noise element.
under various “elements,” or subject categories, including noise.
The noise element must analyze and quantify, to the extent practicable, current and          Â Noise-sensitive receptors are land uses whose
projected noise levels from the following noise sources: major traffic thoroughfares,        purpose and function can be disrupted or
                                                                                             jeopardized by noise. Sensitive receptors include
passenger and freight railroad operations, commercial and general aviation operations,       residences, schools, churches, hospitals, elderly-
industrial plants, and other ground stationary noise sources contributing to the             care facilities, hotels and libraries and certain
community noise environment. Noise levels for these sources must be shown on noise           types of passive recreational open space.
contour maps prepared on the basis of noise monitoring or modeling techniques. Noise         Understandably, noise is of special concern when
                                                                                             it occurs near sensitive receptors.
contours establish the locational relationship between existing and projected land uses
and noise sources, and must be used to guide land use decisions to reduce noise impacts,
especially on Â sensitive receptors. The noise element must include implementation
measures that address any existing and foreseeable noise problems, and must serve as a
guideline for complying with the state’s noise insulation standards.

                   NOISE ELEMENT
                          In preparing Oakland’s noise element, staff    Updating Oakland’s noise element          Oakland’s original noise element was adopted
                            conducted a thorough review of the noise     in 1974. Since then, Oakland’s land-use patterns have changed, and its population and
                   elements from the following jurisdictions: Alameda
                          and Contra Costa counties, and the cities of
                                                                         economy have expanded. While noise cannot be eliminated, the City believes that by
                             Alameda, Berkeley, Emeryville, Fremont,     updating the noise element and the policy statements in it, it can continue to protect
                           Hayward, Los Angeles, Oakland (the 1974       residents’ exposure to excessive noise levels. This document is meant to satisfy the
                        element), Palo Alto, Piedmont, Pittsburg, San    state’s requirements for a noise element.
                        Francisco, San Jose, San Leandro, South San
                              Francisco, Union City and Walnut Creek.
                                                                         Policy statements At the heart of every element of a general plan is a set of goals,
                                                                         objectives, policies actions or other statements which are often collectively referred to as
                                                                         policy statements. The purpose of policy statements is to provide direction for a city or
                                                                         county and guide the development-related actions and decisions of its officials. Policy
                                                                         statements attempt to reconcile and accommodate the diverse and often competing
                                                                         interests of a community and its members. Oakland’s noise element contains two types
                                                                         of policy statements: policies and actions. Policies identify specific areas in which the
Introduction | 2
                                                                         city will direct efforts in order to attain its goals. Actions are detailed and implementable
                                                                         steps that, if feasible, the city will undertake in order to carry out the policies. There is at
                                                                         least one action supporting every policy, and each action lists the city agency (or
                                                                         agencies) expected to assume the leading role in implementing that action.
                                                                         It is important to keep in mind that actions are meant to apply only to those geographic
                                                                         and programmatic areas over which the City of Oakland has legal authority, and that the
                                                                         actions will only be implemented if they can be accomplished successfully given
                                                                         financial, environmental, legal, social and technological factors. Also, because the
                                                                         various elements of the Oakland general plan contain policies that address numerous
                                                                         different goals, some policies might compete with each other. In deciding whether to
                                                                         approve a proposed project, the City’s Planning Commission and City Council must
                                                                         balance the various policies and decide whether the project is consistent (that is, in
                                                                         general harmony) with the general plan overall. (Incidentally, project conflicts with the
                                                                         general plan do not inherently result in a significant impact on the environment under
                                                                         the California Environmental Quality Act, since, under the act, impacts must be related
                                                                         to physical changes.)
                                                                         Relationship to other elements By law, the elements of a general plan must be
                                                                         consistent with each other. Appendix C of the State’s General Plan Guidelines
                                                                         (“Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of the Noise Element of the General
                                                                         Plan”) discusses the relationship between noise and other elements, most importantly
                                                                         the land use and circulation elements (which in Oakland are aggregated as the land use

                                                                                                CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
and transportation element, or LUTE). Appendix C mentions that “a key objective of
the noise element is to provide noise-exposure information for use in the land use
element. When integrated with the noise element, the land use element will show
acceptable land uses in relation to existing and projected noise contours.” Regarding the
circulation element, Appendix C states that “the circulation system must be correlated
with the land use element and is one of the major sources of noise. Noise exposure will
thus be a decisive factor in the location and design of new transportation facilities and
the possible mitigation of noise from existing facilities in relation to existing and planned
land uses.” Appendix C goes on to state that “the local planning agency may wish to
review the circulation and land use elements simultaneously to assess their compatibility
with the noise element.”
As recommended by Appendix C of the General Plan Guidelines, Oakland’s noise element
provides noise-exposure information—in the form of noise contours (Â CHAPTER 4) and
                                                                                                                               3 | Introduction
a land use-noise compatibility matrix (Â CHAPTER 5)—to inform land-use decisions. (The
matrix illustrates the degree of acceptability of exposing specified land uses, including
sensitive land uses, to a range of ambient-noise levels, as indicated on the noise contour
maps.) Also, the noise element acknowledges that transportation is the main source of
noise in Oakland, and correlates noise levels with the layout of the transportation system
in the form of noise contour (Â CHAPTER 4). It should be mentioned that the LUTE
contains noise-related policies on public nuisances and nuisances from incompatible
land uses, the impact of truck traffic on residential neighborhoods, the development of
new transportation infrastructure, the development of sites near the seaport and airport
and along airport flight paths, and the location of entertainment and large-scale
commercial activities. In addition, the open space, conservation and recreation element
contains policy statements addressing the provision of landscape as noise screens along
freeways (Â APPENDIX A).

                   NOISE ELEMENT
Introduction | 4
                                   This page intentionally left blank
2 | NOISE PRIMER
Description When an object vibrates, it radiates part of its energy as acoustic pressure
in the form of sound waves. Noise can be thought of as sound that is intrusive,
annoying or otherwise unwanted. Sound, and noise, can be described in terms of three
technical variables:
● AMPLITUDE, OR LOUDNESS, which is the difference in pressure between the peak and the
   trough of a sound wave; it is measured in decibels.
● FREQUENCY, OR PITCH, which is the number of cycles of a sound wave per unit of time;
   pitch rises as the number of cycles increases and drops as it decreases.
● TIME PATTERN. Sounds can be continuous (as that of a waterfall), fluctuating (traffic
   throughout the day), intermittent (the ringing of a phone) or impulsive (a handclap).
Measurement         Ambient, or community, noise is measured in decibels using the Â A-  Â The human ear is not equally sensitive to all
weighted sound-pressure scale (dBA). The normal range of human hearing extends           frequencies of the sound spectrum. The A-
                                                                                         weighting scale adjusts sound levels to correspond
from 0 dBA to about 140 dBA (Â TABLE 1, next page). Because sound can vary in            to the human hearing response by de-
intensity by over one trillion times within the range of human hearing, decibels are     emphasizing the very low and very high sound
measured on a logarithmic scale, which compresses this range into a manageable set of    frequencies that fall outside the human hearing
numbers. On the logarithmic scale, sound intensity increases exponentially, so that ten  range.
decibels represents ten times more acoustic energy than one decibel but 20 decibels
represents 100 more acoustic energy and 30 decibels, 1,000 times more. Also, noise
sources do not combine in a simple additive fashion: if two sources produce noise levels

                   NOISE ELEMENT
                                   of 50 dBA each, combining them would produce a noise level of only 53 dBA, not 100
                                   dBA (that is, a doubling in the amount of sound energy produces only a 3 dBA change).
                                   RANGE OF HUMAN HEARING                                                                            TABLE 1
                                     NOISE SOURCE OR ENVIRONMENT                 NOISE                      LOUDNESS LEVEL
                                        (DISTANCE OR LOCATION)                 LEVEL, DBA                (COMPARED TO 70 DBA)
                                                                                   140           Deafening; eardrums bleed
                                                                               g 130             Threshold of pain (64 times louder)
                                               Jet takeoff (at 200 feet)
                                                                                                 Threshold of physical discomfort (32
                                                                               g 120
                                       Fire engine siren (100 ft), near                          times louder)
                                      stage at rock concert, table saw
                                                                               g 110             Extremely loud (16 times louder)
                                             Passing train (at platform),
Noise Primer | 6
                                                    unmuffled motorcycle
                                                                               g 100             Very loud (8 times louder)
                                      Pile driver, jackhammer (50 ft),
                                              airliner (under flight path)                       Loud; hearing damage from prolonged
                                                                               g   90
                                      Freeway traffic (100 ft), passing                          exposure (4 times louder)
                                                   truck, vacuum cleaner                         Loud; annoying and highly intrusive
                                                                               g   80
                                     Passing bus (on sidewalk), street                           (twice as loud)
                                                            traffic (100 ft)                     Moderately loud; intrusive; telephone
                                                                               g   70
                                     Dishwasher, AC unit, passing car                            use is difficult (reference loudness)
                                                             (on sidewalk)
                                                                               g   60            Moderate (half as loud)
                                       Normal conversation, light auto
                                           traffic (100 ft), office setting                      Quiet; threshold of interference with
                                                                               g   50
                                                    In typical living room,                      human speech (1/4 as loud)
                                                        background music                         Very quiet; threshold of interference
                                                                               g   40
                                     In library or in bedroom at night,                          with sleep (1/8 as loud)
                                                               soft whisper
                                                                               g   30            Faint (1/16 as loud)
                                      Rustling leaves, inside recording
                                                                      studio
                                                                               g   20            Very faint
                                                       Human breathing
                                                                               g   10            Very faint; just audible
                                                                                    0            Threshold of normal hearing
                                                                                        Compiled by City of Oakland staff from various sources
                                   Human perception        Because of the physical characteristics of noise transmission and
                                   of noise reception by humans, the relative loudness of sounds does not closely match
                                   the actual amounts of sound energy. A change in ambient noise levels of 1-2 dBA is not
                                   audible even to sensitive receptors; a change of 3 dBA (twice the sound energy) is
                                                                                                            CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
considered a just-noticeable difference; a change of at least 5 dBA is necessary to elicit a
noticeable change in response by the community; and it takes a change of 10 dBA to be
perceived as a doubling in loudness. From this, it can be inferred that a reduction in
community noise levels of 5-10 dBA is necessary to appease noise-related complaints.
Time-sensitive measurement            The intrusiveness of noise depends not only on            Â For CNEL, penalties are +5 dBA for readings
loudness but also on frequency, duration and time of day it occurs. To better gauge the         made in the 7-10 pm period and +10 dBA for
                                                                                                readings in the 10 pm-7 am period. For Ldn, there
impact to the community, ambient noise is measured over periods of time rather than at          is only a penalty of +10 dBA during the 10 pm-7
a given moment. The “equivalent sound level” (Leq) can be thought of as the steady-             am period. In practice, Ldn and CNEL values are
state, or average, A-weighted sound level over a measurement period, typically one, eight       considered equivalent, as they rarely differ by
or 24 hours. The “community noise equivalent level” (CNEL) and “day/night average               more than 1 dBA.
sound level” (Ldn) are measures of the 24-hour Leq reading at a given location with Â
upward decibel adjustments, or penalties, to account for people’s increased sensitivity to
noise during the evening, night and morning. Lmax and Lmin are the maximum and
                                                                                                                                                    7 | Noise Primer
minimum noise levels during a measurement period, while Ln refers to the sound level
exceeded over a percentage “n” of the measurement period (for example, an L75 of 60
dBA indicates that the sound level exceeded 60 dBA 75 percent of the time).
Sources       Noise sources are classified as either stationary (or point) sources or as
mobile sources. Common stationary sources include commercial and industrial
equipment and activities (air compressors, generators and gas venting, for example);
construction activities; car stereos and alarms; sporting and other entertainment events;
and residential equipment and activities such as stereos, barking dogs, power tools and
air-conditioning units. Stationary sources usually affect only small areas immediately
adjacent to the source. Mobile sources—especially cars and trucks—are the most
common and significant sources of noise in most communities. Because they stem from
transportation activities, mobile sources often affect large areas along transportation
corridors. The three main types of mobile noise sources are ground motor vehicles
(including cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles and, more recently, motorized scooters),
aircraft, and freight and passenger rail traffic. Traffic noise is generated by tire friction
and wind resistance, and also by engines, mufflers, horns and sirens (in the case of
emergency vehicles). Traffic noise levels depend on the speed of traffic and the
percentage of trucks and, to a lesser extent, on traffic volume.
Propagation and attenuation         Sound propagates, or travels outward, from its
source in waves of acoustic pressure. The pattern of propagation is related to the
geometry of the sound source. Sound from “point” sources (such as a piece of

                   NOISE ELEMENT
                                   industrial equipment) propagates in a spherical pattern around the point. Sound from
                                   sources with a linear pattern (such as a moving train or a line of closely spaced moving
                                   cars) propagates in a cylindrical pattern parallel to the line. Finally, sound from sources
                                   with a quasi-linear pattern (which is between a point and a line, such as moving cars
                                   spaced far apart), propagates in a hybrid pattern between that of a sphere and a cylinder.
                                   As the sound travels away from its source, it also attenuates, or drops off in loudness.
                                   For each doubling of distance, noise levels attenuate by approximately 6 dBA from point
                                   sources, 4.5 dBA from quasi-line sources and 3 dBA from line sources.
                                   Effects on people      Noise can have significant effects on physical and mental human
                                   health and well-being. Adverse impacts and effects include interference with speech and
                                   other forms of communication such as television and radio; sleep disruption; negative
                                   mood and behavioral changes; and hearing loss (usually temporary and caused by
                                   occupational, rather than environmental, noise). Sleep disruption and interference with
Noise Primer | 8
                                   communication are the main sources of noise-related community complaints. It should
                                   be mentioned that people’s tolerance to annoyance from noise is highly subjective,
                                   varying greatly among individuals.
                                   Noise mitigation         Noise impacts can be reduced by controlling the level of noise
                                   generation at the source, through site- and building-design techniques at the noise
                                   receptor, and by modifying the sound transmission path between source and receptor:
                                   ● AT THE SOURCE: The Federal and state governments establish uniform noise-emission
                                      standards for mobile sources and industrial and consumer machinery, while local
                                      governments may set limits on the operations of those sources and also adopt
                                      decibel-based noise-exposure guidelines for different land uses (Â next section).
                                   ● AT THE RECEPTOR: Noise can be reduced by using wall sound insulation and sound-
                                      rated doors and windows; by fitting doors and windows properly and sealing
                                      openings and joints; and by locating openings in recognition of nearby noise sources
                                      (however, air conditioning might be needed for adequate ventilation).
                                   ● TRANSMISSION PATH: Barriers and buffers can be used to lessen noise. Reduction of
                                      traffic noise, for example, can be accomplished by placing walls or landscaped berms
                                      next to roadways, by re-routing traffic, by prohibiting residential development near
                                      major thoroughfares, and by designing building setbacks or other site features that
                                      orient dwelling units and outdoor areas away from traffic.

3 | INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
Federal      Based on its authority to regulate interstate commerce, Congress enacted the
1972 Noise Control Act (NCA) to provide noise-level standards for transportation,
industrial and commercial equipment. Among other provisions, the NCA specifically
reaffirmed earlier preemption by federal agencies over aircraft-noise control by state and
local governments. In 1990, the Airport Noise and Capacity Act again preempted state
and local authority by extending Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) authority over
flight patterns, landing and departure times, and other operational aspects of public and
private airports and heliports. The act grandfathered existing local ordinances
controlling noise at airports, but it requires that new regulations receive FAA approval.
State The Â California noise insulation standards regulate the maximum allowable           Â California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2.
interior noise level in new multi-unit buildings (such as apartment buildings and hotels)  Title 24, Part 2 is published by the International
                                                                                           Code Council, a non-governmental organization
by specifying the extent to which walls, doors and floor/ceiling assemblies must absorb    with sole publication and distribution rights. It
sound. The standards establish a threshold of 45 dBA (CNEL) for noise from exterior        may be examined free of charge at one of many
sources in any habitable room with doors and windows closed, and require preparation       “depository libraries” throughout the state, which
of an acoustical analysis for units proposed in areas with ambient-noise levels of 60 dBA  are listed on the website of the Building Standards
                                                                                           Commission.
or greater to ensure that the threshold is not exceeded. In Oakland, the standards are
enforced by the Building Services Division of the Community and Economic
Development Agency (CEDA).

                               NOISE ELEMENT
                                      Â California Vehicle Code, §27000-27007,       The state has established Â regulations—enforced by the California Highway Patrol or
                                             §27150-27159 and §27200-27207.          local law-enforcement agencies—which set limits on the operation of vehicle horns,
                                                                                     sirens, and mufflers and exhaust systems, and which set maximum noise levels at which
                                                                                     cars, trucks and motorcycles can be operated. The Â California airport noise regulations
                               Â California Code of Regulations, Title 21, §5000,
                                                                           et seq.
                                                                                     provide noise standards governing the operation of aircraft and aircraft engines for
                                                                                     airports in the state (in California, federal and state airport-related regulations are
                                                                                     enforced by Caltrans).
                                                                                     California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)                  This state law requires public
                                                                                     agencies such as the City of Oakland to identify any significant environmental effects of
                                                                                     their “actions,” including their approval of development projects, and to mitigate such
                                                                                     effects if feasible. When evaluating projects under CEQA, the City considers the
                                                                                     potential for a project to, among other things, expose persons to, excessive noise levels
                                                                                     or to result in a substantial increase in ambient noise levels .
Institutional Framework | 10
                                 California Public Utilities Code, §21670-21679.5    County        Â State law requires the establishment of airport land use commissions
                                                                                     (ALUCs) at the county level. The main role of the ALUCs is to develop airport land-use
                                                                                     plans (ALUPs) to advise cities and counties on the orderly expansion of public airports
                                                                                     over a 20-year horizon and on minimizing land-use conflicts with surrounding areas
                                                                                     over the issues of noise and building heights. Cities and counties must generally refer
                                                                                     general plans, zoning ordinances and land-use development proposals near airports and
                                                                                     heliports to the ALUC for determination of consistency with the ALUP. In Alameda
                                                                                     County, the county’s Community Development Agency acts as the ALUC, monitoring
                                                                                     Oakland International Airport, Hayward Executive Airport and Livermore Municipal
                                                                                     Airport; it last adopted an ALUP for the county in 1986.
                                            Oakland Municipal Code, 17.120.050       Oakland        The Oakland Municipal Code contains numerous regulations related to
                               (“Performance Standards—Noise”); and 8.18.010         noise. The most important are the Â noise performance standards and the nuisance
                               (“Excessive and annoying noises prohibited”) and
                                      8.18.020 (“Persistent noises a nuisance”).
                                                                                     noise ordinance. The noise performance standards establish maximum noise levels
                                                                                     generated by certain activities “across real property lines” which may be received by
                                                                                     residential, commercial, manufacturing and other specified land uses. The standards also
                                                                                     establish maximum noise levels for both short- and long-term construction and
                                                                                     demolition activities, and for residential air-conditioning units, residential and
                                                                                     commercial refrigeration units, and commercial exhaust systems. The nuisance noise
                                                                                     ordinance generally prohibits “excessive or annoying” noise.

                                                                                                         CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
In general, noise complaints related to the performance standards are enforced by
CEDA’s Code Enforcement Division while complaints related to “nuisance” noise—
yelling, loud music or barking dogs, for example—are investigated by the Oakland
Police Department (OPD also enforces noise regulations related to ground motor
vehicles). In addition, the City uses the zoning ordinance and the conditional-use permit
process to limit the hours of operation for noise-producing activities and to identify
noise-abatement requirements. In some cases, the discretionary review procedures in
the zoning regulations—such as the use permit requirement for certain activities—
provide the means for case-by-case review of potentially noisy uses.
OAK     Oakland International Airport (OAK) has established noise-abatement policies        OAK’s noise report hotline received 3,291 noise-
and procedures regarding runway use, aircraft operation and flight patterns. The airport    related complaints in 2003. Of these, the vast
                                                                                            majority (2,731 complaints, or 83 percent) came
also operates an internal noise management office which administers a variety of noise-     from Fremont and Alameda callers; Oakland
management programs: computerized systems to monitor airport-related noise levels in        callers represented just over 1.3 percent of the
                                                                                                                                                   11 | Institutional Framework
surrounding communities, sound-insulation programs for residences affected by airport       total (43 complaints). The hotline’s phone
noise, “flying quietly” education provided to pilots, periodic public meetings to address   number is 510/577.4194; the hotline is generally
                                                                                            staffed weekdays from 8:30 am to 5 pm (at other
community concerns over noise, online information on runway use and operations and          times, messages are recorded).
Bay Area air-traffic patterns, and a Â noise report hotline.
                                                                                            “The Oakland Police Department receives many
                                                                                            complaints about barking dogs… Owners of
                                                                                            barking dogs may be in violation of the Oakland
                                                                                            Municipal Code. Violations are punishable by law
                                                                                            and owners or keepers of animals creating a
                                                                                            nuisance may be required to pay a fine. The
                                                                                            Oakland Police Department investigates all
                                                                                            complaints of barking dogs in the City of Oakland.
                                                                                            To file a complaint or for further information, call
                                                                                            the Oakland Police Department at 415/777.3333
                                                                                            24 hours a day, 7 days a week.”
                                                                                            —From the website of the Oakland Animal Shelter
                                                                                            and Animal Control Field Services, a division of
                                                                                            the Oakland Police Department

                               NOISE ELEMENT
Institutional Framework | 12
                                               This page intentionally left blank
4 | LOCAL NOISE ENVIRONMENT
Noise sources           The major noise sources in Oakland, as in most cities, are
transportation activities, specifically motor-vehicle traffic on major thoroughfares, which
generates noise throughout the city continuously; rail operations (including those of the
Bay Area Rapid Transit, or BART), which produce significant noise levels intermittently
along railroad alignments; and operations at Oakland International Airport (OAK),
which produce intermittent noise along flight paths. Finally, while a number of
industrial noise sources exist throughout the city (mostly in West and East Oakland)
which generate noise levels above those of their surroundings, none generates sufficient
noise to affect the city’s overall noise environment.
Technical study In 2004, as part of updating the noise element, the City of Oakland
retained the noise consulting firm of Illingworth & Rodkin to evaluate the city’s noise
environment. The firm conducted a city-wide noise-monitoring survey in August 2004
(supplemented with results from project-specific noise studies conducted previously in
Oakland) and presented the results in a report dated December 2004. Much of the
information contained in this chapter of the noise element is derived from the
Illingworth & Rodkin report. (More detailed information can be found in the report
itself, which forms part of the noise element by reference, and which is available from
the City.)

                               NOISE ELEMENT
                                               Noise monitoring survey          As mentioned above, Illingworth & Rodkin conducted a
                                               city-wide noise-monitoring survey on August 17-24, 2004 to determine the local noise
                                               environment. Noise levels were measured long-term (for 24 hours) at 12 locations in
                                               the city, and short-term (for 1 hour) at 11 additional locations. These 23 measurements
                                               were supplemented with results from 14 noise studies conducted by others between
                                               1999 and 2003 for specific development projects in Oakland (Â FIGURE 1 for noise-
                                               measurement locations). Â A PPENDIX B contains tables summarizing information related
                                               to the long-term measurements (Â TABLE B-1), the short-term measurements (Â TABLE B-
                                               2), and the previously conducted measurements (Â TABLE B-3). The measurements
                                               captured noise from a variety of both mobile and stationary sources.
                                               Roadway noise Illingworth & Rodkin used Caltrans’ noise prediction model LeqV2
                                               to develop noise contours (measured in Ldn) for the major traffic thoroughfares in
                                               Oakland (including the state and interstate freeways), employing traffic data obtained
Local Noise Environment | 14
                                               from various government agencies. The data were input into the traffic noise model for
                                               calibration with the observed noise measurements, and existing noise levels along city
                                               streets and highways were then calculated using the calibrated traffic noise model (noise
                                               levels were estimated at 75 feet from the centerline of major local thoroughfares and 150
                                               feet from the centerline of freeways). Â APPENDIX B contains tables summarizing existing
                                               noise levels and noise levels predicted for the year 2025 along various local streets (Â
                                               TABLE B-4) and freeway segments (Â TABLE B-5). The contours of the future traffic noise
                                               levels are shown on Â FIGURE 2. (Contours of existing traffic noise levels were not
                                               mapped because they would not be distinguishable from future contours, given the
                                               minor changes expected to occur in noise levels over the next 20 years.) As the noise
                                               contour map shows, freeways are the main source of noise in the city, with I-580, I-880,
                                               I-980 and highways 13 and 24 generating the highest noise levels, in excess of 70 Ldn.
                                               It should be noted that given Ldn values, including as expressed in noise contours, are
                                               considered worst-case estimates because noise measurements do not account for noise-
                                               mitigation measures (such as sound walls or berms, building setbacks, and sound-rated
                                               construction methods); for this reason, it can be assumed that areas within a given noise
                                               contour or surrounding a measurement site experience noise at below the measured
                                               levels. It should also be noted that although considerable effort goes into developing
                                               noise contours, the present modeling technology is such that the accuracy of contours is
                                               usually no better than +/− 3 dB; noise contours should, therefore, not be thought of as
                                               absolute lines of demarcation on a map (such as topographical contours) but rather as
                                               bands of similar noise exposure.

                                                                                                          CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
Railroad noise       There are two Union Pacific railroad right-of-ways in the city, both
following north-south alignments. The two lines are parallel and near each other,
contributing to cumulatively higher noise levels on the parcels between them. A typical
train traveling at 25 mph may produce noise levels in excess of 95 dBA at a distance of
100 feet from the tracks, while train horns may approach 110 dBA. Brakes, coupling
impacts and crossing guard warnings are additional common sources of noise along a
railroad corridor. The aboveground BART lines—through West Oakland, along East
8th Street/East 12th Street/San Leandro Boulevard, along Highway 24, and along Martin
Luther King Jr Way—are additional noise sources in the city. A typical BART train
produces a noise level of 85 dBA at 100 feet (noise levels are lower near the stations due
to the slower speeds of approaching and departing trains). BART trains run frequently
through Oakland, at a combined rate of about 40 per hour on all lines during the
daytime on weekdays and about 20 per hour during the early morning and evening on
                                                                                                                                                 15 | Local Noise Environment
weekdays and during the weekend and holidays.
Using data collected for the San Leandro general plan update in 2000, Illingworth &
Rodkin estimated noise levels along the Union Pacific and BART track alignments
(including from train warning whistles) through Oakland. Distances from track
centerlines to various Ldn levels are shown on Â TABLE B-6, while the noise contours are
shown on Â FIGURE 3. (It should be remembered that noise generated by trains is
intermittent, unlike noise from motor-vehicle traffic, which is continuous.) Given the
unavailability of data regarding future railroad and BART operations, predicted future
noise levels and noise contours along the rail corridors have not been prepared.
Aircraft noise       Â FIGURE 4, obtained from Oakland International Airport (OAK),          Because the community noise equivalent level
shows the noise contours, measured in Â CNEL, for existing overflight and ground             (CNEL) is the noise metric specified in the State
                                                                                             Aeronautics Code, aircraft noise in California is
airport operations (from the fourth quarter of 2004; it should be noted that noise from      described in terms of CNEL. CNEL is roughly
aircraft overflights is intermittent while noise from ground operations is relatively        equivalent to the day/night average sound level
continuous). Â FIGURE 5, from the 1996 EIS/EIR for the Port of Oakland’s proposed            (Ldn) but includes a 5 dBA upward adjustment for
Airport Development Plan, shows the predicted CNEL contours from airport                     the evening hours (7-10 pm).
operations in the year 2010. As the maps show, noise impacts from airport operations
are experienced primarily at the airport, over water, and over small areas of Bay Farm
Island.
Future noise levels The noise element must analyze and quantify, to the extent
practicable, both current and projected noise levels for the major sources of community

                               NOISE ELEMENT
                                               noise. As described above, noise levels were predicted for the year 2025 along various
                                               local streets (Â TABLE B-4) and freeway segments (Â TABLE B-5) based on traffic data
                                               obtained from various government agencies. The contours of the future traffic noise
                                               levels are shown on Â FIGURE 2. (For the noise element, the City chose a time horizon
                                               of 20 years from the document’s expected publication in 2005. While traffic studies
                                               commonly have two time horizons—10 and 20 years—community noise levels in a
                                               built-out city like Oakland would not change sufficiently in ten years to also justify this
                                               earlier time horizon. As mentioned earlier, contours of existing traffic noise levels were
                                               not mapped because they would not be distinguishable from future contours, given the
                                               minor changes expected to occur in noise levels over the next 20 years.) Future noise
                                               levels were not predicted along rail corridors because there is no reliable data on how
                                               railroad and BART operations will change over the next 20 years. Finally, Â FIGURE 5,
                                               shows the predicted CNEL contours from airport operations in the year 2010 (there is
                                               no reliable data for predicting airport noise contours for the year 2025).
Local Noise Environment | 16

                                                                                   CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
EXISTING (2003) CNEL NOISE CONTOURS FOR OAKLAND INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT OPERATIONS    FIGURE 4
                                                                                                                  17 | Local Noise Environment
Source: Metropolitan Oakland International Airport
                               NOISE ELEMENT
                                               FUTURE (2003) CNEL NOISE CONTOURS FOR OAKLAND INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT OPERATIONS                                               FIGURE 5
Local Noise Environment | 18
                                                    Source: Port of Oakland Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report; US Army Corps of Engineers, September 10, 1996
5 | NOISE-LAND USE
COMPATIBILITY
A key purpose of the noise contour maps in the noise element is to provide a basis for
determining the acceptability of proposed land uses at their proposed sites. To help
accomplish this, the California Department of Health Services developed receiver-based
noise-compatibility guidelines, in the form of a matrix, for various land uses. The matrix
illustrates the degree of acceptability of exposing specified land uses (including sensitive
land uses) to a range of ambient-noise levels, as indicated on the noise contour maps.
As part of the noise element update, the City of Oakland is adopting a version of the
guidelines matrix (Â FIGURE 6, at the end of this chapter). The matrix, in conjunction
with the noise contour maps (Â FIGURES 2-3, in Chapter 4) and when appropriate, site-
specific noise assessments, should be used by the City when considering proposed
development projects in order to gauge the acceptability of a proposed project (that is,
its compatibility with noise levels at the proposed site).
The California General Plan Guidelines is of the opinion that the matrix criteria “require a
rather broad interpretation.” For one thing, noise contours should be thought of as
bands of similar noise exposure, rather than as absolute lines of demarcation, due to the
limited accuracy of existing noise modeling technology; for another, noise contours
should be considered worst-case estimates because noise measurements do not account
for noise-mitigation measures. In addition, the evaluation of proposed land uses for
noise compatibility should, in general, include many factors. These include the type of

                                    NOISE ELEMENT
                                                    noise source, the sensitivity of the noise receptor, the noise reduction likely to be
                                                    provided by structures, the degree to which the noise source may interfere with speech,
                                                    sleep or other activities characteristic of the land use, seasonal variations in noise source
                                                    levels, existing outdoor ambient levels, general societal attitudes towards the noise
                                                    source, prior history of the source, and tonal characteristics of the source. To the extent
                                                    that any of these factors can be evaluated, the measured or computed noise exposure
                                                    values may be adjusted in order to more accurately assess local sentiments towards
                                                    acceptable noise exposure.
                                                    Conventional contemporary construction methods and materials decrease outdoor noise
                                                    by 12-18 dB (with partially open windows). At the same time, according to common
                                                    practice, the following are the maximum interior noise levels generally considered
                                                    acceptable for various common land uses:
                                                    ● 45 dB: residential, hotels, motels, transient lodging, institutional (churches, hospitals,
Noise-Land Use Compatibility | 20
                                                       classrooms, libraries), movie theaters
                                                    ● 50 dB: professional offices, research and development, auditoria, meeting halls
                                                    ● 55 dB: retail, banks, restaurants, sports clubs
                                                    ● 65 dB: manufacturing, warehousing
                                                    Taking residential uses as an example, the above information implies that an ambient
                                                    noise level of 60 dB is the threshold of a “normally acceptable” environment for
                                                    residences (maximum interior noise level of 45 dB plus average noise mitigation of 15
                                                    dB). Higher ambient noise levels would require detailed noise analyses, sound-rated
                                                    construction methods or materials, mechanical ventilation systems (so that windows may
                                                    be kept closed), or noise shielding features such as sound walls, street setbacks and
                                                    thoughtful site planning and building orientation. For example, considering that sound
                                                    walls typically provide noise level reduction of 10 dB, residences could be built in areas
                                                    exposed to noise levels of 70 dB if a suitable sound wall was provided.
                                                    Regarding the noise-land use compatibility guidelines, it is important to keep in mind
                                                    two cautionary principles. First, the guidelines should not be used permissively to allow
                                                    for the degradation of noise levels up to the maximum desired standards: for example, if
                                                    the ambient noise level in an area currently zoned for residential uses is below 60 dB, an
                                                    increase in noise up to that level should not necessarily be allowed. Second, even land
                                                    uses proposed for “normally acceptable” noise environments should be evaluated in
                                                    terms of any potential adverse noise impacts that such proposed projects would have on
                                                    existing land uses nearby.

                                                                                                                          CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
NOISE-LAND USE COMPATIBILITY MATRIX                                                         FIGURE 6
                                                                                                          INTERPRETATION
                                             COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE (LDN OR CNEL, DB)
        LAND USE CATEGORY
                                                55       60       65       70      75       80
                                                                                                          NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE: Development may occur
Residential                                                                                               without an analysis of potential noise impacts to the
                                                                                                          proposed development (though it might still be
                                                                                                          necessary to analyze noise impacts that the project
Transient lodging—motels, hotels                                                                          might have on its surroundings).
Schools, libraries, churches,                                                                             CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE: Development should be
hospitals, nursing homes                                                                                  undertaken only after an analysis of noise-reduction
                                                                                                          requirements is conducted, and if necessary noise-
Auditoriums, concert halls,                                                                               mitigating features are included in the design.
                                                                                                          Conventional construction will usually suffice as long
                                                                                                                                                                     21 | Noise-Land Use Compatibility
amphitheaters
                                                                                                          as it incorporates air conditioning or forced fresh-air-
                                                                                                          supply systems, though it will likely require that
Sports arenas, outdoor spectator                                                                          project occupants maintain their windows closed.
sports
                                                                                                          NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE: Development should
Playgrounds, neighborhood parks
                                                                                                          generally be discouraged; it may be undertaken only
                                                                                                          if a detailed analysis of the noise-reduction
                                                                                                          requirements is conducted, and if highly effective
Golf courses, riding stables, water                                                                       noise insulation, mitigation or abatement features
recreation, cemeteries
                                                                                                          are included in the design.
Office buildings, business
commercial and professional                                                                               CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE: Development should not be
                                                                                                          undertaken.
Industrial, manufacturing, utilities,
agriculture
      Adapted from State of California—General Plan Guidelines, 2003 (Appendix C); Governor’s Office of
                                                                                Planning and Research

                                    NOISE ELEMENT
Noise-Land Use Compatibility | 22
                                                    This page intentionally left blank
6 | POLICY STATEMENTS
Overview At the heart of every general plan element is a set of goals, objectives,
policies, recommendations, strategies, actions and other statements which are often
collectively referred to as policy statements. The purpose of policy statements is to
provide direction for a city or county, and guide the development-related actions and
decisions of its officials. Policy statements attempt to reconcile the diverse interests of a
community, and are normally based on background technical information and issue
analyses developed as part of the general-plan process.
Oakland’s noise element uses a hierarchical, three-layer framework to organize the policy
statements. At the top of the hierarchy are goals, or broad, general ends which the city
desires to achieve by implementing the noise element. The noise element formulates
two goals for the City:
● To protect Oakland’s quality of life and the physical and mental well-being of
   residents and others in the City by reducing the community’s exposure to noise; and
● To safeguard Oakland’s economic welfare by mitigating noise incompatibilities
   among commercial, industrial and residential land uses.
Goals form the basis for policies, the next level of the hierarchy. Policies, which are less
general than goals, identify specific areas in which the city will direct efforts in order to
attain its goals. Below the policies are actions, detailed and implementable steps that, if

                         NOISE ELEMENT
                                         feasible, the city will undertake in order to carry out the policies and, ultimately, the
                                         goals. There is at least one action supporting every policy, and each action lists the city
                                         agency or agencies expected to assume the leading role in implementing that action.
                                         (CEDA refers to the Community and Economic Development Agency, OPD to the
                                         Oakland Police Department, and PWA to the Public Works Agency.) It is important to
                                         note that the actions are underlain by two assumptions. First, the actions are meant to
                                         apply only to those geographic and programmatic areas over which the City of Oakland
                                         has legal authority. Second, the actions will only be implemented if they can be
                                         accomplished successfully given financial, environmental, legal, social and technological
                                         factors.
Policy Statements | 24
                                         POLICY STATEMENTS
                                          POLICY 1             Ensure the compatibility of existing and, especially, of proposed
                                                               development projects not only with neighboring land uses but
                                                               also with their surrounding noise environment.
                                         ● ACTION 1.1: Use    the noise-land use compatibility matrix (Figure 6) in conjunction
                                           with the noise     contour maps (especially for roadway traffic) to evaluate the
                                           acceptability of   residential and other proposed land uses and also the need for
                                           any mitigation      or abatement measures to achieve the desired degree of
                                           acceptability.
                                                                                            f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
                                         ● ACTION 1.2: Continue using the City’s zoning regulations and permit processes to
                                           limit the hours of operation of noise-producing activities which create conflicts
                                           with residential uses and to attach noise-abatement requirements to such
                                           activities.
                                                                                            f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
                                         ● ACTION 1.3: Continue working with the Alameda County Community
                                           Development Agency (in its role as the county’s airport land use commission)
                                           and with the Port of Oakland to ensure consistency with the county’s airport

                                                                                           CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
  land-use plan of the city’s various master-planning documents, zoning
  ordinance and land-use development proposals near Oakland’s airport.
                                                 f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
 POLICY 2          Protect the noise environment by controlling the generation of
                   noise by both stationary and mobile noise sources.
● ACTION 2.1: Review the various noise prohibitions and restrictions under the
  City’s nuisance noise ordinance and revise the ordinance if necessary.
                                                    f OPD BUREAU OF FIELD OPERATIONS
● ACTION 2.2: As resources permit, increase enforcement of noise-related
  complaints and also of vehicle speed limits and of operational noise from cars,
                                                                                                                          25 | Policy Statements
  trucks and motorcycles.
                                                    f OPD BUREAU OF FIELD OPERATIONS
                                                   f CEDA CODE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION
● ACTION 2.3: Encourage the Port of Oakland to continue promoting its noise-
  abatement office and programs for Oakland International Airport.
                                                 f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION
 POLICY 3          Reduce the community’s exposure to noise by minimizing the
                   noise levels that are received by Oakland residents and others in the
                   City. (This policy addresses the reception of noise whereas
                   Policy 2 addresses the generation of noise.)
● ACTION 3.1: Continue to use the building-permit application process to enforce
  the California Noise Insulation Standards regulating the maximum allowable
  interior noise level in new multi-unit buildings.
                                                    f CEDA BUILDING SERVICES DIVISION
● ACTION 3.2: Review the City’s noise performance standards and revise them as
  appropriate to be consistent with City Council policy.
                                                 f CEDA PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION

                         NOISE ELEMENT
                                         ● ACTION 3.3: Demand that Caltrans implement sound barriers, building retrofit
                                           programs and other measures to mitigate to the maximum extent feasible noise
                                           impacts on residential and other sensitive land uses from any new, widened or
                                           upgraded roadways; any new sound barrier must conform with City policies and
                                           standards regarding visual and aesthetic resources and quality.
                                                                                 f PWA TRANSPORTATION SERVICES DIVISION
Policy Statements | 26

7 | RESOURCES
Below is a list of noise-related resources online, including many that were used to
prepare the noise element. It should be kept in mind that a large percentage of Internet
addresses become invalid every year, as web pages cease to exist or are moved to other
locations on the Internet. Nevertheless, it was felt that providing online resources
would be useful because many web pages do remain valid for at least several years and
also because the noise element will be consulted by the public most frequently in the few
months after its publication.
Government agencies
● FAA Office of Environment and Energy, Noise Division: aee.faa.gov/noise
● Oakland Community and Economic Development Agency: oaklandceda.com
● Oakland Police Department: www.oaklandpolice.com
Government resources
● Government information      sources on noise pollution:
   www.libsci.sc.edu/bob/class/clis734/webguides/noise.html
● California law codes: leginfo.ca.gov/calaw.html
● California Code of Regulations: ccr.oal.ca.gov
●  California General Plan Guidelines:
   opr.ca.gov/planning/PDFs/General_Plan_Guidelines_2003.pdf
●  California Environmental Quality Act: ceres.ca.gov/ceqa

                 NOISE ELEMENT
                                 ●   Oakland Municipal Code: bpc.iserver.net/codes/oakland
                                 ●   Oakland International Airport's Noise Management Program:
                                     flyoakland.com/noise/noise_management_pro.shtml
                                 Noise-pollution control advocacy
                                 ● Noise Pollution Clearinghouse: nonoise.org
                                 ● Right to Quiet Society: quiet.org
                                 ● The League for the Hard of Hearing's Noise Center: lhh.org/noise
                                 ● Airport noise law: www.netvista.net/~hpb
Resources | 28

APPENDIX A
NOISE-RELATED POLICY STATEMENTS FROM OTHER ELEMENTS OF THE OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
  FROM THE LAND USE AND TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT                       Policy T1.6: Designating truck routes. An adequate system
                                                                     of roads connecting port terminals, warehouses, freeways and
                                                                     regional arterials, and other important truck destinations should be
Policy I/C4.2: Minimizing nuisances. The potential for new
                                                                     designated. This system should rely upon arterial streets away from
or existing industrial or commercial uses, including seaport and
                                                                     residential neighborhoods (p. 51).
airport activities, to create nuisance impacts on surrounding
residential land uses should be minimized through appropriate
                                                                     Policy T1.7: Routing freeway construction.                  New or
siting and efficient implementation and enforcement of
                                                                     expanded freeway construction should be routed through areas
environmental and development controls (p. 42).
                                                                     containing land uses which can tolerate any anticipated future noise
                                                                     impact, and/or incorporate special design features or traffic
Policy T1.5: Locating truck services.          Truck services should
                                                                     controls which will offset the impact.(p. 51).
be concentrated in areas adjacent to freeways and near the seaport
and airport, while ensuring the attractiveness of the environment
                                                                     Policy T1.8: Re-routing and enforcing truck routes.             The
for visitors, local business, and nearby neighborhoods (p. 51).
                                                                     City should make efforts to re-route traffic away from
                                                                     neighborhoods, wherever possible, and enforce truck route
                                                                     controls (p. 51).
                  NOISE ELEMENT
                                                                                               Policy W6.2: Developing areas adjacent to the airport.
                  Policy T6.1: Posting maximum speeds.              Collector streets          Development of sites proximate to airport flight paths should be in
                  shall be posted at the lowest possible speed (usually a maximum              conformance with Federal and State standards, as articulated in
                  speed of 25 miles per hour), except where a lower speed is dictated          Federal Aviation Regulation, Part 77 and Part 150 ALUC planning
                  by safety and allowable by law (p. 60).                                      guidelines, and any other applicable regulations and amendments
                                                                                               (p. 88).
                  Policy T6.4: Rebuilding freeways. In the event of a major
                  disaster, necessitating reconstruction of the I-880 freeway, it should       Policy W7.1: Developing lands in the vicinity of the
                  be rebuilt below ground in the downtown/Jack London Square                   seaport/airport. Outside the seaport and airport, land should
                  area (p. 60).                                                                be developed with a variety of uses that benefit from the close
                                                                                               proximity to the seaport and airport and that enhance the unique
                  Policy D12.3: Locating entertainment activities.           Large             characteristics of the seaport and airport. These lands should be
                  scale entertainment uses should be encouraged to concentrate in              developed with uses which can buffer adjacent neighborhoods
                  the Jack London Waterfront and within the Broadway corridor                  from impacts related to such activities (p. 88).
Appendix A | 30
                  area. However, existing large scale facilities in the Downtown
                  should be utilized to the fullest extent possible (p. 73).                   Policy N1.4: Locating large-scale commercial activities.
                                                                                               Commercial uses which serve long term retail needs or regional
                  Policy D12.4: Locating smaller scale entertainment                           consumers and which primarily offer high volume goods should be
                  activities. Small scale entertainment uses, such as small clubs,             located in areas visible or amenable to high volumes of traffic.
                  should be allowed to locate in the Jack London Waterfront area               Traffic generated by large scale commercial developments should
                  and to be dispersed throughout downtown districts, provided that             be directed to arterial streets and freeways and not adversely affect
                  the City works with area residents and businesses to manage the              nearby residential streets (p. 104).
                  impacts of such uses (p. 73).
                                                                                               Policy N1.6: Reviewing potential nuisance activities.
                  Policy W1.3: Reducing land use conflicts.                 Land uses and      The City should closely review any proposed new commercial
                  impacts generated from Port or neighborhood activities should be             activities that have the potential to create public nuisance or crime
                  buffered, protecting adjacent residential areas from the impacts of          problems, and should monitor those that are existing. These may
                  seaport, airport, or other industrial uses. Appropriate siting of            include isolated commercial or industrial establishments located
                  industrial activities, buffering (e.g., landscaping, fencing, transitional   within residential areas, alcoholic beverage sales activities
                  uses, etc.), truck traffic management efforts, and other mitigations         (excluding restaurants), adult entertainment, or other entertainment
                  should be used to minimize the impact of incompatible uses (p.               activities (p. 104).
                  78).
                                                                                               Policy    N3.9:      Orienting     residential      development.
                  Policy    W2.2:      Buffering      of   heavy      industrial     uses.
                                                                                               Residential developments should be encouraged to face the street
                  Appropriate buffering measures for heavy industrial uses and                 and to orient their units to desirable sunlight and views, while
                  transportation uses on adjacent residential neighborhoods should             avoiding unreasonably blocking sunlight and views for neighboring
                  be developed and implemented (p. 78).                                        buildings, respecting the privacy needs of residents of the
                                                                                               development and surrounding properties, providing for sufficient
                                                                       CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
conveniently located on-site open space, and avoiding undue noise
exposure (p. 107).
Policy N5.2: Buffering residential areas.         Residential areas
should be buffered and reinforced from conflicting uses through
the establishment of performance-based regulations, the removal
of non-conforming uses, and other tools (p. 109).
Policy N11.4: Alleviating Public Nuisances.             The City
should strive to alleviate public nuisances and unsafe and illegal
activities. Code Enforcement efforts should be given as high a
priority as facilitating the development process. Public nuisance
regulations should be designed to allow community members to
use City codes to facilitate nuisance abatement in their
                                                                                                      31 | Appendix A
neighborhood (p. 114).
 FROM THE OPEN SPACE, CONSERVATION              AND   RECREATION
 ELEMENT
Policy OS-3.6: Open Space Buffers Along Freeways.
Maintain existing open space buffers along Oakland’s freeways to
absorb noise and emissions… (p. 2-29).
● ACTION OS-3.6.1: LANDSCAPE SCREENING ALONG FREEWAYS.
   Require retention of existing landscape screening as a condition
   of development approval for any property adjacent to Highway
   13, Highway 580 (east of Grand), or Highway 24 (above
   Broadway). Encourage Caltrans to include landscape screening
   for any sound wall project in these areas (p. 2-30).
● ACTION OS-3.6.3: FREEWAY BUFFERS.          Encourage Caltrans to
   plant and maintain additional landscaping along Oakland’s
   freeways, particularly those stretches of Interstate 880 adjacent
   to residential neighborhoods and other sensitive receptors (p. 2-
   30).

                  NOISE ELEMENT
Appendix A | 32
                                  This page intentionally left blank
APPENDIX B
TABLES FROM THE TECHNICAL REPORT
See pages that follow
                  NOISE ELEMENT
                  SUMMARY OF LONG-TERM NOISE MONITORING RESULTS                                                           TABLE B-1
                                  LOCATION (DISTANCE, IN FEET, FROM                        DAYTIME NOISE    NIGHTTIME
                   SITE                                                       DATE                                           LDN
                                        CENTERLINE OF ROAD)                                LEVELS (DBA)    NOISE LEVELS
                   LT-1    Hwy 24 (~144 ft), east of Broadway            8/17 to 8/19/04     74 to 80        67 to 78        80
                   LT-2    Skyline Pkwy (~20 ft), at 7293 Skyline Pkwy   8/17 to 8/19/04     55 to 68        32 to 58       61-63
                   LT-3    Hwy 13 (~90 ft), at Monterey and Maiden Ln    8/17 to 8/19/04     67 to 72        57 to 69        72
                   LT-4    Skyline Pkwy (~87 ft), at Mott Pl             8/17 to 8/19/04     52 to 61        42 to 55       57-58
                   LT-5    Fruitvale Av (~87 ft), at Davis St            8/17 to 8/19/04     63 to 67        54 to 63        67
                             th                        nd
                   LT-6    14 Av (~75 ft), at East 22       St           8/17 to 8/19/04     64 to 68        55 to 64        68
                   LT-7    I-580 (~186 ft), at Wesley St                    8/17/04          72 to 73           --           --
Appendix B | 34
                   LT-8    San Leandro St (~30 ft), at the BART tracks   8/23 to 8/24/04     72 to 74       Down to 59       --
                   LT-9    55th Av (~132 ft), at Bancroft Av             8/23 to 8/24/04     64 to 74        55 to 74        72
                                                                 st
                   LT-10   International Blvd (~75 ft), at 81 St         8/23 to 8/24/04     67 to 75        61 to 67        73
                   LT-11   98th St (~81 ft), at E St                     8/23 to 8/24/04     69 to 72        60 to 68        72
                   LT-12   Hegenberger Rd (~81 ft), at Leet              8/23 to 8/24/04     68 to 72        62 to 69        74
                                                                                                              CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
SUMMARY OF SHORT-TERM NOISE MONITORING RESULTS                                                                  TABLE B-2
              LOCATION (DISTANCE, IN FEET, FROM
  SITE                                                   DATE AND TIME       LMAX   LMIN   L1    L10    L50    L90   LEQ
                    CENTERLINE OF ROAD)
 ST-1    MLK Blvd (~84 ft)                            8/18/2004; 10:30 am     96     55    83     73    68     60    74
 ST-2    Alcatraz St (~36 ft), at 620-626 Alcatraz    8/18/2004; 11:10 am     84     48    75     71    65     53    68
 ST-3    Intersection of Grandview and Gravatt        8/18/2004; 11:40 am     66     39    65     55    44     41    53
 ST-4    Moraga (~54 ft), at Harbord Dr               8/18/2004; 12:15 am     74     45    72     70    63     55    65
 ST-5    Pleasant Valley Av (~63 ft), at Home St      8/18/2004; 12:40 am     78     54    76     72    66     60    68
 ST-6    Shepard Canyon Rd (~63 ft), at Paso Robles   8/18/2004; 2:00 am      77     41    70     63    52     44    59
 ST-7    Park (~63 ft), at Everett                    8/23/2004; 2:00 am      78     46    76     71    64     53    67
                                                                                                                                             35 | Appendix B
 ST-8    Lincoln (~42 ft), at Burlington              8/23/2004; 2:20 am      83     42    77     67    56     46    65
 ST-9    35th Av (~69 ft), at Harbor View             8/23/2004; 2:50 am      88     50    80     71    63     55    69
 ST-10   Redwood Rd (~66 ft), at Via Rialto           8/24/2004; 12:00 am     76     48    74     70    61     52    65
 ST-11   Golf Links Rd (~71 ft), at Dunkirk Av        8/24/2004; 12:40 am     73     39    68     63    52     44    58
During short-term measurements, vehicular traffic on the street network was the dominant noise source; however, there were
contributions from overflight aircraft at ST-4, ST-5, ST-6, ST-8 and ST-11. Aircraft at ST-5 and ST-8 generated maximum
levels of 70 dBA.
                  NOISE ELEMENT
                  SUMMARY OF PREVIOUSLY CONDUCTED NOISE MEASUREMENTS                                                                                         TABLE B-3
                                                                   NOISE LEVEL   DISTANCE
                                  LOCATION              DURATION                                    MAJOR NOISE SOURCE                   SOURCE OF INFORMATION
                                                                     (DBA)        (FEET)
                  Oak & 4th Street                      24 Hour      71 Ldn      Fence line   Traffic on Oak Street                  ESA, 1999
                  Telegraph Ave & 32nd St               24 Hour     71 CNEL         50        Traffic on Telegraph Ave               ESA, 2000
                  NE corner of MacArthur BART           24 Hour     72 CNEL          *        Traffic on I-580, BART                 ESA, 2000
                  MLK Jr Way btwn Apgar & 39th St          *         65 Leq         60        I-580, BART, MLK Jr Way traffic        ESA, 2000
                  62nd St btwn San Pablo & Marshall        *         60 Leq         25        Traffic on 62nd and San Pablo          ESA, 2000
                  San Pablo & 16th                       30 Min     63 CNEL         30        Traffic on San Pablo Ave               Lamphier & Associates, 2000
                  16th & Clay                            30 Min     62 CNEL         30        Traffic on 16th Street                 Lamphier & Associates, 2000
                  16th Street btwn Jefferson and Clay    30 Min     61 CNEL         30        Traffic on 16th Street                 Lamphier & Associates, 2000
Appendix B | 36
                  17th Street btwn MLK and Jefferson     30 Min     66 CNEL         30        Traffic on 17th Street                 Lamphier & Associates, 2000
                  9th St                                24 Hour     65 CNEL          *        Traffic on 9th St                      Charles Salter & Associates, 2000
                  8th St                                24 Hour     66 CNEL          *        Traffic on 8th St                      Charles Salter & Associates, 2000
                  Jefferson St.                         24 Hour     71 CNEL          *        Traffic on Jefferson St.               Charles Salter & Associates, 2000
                  Clay St.                              24 Hour     71 CNEL          *        Traffic on Clay St.                    Charles Salter & Associates, 2000
                  Vernon Street north of Bay Place      24 Hour      58 Ldn         60        Traffic on Vernon Street               ESA, 2000
                  Bay Place                              15 Min     64 peak         30        Traffic on Bay Place                   ESA, 2000
                  Harrison Street                        15 Min     66 peak         55        Traffic on Harrison Street             ESA, 2000
                  3rd/Broadway, NW Corner                15 Min    70 peak am    Sidewalk     I-880, railroad, local traffic         Jones & Stokes, 2001
                  3rd/Broadway, NW Corner                15 Min    67 Peak pm    Sidewalk     I-880, railroad, local traffic         Jones & Stokes, 2001
                  3rd/Broadway, SW Corner                15 Min    66 peak am    Sidewalk     I-880, railroad, local traffic         Jones & Stokes, 2001
                  3rd/Broadway, SW Corner                15 Min    68 peak pm    Sidewalk     I-880, railroad, local traffic         Jones & Stokes, 2001
                  3rd/Franklin NW Corner                 15 Min    69 peak am    Sidewalk     I-880, railroad, local traffic         Jones & Stokes, 2001
                  3rd/Franklin NW Corner                 15 Min    66 peak pm    Sidewalk     I-880, railroad, local traffic         Jones & Stokes, 2001
                  2nd/Broadway, SW Corner                15 Min    69 peak am    Sidewalk     I-880, railroad, local traffic         Jones & Stokes, 2001
                  2nd/Broadway, SW Corner                15 Min    69 peak pm    Sidewalk     I-880, railroad, local traffic         Jones & Stokes, 2001
                  Pine Street & Gross Street            24 Hour     68 CNEL          *        I-880, local traffic, BART, aircraft   G. Borchard & Associates, 2001
                  1109 Wood Street btwn 11th & 12th     24 Hour     64 CNEL          *        Local traffic, aircraft, I-880         G. Borchard & Associates, 2001
                                                                                                                  CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
                                                 NOISE LEVEL    DISTANCE
              LOCATION                DURATION                                      MAJOR NOISE SOURCE                 SOURCE OF INFORMATION
                                                   (DBA)         (FEET)
So. side of 3rd St near Tower Lofts   24 Hour      68 Ldn           *         I-880, local traffic                 Charles Salter & Associates, 2001
I-880 Freeway (South of Oak Street)   24 Hour     75 CNEL          500        Traffic on I-880                     Lamphier-Gregory, 2002
Foothill Boulevard (At 68th Ave)      24 Hour     69 CNEL          50         Traffic on Foothill Blvd             Lamphier-Gregory, 2002
MacArthur Blvd (South of 90th Ave)    24 Hour     70 CNEL          50         Traffic on MacArthur Blvd            Lamphier-Gregory, 2000
San Pablo Avenue (at 32nd Street)      15 Min     69 CNEL          50         Traffic on San Pablo Ave             Lamphier-Gregory, 2003
West Grand Avenue (at Chestnut St)     15 Min     71 CNEL          50         Traffic on West Grand Ave            Lamphier-Gregory, 2003
Mandela Parkway (at 17th Street)       15 Min     64 CNEL          50         Traffic on Mandela Parkway           Lamphier-Gregory, 2003
16th Street (West of Wood Street)     24 Hour     66 CNEL           *         Traffic on 16th Street               Lamphier-Gregory, 2003
Peralta Street (at 8th Street)         15 Min     69 CNEL          50         Traffic on Peralta Street            Lamphier-Gregory, 2003
                                                                                                                                                       37 | Appendix B
                                                                                          th
7th Street (at Mandela Parkway)        15 Min     72 CNEL          50         Traffic on 7 Street                  Lamphier-Gregory, 2003
Alice St, entrance to 'The Landing'   24 Hour    66-67 Ldn         40         Amtrak activity and local traffic    ESA, 2003
Embarcadero near Alice St             24 Hour    72-73 Ldn     150 (Amtrak)   Amtrak activity and local traffic    ESA, 2003
                  NOISE ELEMENT
                  CALCULATED TRAFFIC NOISE LEVELS FOR MAJOR LOCAL ROADWAYS                                                                              TABLE B-4
                                                                                                       DISTANCE (FT) TO NOISE            DISTANCE (FT) TO NOISE
                                                                                           EXISTING        CONTOUR FROM                      CONTOUR FROM
                                                                                                                              FUTURE LDN
                                                                                             LDN          ROADWAY CENTER                    ROADWAY CENTER
                                                                                                                              (AT 75 FT)
                                                                                          (AT 75 FT)
                            STREET NAME                 FROM                       TO                  70 LDN 65 LDN 60 LDN              70 LDN 65 LDN 60 LDN
                        th                     th                     st
                   14            / Beaumont   8 St                  21 St                    65          *      80     170       66         *      90      190
                        th                              th                    th
                   14            / Beaumont   East 24 St            East 27 St               67          50     100    210       67        50     100      220
                   23rd Ave                   East 7th St           12th St                  68          60     120    260       69        60     140      300
                   23rd Ave                   29th Ave              East 7th St              68          60     120    260       69        60     140      300
                   35th Ave                   Foothill Blvd         East 14th St             60          *       *      70       61         *      *        90
                        th
                   35            Ave          MacArthur Blvd        Foothill Blvd            66          *      80     180       66         *      90      190
                        nd                                            th
                   42            Ave          Foothill Blvd (S)     14 St                    67          50     110    240       66         *      90      190
Appendix B | 38
                   51st St                    Shattuck Ave          Telegraph Ave            61          *       *      80       61         *      *        90
                        st
                   51 St                      Telegraph Ave         Broadway                 67          50     100    210       67        50     100      220
                   66th Ave                   Oakport St            San Leandro St           66          *      80     180       66         *      90      190
                   73rd Ave                   Bancroft Ave          MacArthur Blvd           69          60     130    280       70        70     160      350
                        rd
                   73            Ave          International Blvd    MacArthur Blvd           71          90     190    410       72       100     220      470
                   73rd Ave                   Arthur St             Bancroft Ave             71          80     180    380       72       100     220      470
                       th
                   7        St                Fallon St             Fifth Ave                63          *      50     120       65         *      70      160
                   7th St                     Wood St               Market St                66          *      90     190       67        50     100      220
                   98th Ave                   Bancroft Ave          Golf Links Rd            66          *      90     180       65         *      70      160
                            th
                   98            Ave          San Leandro St        Bancroft Ave             65          *      80     160       66         *      90      190
                   98 th Ave                  I-880 (E)             San Leandro St           67          50     110    230       68        60     120      260
                   Alcatraz Ave               Telegraph Ave         Berkeley city limit      64          *      60     140       68        60     120      260
                   Alcatraz Ave               Berkeley city limit   Shattuck Ave             60          *       *      80       61         *      *        90
                   Bancroft Ave               Seminary Ave          Havenscourt Blvd         60          *       *      80       62         *      50      100
                                                                      rd
                   Bancroft Ave               Havenscourt Blvd      73     Ave               66          *      90     200       67        50     100      220
                   Bancroft Ave               98th Ave              SL city limit            66          *      90     190       66         *      90      190
                                                rd                    th
                   Bancroft Ave               73     Ave            98 Ave                   66          *      90     200       67        50     100      220
                   Broadway                   Keith Ave             Rte 13 EB on-ramp        69          60     140    300       71        90     190      410
                   Broadway                   MacArthur Blvd        Pleasant Valley Ave      66          *      90     200       67        50     100      220
                   Broadway                   27th St               MacArthur Blvd (W)       67          50     100    220       66         *      90      190
                                                                                           CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
Broadway           Pleasant Valley Ave   Keith Ave             68   60    120   260   69      60    140   300
Brush St           5th St                11TH St               67   50    100   230   69      60    140   300
Claremont Ave      College Ave           Berkeley city limit   65    *    80    160   66      *     90    190
Claremont Ave      Berkeley city limit   CCC LIMIT             67   50    100   230   66      *     90    190
Claremont Ave      Telegraph Ave         College Ave           66    *    90    190   65      *     70    160
Coliseum Way       46th Ave              66TH Ave (E)          66   *     90    190   61      *      *     90
Edes Ave           I-880 off-ramps       85TH Ave              66    *    90    180   63      *     60    120
Foothill Blvd      Lakeshore             5th Ave               58    *     *    60    59      *      *     60
                       th                     TH
Foothill Blvd      8        Ave          14        Ave         63    *    50    110   61      *      *     90
Foothill Blvd      14th Ave              19TH Ave              59    *     *    60    60      *      *     70
Foothill Blvd      23RD Ave              Fruitvale Ave         61    *     *    80    60      *      *     70
Foothill Blvd      35th Ave              38th Ave              62    *    50    110   63      *     60    120
                                                                                                                          39 | Appendix B
Foothill Blvd      38th Ave              42nd Ave (S)          63    *    50    110   61      *      *     90
Foothill Blvd      High St               Vicksburg Ave         61    *     *    90    62      *     50    100
Foothill Blvd      Vicksburg Ave         55th Ave              59    *     *    60    59      *      *     60
                        th
Foothill Blvd      55        Ave         Seminary Ave          60    *     *    80    59      *      *     60
Fruitvale Ave      Harold St             International Blvd    62    *     *    100   63      *     60    120
Fruitvale Ave      International Blvd    Alameda city limit    63    *    50    120   63      *     60    120
                                              th
Golf Links Rd      Fontaine St           98 Ave                63    *    60    130   64      *     60    140
Grand Ave          MacArthur Blvd        Piedmont city limit   66    *    90    190   65      *     70    160
Grand Ave          Harrison St           MacArthur Blvd        69   60    130   280   69      60    140   300
Harrison St        Hamilton Pl           Santa Clara Ave       66    *    90    200   67      50    100   220
                        th
Harrison St        27 St                 Hamilton Pl           66    *    90    200   67      50    100   220
                                              th
Harrison St        Grand Ave             27 St                 66    *    90    200   67      50    100   220
Havenscourt Blvd   International Blvd    Bancroft Ave          62    *    50    100   63      *     60    120
Hegenberger Rd     Edes Ave              San Leandro St        75   160   340   730   76     190    410   870
Hegenberger Rd     San Leandro St        14th St               74   140   290   640   75     160    350   750
Hegenberger Rd     Doolittle Dr          Pardee Dr             70   80    160   350   71      90    190   410
High St            Brookdale Ave         Redding St            64    *    70    140   66      *     90    190
High St            Alameda city limit    Oakport St            70   70    160   330   69      60    140   300
High St            Coliseum Way          San Leandro St        65    *    80    160   66      *     90    190
High St            Foothill Blvd         Brookdale Ave         64    *    60    140   64      *     60    140
                  NOISE ELEMENT
                  International Blvd   1st Ave Pl            14th Ave             64    *    70    140   64    *    60    140
                  International Blvd   14th Ave              Fruitvale            66    *    90    180   63    *    60    120
                                                               nd
                  International Blvd   Fruitvale Ave         42     Ave           64    *    70    150   64    *    60    140
                                         th                    th
                  Lakeshore Ave        18 St East            12 St East           65   *     70    150   66   *     90    190
                  Lakeside Dr          Madison St            Harrison St          63    *    50    120   64    *    60    140
                  MacArthur Blvd       Fruitvale Ave         High St              66    *    80    180   66    *    90    190
                  MacArthur Blvd       High St               Buell St             66    *    90    190   66    *    90    190
                  MacArthur Blvd       Buell St              Seminary Ave (E)     68   50    110   240   68   60    120   260
                                         th
                  Market St            55 St                 Stanford Ave         66    *    90    180   65   *     70    160
                  MLK Way              27th St               MacArthur Blvd       63    *    60    120   64    *    60    140
                                         th
                  MLK Way              47 St                 END1                 63    *    60    120   64    *    60    140
                  Miles Ave            College Ave           Rte 24 SB off-ramp   61    *     *    90    63    *    60    120
Appendix B | 40
                  Moraga Ave           Piedmont city limit   Estates Dr           63    *    60    120   64    *    60    140
                  Moraga Ave           Estates Dr            Thornhill Dr         62    *    50    100   64    *    60    140
                  Moraga Ave           Thornhill Dr          Mountain Blvd        63    *    60    120   64    *    60    140
                  Mountain Blvd        Edwards Ave (S)       Keller Ave           74   140   300   660   74   140   300   640
                  Mountain Blvd        Holy Names College    Redwood Rd (S)       65    *    70    160   64   *     60    140
                  Mountain Blvd        Redwood Rd (S)        Carson St            62   *     50    100   62   *     50    100
                  Mountain Blvd        Moraga Ave            Park Blvd (N)        65   *     80    170   66   *     90    190
                  Park Blvd            Grosvenor Pl          Wellington St        69   60    130   280   69   60    140   300
                  Park Blvd            Leimert Blvd          Trafalgar Pl         64    *    60    130   64    *    60    140
                  Park Blvd            Spruce St             MacArthur Blvd       65    *    70    160   66    *    90    190
                  Park Blvd            Wellington St         Leimert Blvd         65    *    70    150   64    *    60    140
                  Redwood Rd           Aliso Ave             Skyline Blvd West    66    *    90    200   66    *    90    190
                  Redwood Rd           Aliso Ave             END3                 66    *    80    180   66    *    90    190
                  San Leandro St       66th Ave              75th Ave             67   50    100   230   68   60    120   260
                  San Leandro St       75th Ave              SL city limit        68   50    120   250   69   60    140   300
                                                               th
                  San Leandro St       High St               66 Ave               65    *    70    160   67   50    100   220
                  San Leandro St       Fruitvale Ave         High St              66    *    90    200   66    *    90    190
                  Seminary Ave         Bancroft Ave          International Blvd   59    *     *    70    59    *     *    60
                  Seminary Ave         San Leandro St        International Blvd   60    *     *    70    58    *     *    60
                  Shattuck Ave         52nd St               55th St              61    *     *    90    62   *     50    100
                                                                                            CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
 Shattuck Ave        55th St               Alcatraz Ave          63   *    60    130   64      *     60    140
 Stanford Ave        San Pablo Ave         Adeline St            65   *    70    150   67      50    100   220
 Telegraph Ave       West Grand Ave        27th St               62   *    50    100   60      *      *     70
                        th
 Telegraph Ave       27 St                 W MacArthur Blvd      62   *    50    100   62      *     50    100
 Telegraph Ave       40th St               50th St               62   *    50    100   63      *     60    120
 Telegraph Ave       51st St               Aileen St             63   *    50    120   63      *     60    120
 Telegraph Ave       Aileen St             Alcatraz Ave          68   60   120   260   68      60    120   260
 Telegraph Ave       Alcatraz Ave          Berkeley city limit   68   60   120   260   68      60    120   260
 W MacArthur Blvd    Market St             Telegraph Ave         66   *    90    200   67      50    100   220
 W MacArthur Blvd    Telegraph Ave         Broadway              67   50   110   230   68      60    120   260
 W MacArthur Blvd    Broadway              Fairmount Ave         68   50   110   240   68      60    120   260
                                                                                                                           41 | Appendix B
*Distances of less than 50 feet are not included on this table
                  NOISE ELEMENT
                  CALCULATED TRAFFIC NOISE LEVELS FOR HIGHWAYS AND FREEWAYS                  TABLE B-5
                                                                   EXISTING    DISTANCE (FT) TO NOISE
                  HIGHWAY                     VICINITY               LDN    C ONTOUR FROM ROAD CENTER
                                                                   (150 FT)
                                                                            70 LDN 65 LDN 60 LDN
                   SR 13    Oakland, Carson St                       71       170      380     810
                   SR 13    Oakland, Redwood Rd                      71       170      380     810
                   SR 13    Oakland, Lincoln Av                      72       200      440      950
                   SR 13    Oakland, Park Blvd                       73       240      510     1100
                   SR 13    Oakland, Moraga Av                       72       200      440     950
                   SR 13    Oakland, Broadway Terr                   73       240      510     1100
                   SR 13    Oakland, Jct SR 24                       73       240      510     1100
Appendix B | 42
                   SR 24    Oakland, Telegraph Av / Claremont Av     79       600     1290     2770
                   SR 24    Oakland, Broadway / Patton St            79       600     1290     2770
                   SR 24    Oakland, Jct SR 13 at Landvale Rd        80       700     1500     3230
                   SR 24    Oakland, Caldecott Lane                  79       600     1290     2770
                   SR 24    Caldecott Tunnel                         80       700     1500     3230
                    I-580   Oakland, Foothill Blvd                   78       550     1180     2540
                                         th
                    I-580   Oakland, 106 Av                          78       540     1170     2510
                    I-580   Oakland, Golf Links Rd                   79       570     1220     2630
                    I-580   Oakland, Keller Av                       79       570     1230     2640
                    I-580   Oakland, Edwards Av                      79       570     1230     2660
                    I-580   Oakland, Kuhnle Av                       79       610     1320     2840
                    I-580   Oakland, Jct SR 13 North                 79       600     1290     2770
                    I-580   Oakland, MacArthur Blvd                  78       530     1130     2440
                    I-580   Oakland, High St                         78       510     1100     2360
                                        th
                    I-580   Oakland, 35 Av                           78       550     1190     2560
                    I-580   Oakland, Coolidge Av                     79       600     1290     2780
                    I-580   Oakland, Fruitvale Av                    78       550     1190     2560
                    I-580   Oakland, Beaumont Av                     79       610     1320     2840
                                                                                         CITY OF OAKLAND GENERAL PLAN
                                                     EXISTING   DISTANCE (FT) TO NOISE
HIGHWAY                    VICINITY                    LDN    CONTOUR FROM ROAD CENTER
                                                     (150 FT)
                                                              70 LDN 65 LDN 60 LDN
 I-580    Oakland, Park Blvd                           79       560    1200     2580
 I-580    Oakland, Lakeshore Av / Park Blvd            79       620    1350     2900
 I-580    Oakland, Van Buren Av / Grand Av             79       570    1230     2640
 I-580    Oakland, Oakland Av / Harrison St            79       620    1340     2890
 I-580    Oakland, Jct I-80 and I-880                  79       610    1300     2810
                      th
 I-880    Oakland, 98 Av                               83      1070    2310     4980
 I-880    Oakland, Hegenberger Rd                      83      1030    2220     4790
                      th
 I-880    Oakland, 66 Av                               83      1090    2350     5060
                                                                                                                        43 | Appendix B
                                           nd
 I-880    Oakland, Jct SR 77, High St / 42      Av     81       810    1750     3770
                      th
 I-880    Oakland, 29 / Fruitvale Av                   83      1120    2410     5180
                      rd
 I-880    Oakland, 23      Av                          83      1110    2400     5160
 I-880    Oakland, Embarcadero                         83      1180    2550     5490
                    th
 I-880    Oakland, 5 Av                                83      1180    2550     5490
 I-880    Oakland, Oak St / Madison St                 83      1170    2520     5430
 I-880    Oakland, Jackson St / Broadway               83      1090    2360     5080
 I-880    Oakland, Jct I-980; Market St                83      1100    2370     5100
 I-880    Adeline St / Union St                        80       700    1520     3270
 I-880    7th St                                       80       730    1560     3370
 I-880    West Jct. I-80                               80       670    1440     3110
                      th
 I-980    Oakland, 14 St                               80       700    1500     3230
                      TH
 I-980    Oakland, 18      St                          81       810    1750     3770
 I-980    Oakland, Jct. I-580                          82       950    2040     4390
                  NOISE ELEMENT
                  NOISE CONTOUR DISTANCES FOR RAILROAD LINES
                                                          TABLE B-6
                                      DISTANCE (FT) TO NOISE CONTOUR
                     RAILROADS                  FROM TRACK
                                    75 LDN   70 LDN   65 LDN   60 LDN
                   UPRR (whistle)    80       180      390      840
                   BART + UPRR       130      280      600      1290
Appendix B | 44
APPENDIX C
OAKLAND CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION ADOPTING THE NOISE ELEMENT
See pages that follow
                  NOISE ELEMENT
Appendix C | 46
                                  This page intentionally left blank





































































































































































































































































































































































































































Table of Contents
Executive Summary .......................................................................................................... vii
Section I: Background .................................................................................................... 1
    Introduction ................................................................................................................. 3
        Study History ........................................................................................................ 3
        Purpose and Role of the Plan .................................................................................. 6
        Plan Organization .................................................................................................. 7
    The Estuary Shoreline ................................................................................................ 11
        Multiple Jurisdictions ........................................................................................... 14
        Trends in Military Use of the Shoreline ................................................................ 15
        Emerging Roles for the Estuary Shoreline ............................................................. 18
Section II: Objectives ................................................................................................... 21
    Land Use .................................................................................................................... 23
        Market Trends ...................................................................................................... 23
        Issues and Opportunities ...................................................................................... 28
        Land Use Objectives ............................................................................................. 29
    Shoreline Access and Public Spaces ............................................................................. 33
        Shoreline Access ................................................................................................... 33
        Issues and Opportunities ...................................................................................... 36
        Shoreline Access & Public Space Objectives .......................................................... 37
Executive Summary                                                                                                                    iii
       Regional Circulation & Local Street Network ............................................................ 43
           Barriers ................................................................................................................. 43
           Issues and Opportunities ...................................................................................... 44
           Regional Circulation & Local Street Network Objectives ..................................... 45
   Section III: District Recommendations ........................................................................ 51
       Jack London District .................................................................................................. 53
           Land Use .............................................................................................................. 56
           Shoreline Access and Public Spaces ....................................................................... 67
           Regional Circulation, Local Street Improvements Transit & Parking ..................... 73
       Oak to Ninth Street District ...................................................................................... 83
           Shoreline Access & Public Spaces .......................................................................... 86
           Land Use .............................................................................................................. 92
           Regional Circulation & Local Access ..................................................................... 95
       San Antonio/Fruitvale District .................................................................................. 103
           Land Use ............................................................................................................ 103
           Shoreline Access & Public Spaces ........................................................................ 113
           Regional Circulation & Local Street Improvements ............................................ 116
   Section IV: Moving Forward ...................................................................................... 125
       Steps Towards Implementing the Estuary Policy Plan ................................................ 127
           Summary of Land Use Classifications ................................................................. 132
   Appendix: ...................................................................................................................... 139
       A. Jack London District Potential Designated Historic Properties & Districts ........... 141
   Index........ ...................................................................................................................... 142
   Credits .......................................................................................................................... 144
iv                                                                                                   Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
List of Figures
I-1. Regional Context ........................................................................................................ 4
I-2. Oakland Neighborhoods Adjacent to Estuary .............................................................. 5
I-3. Planning Area Districts ................................................................................................ 7
1-4. Activity Centers ....................................................................................................... 13
I-5. Jurisdictions ..................................................................................................... 16 & 17
II-1. Existing Land Use .......................................................................................... 24 & 25
II-2. Existing Public Access and Open Space ........................................................... 34 & 35
II-3. Illustrative Shoreline Access and Public Space Plan .......................................... 40 & 41
II-4. Illustrative Circulation Plan ............................................................................ 46 & 47
III-1. Jack London District: Current Ownership .............................................................. 54
III-2. Jack London District: Existing Land Use ................................................................ 55
III-3. Central Jack London District: Illustrative Development Strategy ............................. 58
III-4. Jack London District: Existing Public Access and Open Space ................................. 65
III-5. Jack London District: Illustrative Shoreline Access and Public Space Plan ................ 66
III-6. Jack London District: Illustrative Circulation .......................................................... 72
III-7a & b. Jack London District Illustrative Street Cross Sections .......................... 76 & 78
III-8. Oak to 9th District: Current Ownership ................................................................ 84
III-9. Oak to 9th District: Existing Land Use ................................................................... 85
III-10. Oak to 9th District Illustrative Public Space Key Map .......................................... 87
III-11. Oak to 9th: Bird’s-Eye Illustrative Perspective ...................................................... 89
III-12. Clinton Basin Illustrative Cross Section ....................................................... 96 & 97
III-13. 5th Avenue Illustrative Cross Section .................................................................... 98
III-14. Oak to 9th District: Illustrative Circulation .......................................................... 99
III-15. San Antonio/Fruitvale District: Current Ownership ............................................ 104
III-16. San Antonio/Fruitvale District: Existing Land Use .............................................. 105
III-17. San Antonio/Fruitvale District Sub-District Map ................................................ 106
III-18. San Antonio/Fruitvale District: Illustrative Cross Sections .................................. 117
III-19. San Antonio/Fruitvale Illustrative Circulation .......................................... 118 & 119
Executive Summary                                                                                                                v

   III-20. San Antonio/Fruitvale District: Illustrative
           Cross Sections (cont’d .....................................................120 & 121
   III-21. Fruitvale Avenue Illustrative Cross Sections ................................122
   IV-1. Land Use Classifications ................................................. 130 & 131
   Appendix
   A. Jack London District Potential Designated
       Historic Properties & Districts.......................................................... 141
vi                                                                                     Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Executive Summary
As the twenty-first century approaches, na-     reinforced by the goals, objectives and poli-    tinuous landscaped parkway with promenades,
tional and international trends have created    cies established by the General Plan Congress    bikeways and shoreline trails, is recommended.
new opportunities for the urban waterfront      in the 1998 update of the Oakland General        In addition to enhancing existing facilities, new
and its role for the City of Oakland. Recog-    Plan.                                            parks are proposed at the mouth of the Lake
nizing this potential and the strategic nature                                                   Merritt Channel, at the site of the Ninth Av-
of the Oakland Estuary, the Port of Oakland     The basic premise of the plan and its preced-    enue Terminal, at Union Point, and within the
and City of Oakland have undertaken the         ing efforts is that the Estuary is a resource of Jack London District.
preparation of this plan to reinforce Oakland’s citywide and regional significance. This area
identity as a livable city on the bay.          cannot be viewed as a single-purpose district    Further, the Estuary Plan proposes a variety
                                                isolated from the city, but rather as a diverse  of uses that strengthen Oakland’s position as
The “Estuary Policy Plan” (Also referred to as  and multifaceted place that connects the city    an urban center, accommodate economic
the ‘Estuary Plan’) includes objectives and     and the bay.                                     growth, and encourage development that
policies to enhance the future of the area of                                                    complements the downtown and adjacent
Oakland between Adeline Street, the Nimitz      The Estuary Policy Plan calls for a system of    neighborhoods.
Freeway, 66th Avenue and the Estuary shore-     open spaces and shoreline access that provides
line.     The plan is a result of community     recreational use opportunities, environmental    The plan reinforces the Jack London District
concerns first articulated by the League of     enhancement, interpretive experiences, visual    as the East Bay’s primary dining and enter-
Women Voters in its award-winning report        amenities, and significant gathering places. A   tainment venue, by promoting mixture of
entitled “The Waterfront: It Touches the World; series of individual parks, open spaces and      retail, dining, entertainment and visitor-serv-
How Does It Touch Oakland?” , subsequently      shoreline access points, connected by a con-
Executive Summary                                                                                                                               vii

ing uses oriented to significant gathering places  cate for a variety of reasons. If that occurs, the tivities along Lower Broadway, toward the
and public access areas along the water.           plan suggests land use priorities for an appro-    downtown. At the same time, development
                                                   priate transition to new urban development         of the area between Estuary Park and the
The plan proposes the preservation of indus-       in the future.                                     Ninth Avenue Terminal will create a signifi-
trial areas which are necessary to support                                                            cant place for Oaklanders to gather for events,
Oakland’s port, as well as the city’s role in food The Estuary Policy Plan also proposes signifi-     and achieve a long-held objective of connect-
processing, manufacturing and distribution. In     cant measures to improve both regional and         ing the Estuary to the Lake Merritt Channel,
addition, the emerging trend toward loft-type      local access. The proposed circulation system      Lake Merritt, and inland neighborhoods.
residential and off-price retail establishments    is aimed at reducing the barrier effect of the
in the Jack London District is encouraged to       freeway by improving on and off ramps and          Redevelopment at Embarcadero Cove is
continue.                                          by enhancing local vehicular access to inland      planned to create additional windows to the
                                                   areas.                                             Estuary. A new park at Union Point and im-
The plan proposes the large-scale transforma-                                                         provements to the shoreline should create a
tion of the area from the Lake Merritt Chan-       The plan recommends creating a continuous          new focus along the water for Brooklyn Ba-
nel to the Ninth Avenue Terminal into a mix        landscaped recreational parkway, accommodat-       sin, San Antonio, Fruitvale, Central East Oak-
of artisan work/live lofts, hotel, cultural and    ing pedestrians and bicycles as well as transit    land, and other inland neighborhoods. Exten-
commercial-recreational uses that will comple-     and vehicular access, along the entire five-and-   sion of the Martin Luther King, Jr. Regional
ment the planned open spaces and parks along       a-half-mile length of waterfront, between 66th     Shoreline westward to High Street will also
the water.                                         Avenue and the Jack London District. This          provide open space opportunities for East
                                                   parkway would help knit together the diverse       Oakland residents and visitors to enjoy the
The plan recommends strengthening the liv-         parts of the Estuary shoreline, thereby estab-     environment of San Leandro Bay.
ability of existing and future residential devel-  lishing an identity of Oakland as a waterfront
opment within the Kennedy Tract, and sug-          city.                                              Finally, the Estuary Policy Plan recommends
gests new opportunities for small-scale office,                                                       some critical first steps in implementing the
business and commercial establishments. In         The Estuary Policy Plan also emphasizes the        plan and achieving the vision. It identifies what
certain areas (e.g., around the Con-Agra facil-    need for connection between waterfront uses        is necessary to move on to the next level of
ity in the San Antonio/Fruitvale District), the    and inland areas. The plan promotes enter-         action.
plan supports the retention of existing indus-     tainment-oriented development in the Jack
tries, but acknowledges that they may relo-        London District, and extending waterfront ac-
viii                                                                                                                      Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

In total, the Estuary Policy Plan is a waypoint
in a community-wide dialogue that has been
underway for many years. It follows up on
ideas that were first presented several decades
ago; more recently reinforced by the League of
Women Voters and the Oakland General Plan.
It is both a recognition of the importance of
this unique asset to Oakland, and a long-range
vision of the Estuary’s potential.
At the same time, the plan initiates a series of
steps that can achieve the vision. By begin-
ning now, and working hard, Oakland can
enhance the waterfront, fulfill its unmet po-
tential, and reclaim its role as a true waterfront
city.
Executive Summary                                  ix

x Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
       I           Background
Section I: Background         1
The 5.5-mile long Estuary Planning Area extends from Adeline Street on the west to 66th Avenue on the east.
2                                                                                                           Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Introduction
In 1996, the Port of Oakland and the City of    Oakland can claim the most extensive and di-        In the early 1990s, public dialogue about
Oakland embarked on an unprecedented co-        verse bay shoreline of any community in the         Oakland’s waterfront began with the update
operative effort to develop the first plan in   region. Yet, for many, the experience of the        of the Open Space, Conservation and Recre-
Oakland’s history focused specifically on the   Oakland waterfront is fragmented—limited            ation Element of the Oakland General Plan.
Estuary shoreline (Figure I-1). The Estuary     to specific areas, such as the highly visible ship- At about the same time, the League of Women
Policy Plan represents an effort conducted over ping terminals or the commercial activities and     Voters published a report, “The Waterfront. It
a period of approximately 18 months to pre-     special events at Jack London Square. Al-           Touches the World; How Does it Touch Oak-
pare a plan for 5 1/2 miles of urban water-     though its shoreline extends for 19 miles along     land?” ( June 1993), which focused on the
front within the heart of the city and port.    the edge of the city, Oakland is more often         waterfront. The report strongly promoted
                                                viewed as an inland gateway at the hub of mul-      Oakland’s identity as a waterfront city. This
This effort encompassed a planning area ex-     tiple rail and highway corridors than as a wa-      report became a call to action for waterfront
tending from Adeline Street to 66th Avenue,     terfront city.                                      advocates and the community at large.
including all of the lands on the water side of
I-880 within Port and City jurisdiction. The                 STUDY HISTORY                          The efforts of the League of Women Voters
study area touches many of the city’s neigh-                                                        spawned the Waterfront Coalition, a grassroots
borhoods as well as downtown, and is brack-     In recent years, community interest in the          citizens organization that, in turn, sparked even
eted at the ends by Oakland’s airport and sea-  waterfront has increasingly focused a desire for    broader interest and support for waterfront
port (Figure I-2).                              improved public access, environmental qual-         revitalization. In 1995, a charrette was spon-
                                                ity, civic image and identity, recreation, and      sored by the Port and the City to help formu-
                                                other publicly oriented activities.
Section I: Background                                                                                                                               3

                            SAN
                                                                                                   Berkeley             13
                                              TY
                                                                                     80                                                                                    Orinda
                                          OUN
                                      A C        NTY
                                  M ED      COU
                             AL A        CO
                                    NCIS
                                                                                            123                         24
                               FRA
                           Treasure                                        Emeryville
                             Island
                                                                                          580
                                                                                                                                      Piedmont
                                                            80
                                                                  Outer                                 980
                                                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                                                                              TR
    SAN                                                           Harbor                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                                                                            ON LA
                                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                    A COS
                                                                                                                                                                                          TA
     FRANCISCO                                                                                                                                                                   M ED
                                                                                                                                                                                      A C
                                                                                                                                                                                         O.
                                                                                                                                                                                             CO .
                               ;
                                                                                                                               580
                                                                                                                              Lake
                                                                                                                             Merritt
     80
                      Sa
                        n
                           F
                             ;
                            ;;;;;
                             r
                                 ;    a
                                              n
                                                       ci
                                                            sc
                                                                 o B
                                                                             NAS
                                                                           ALAMEDA
                                                                       Estuary
                                                                    Planning Area
                                                                                                  260
                                                                                                        61
                                                                                                                  880
                                                                                                              Alameda
                                                                                                                                       OAKLAND
                                                                                                                                        Fruitvale
                                                                                                                                                   77
                                                                                                                                                    880
                                                                                                                                                                     185
                            ;;;
     101
                                                                     ay
           280
                                                                                                                                                 San
                                                                                                                                               Leandro
                                                                                                                                                 Bay
                                                                                                                                          61                                        185
                                                                                                                                        OAKLAND
                                                                                                                                     INTERNATIONAL                           San
                                                                                                                                        AIRPORT                            Leandro
FIGURE I-1:      Regional Context
4                                                                                                                                                         Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
late a vision for the waterfront that would, in
turn, provide additional policy support.
At the time, the Oakland General Plan was
being updated, overseen by a community-wide
advisory committee known as the General Plan
Congress. A Waterfront Subcommittee of the
General Plan Congress was formed. In 1996
the General Plan Congress published its draft
Goals, Objectives and Policies report for the
entire waterfront area. The policies recognized
the waterfront as having untapped potential for
redevelopment, publicly oriented activities,
and enhanced public access. One of these poli-
cies specified the need for more detailed study
and planning in the Estuary portion of the wa-
terfront.
Hence, the Oakland Estuary Policy Plan.
The Estuary Plan project has been undertaken
as a joint effort by the Port of Oakland and
the City of Oakland. The plan incorporates
comments and input from other public agen-
cies, including the Bay Conservation and De-
velopment Commission (BCDC), East Bay
Regional Parks District (EBRPD), the Trust
for Public Lands, the City of Oakland Life
Enrichment Agency—Parks, Recreation and
                                                FIGURE I-2: Oakland Neighborhoods Adjacent to the Estuary
Section I: Background                                                                                     5

Cultural Services, and the Oakland Museum.        ing, traffic engineering; as well as numerous    ! Enhance and promote the city’s waterfront
Draft concepts and recommendations were           others offering expertise in specialized techni-    for the economic benefit of the commu-
presented to the City-Port Liaison Commit-        cal areas.                                          nity, with emphasis on Oakland’s position
tee, the City Planning Commission, and the                                                            as a leading West Coast maritime terminal
Board of Port Commissioners.                                      PURPOSE &                           and a primary Bay Area passenger and cargo
                                                           ROLE OF THE PLAN                           airport.
Guidance, input, and direction in the plan-
ning process were also provided by the Estu-      The Estuary Policy Plan has been prepared in     ! Connect the waterfront to the rest of the
ary Advisory Committee, a diverse group rep-      an attempt to address issues and concerns that      city, with emphasis on linking the adjacent
resenting a broad spectrum of community in-       have arisen related to continuity and accessi-      neighborhoods and downtown directly to
terests. The advisory group was facilitated by    bility of the shoreline, the quality and charac-    the waterfront, reducing physical barriers
the nonprofit organization Oakland Sharing        ter of new development, and the relationship        and the perception of isolation from the
the Vision. This group also helped organize       of the shoreline with surrounding districts and     water’s edge, and improving public access
the community involvement process. Mem-           neighborhoods. More specifically, the plan          to and along the waterfront.
bers of the Advisory Committee committed          builds upon the goals for the waterfront pre-
significant energy and effort to shaping the      pared by the General Plan Congress. The goals    ! Preserve and enhance the existing natural
planning effort. They met nine times in pub-      are summarized as follows:                          areas along the waterfront.
lic sessions, and hosted a public workshop with
consultants and staff.                            ! Increase the awareness of the waterfront       The Estuary Policy Plan is intended to be in-
                                                      throughout the city and region, and maxi-    corporated into the General Plan, which in-
To assist in preparing the draft of the Estuary       mize the benefit of Oakland’s waterfront     cludes elements regarding Land Use & Trans-
Plan, the Port and City engaged a team of con-        for the people of the city.                  portation, Open Space, Conservation & Rec-
sultants led by ROMA Design Group. ROMA                                                            reation (OSCAR), Historic Preservation,
served as the lead firm, directing the efforts of ! Promote the diversity of the waterfront by     Housing, Noise andd Safety.
an Oakland-based team of consultants, includ-         providing opportunities for new parks, rec-
ing Hansen/Murakami/Eshima, associated ar-            reation, and open space; cultural, educa-    Compared to the General Plan, the Estuary
chitects; Hausrath Economics Group, urban             tional and entertainment experiences; and    Policy Plan has a more focused geographic
economists; Gabriel-Roche, Inc., public par-          new or revitalized retail, commercial and    scope, and is therefore more specific in nature.
ticipation and transportation; Korve Engineer-        residential development.                     In addition to policy recommendations that
6                                                                                                                      Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

                                                                                                 Ave.
        Mar
                                                      Lake
                                                     Merritt
                                                                                                        16th Ave.
                                                                                                                    Oakland                                                 High S
         ket S                         14th St.                           Intern              14th
                                                                                                                                                        va                        t.
                                                                                                                                                  Fruit
                                                                                ation
                                                                                     al Blv                                                                                              International Blvd.
                                                               5th A
                                                                                                                                   29th Ave.
           t.     980
                                                                                            d.
                                                                    ve.
                                  ay
                                                  Oak St.
                            Broadw
Ade                                                                                                                                                       e.
                                                                                                                                                     le Av
                                                                                                                    880                                        San Leandro St.
 line
  St.
                                                                                           Coast Guard
                                ade       ro                                                 Island
                         Embarc
                                                                                        Oaklan d Estuar y
                                                                                                                              Park St.
                    Jack London                                Oak-9th
                                                                                                                                               San Antonio-                                               Av
                                                                                                                                                                                                            e.
                                                                                                     Alameda                                     Fruitvale                             San Leandro
                 Planning Area Districts
                                                                                                                                                                                                         th
FIGURE I-3:                                                                                                                                                                                Bay           66
         will be integrated into the General Plan, a com-                 Plan recommendations will also be reflected                          and the East Bay Regional Parks District
         panion document, the Estuary Plan Implemen-                      in the Oakland Waterfront Public Access                              (EBRPD).
         tation Guide, will be prepared. The Imple-                       Plan,which will identify public access oppor-
         mentation Guide will identify specific steps                     tunities for the entire Oakland waterfront.                                    PLAN ORGANIZATION
         to be undertaken to implement the recom-                         The Estuary Policy Plan may also serve as a
         mendations of the Estuary Policy Plan. These                     basis for revisions and amendments to the                            The Estuary Policy Plan presents recommen-
         include detailed strategies and work programs                    BCDC San Francisco Bay Area Seaport Plan,                            dations related to land use, development, ur-
         to create and implement projects, site design                    plans for the regional San Francisco Bay Trail,                      ban design, shoreline access, public spaces, re-
         and development standards, funding and in-                       and planning documents prepared by other re-                         gional circulation, and local street improve-
         stitutional strategies, and other administrative                 gional agencies, such as the Association of Bay                      ments for the entire waterfront and individual
         steps necessary to carry out the Estuary Policy                  Area Governments (ABAG), the Metropoli-                              districts within it.
         Plan.                                                            tan Transportation Commission (MTC), East
                                                                          Bay Municipal Utilities District (EBMUD)
         Section I: Background                                                                                                                                                                       7
Section I includes all of the introductory ele-  Section IV of the plan, entitled “Moving For-
ments, which provide an overview and sum-        ward”, describes the next steps in implement-
mary of the planning process, the planning area  ing the Policy Plan. It identifies the critical
and surrounding context, major plan concepts     activities necessary to sanction the plan, gives
and recommendations.                             decision-makers and staff direction to begin
                                                 to implement the plan, and establishes the
Issues to be resolved, opportunities to improve  regulatory controls necessary to insure com-
the situation and objectives to be realized are  pliance with it.
described in Section II of the plan. They are
organized by functional topics: Land Use,
Shoreline Access, Public Spaces, Regional
Circulation, and Local Street Improvements.
Section III of the plan recommends policies
for each of the three districts within the Estu-
ary planning area. As shown in Figure I-3,
these districts include:
! ‘Jack London District’, extending from
   Adeline Street to Oak Street;
! ‘Oak-to-Ninth Avenue District’, from Oak
   Street to the Ninth Avenue Marine Termi-
   nal; and
! ‘San Antonio/Fruitvale District’, from 9th
   Avenue to 66th Avenue.
8                                                                                                 Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Section I: Background 
Oakland’s harbor circa 1882, at the present-day Jack London Waterfront, supported a diverse range of maritime and commercial activities.
10                                                                                                                                       Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

The Estuary Shoreline
Oakland, California has a waterfront.           more like a river. It is linear in form and con-   ern city and national transportation hub. The
                                                tained, rather than open and expansive like        settlement which became Oakland was first es-
In Oakland, the shoreline of San Francisco Bay  the broader bay. It creates an environment         tablished on the Estuary, at a transshipment point
extends 19 miles, from San Leandro Bay to       that is intimate in scale and character. It frames where water-borne goods were off-loaded and
the Oakland-San Francisco Bay Bridge. At        dramatic views to the San Francisco and Oak-       transferred to transport and land networks.
its northern end, the shoreline is dominated    land downtown skylines.
by the Port of Oakland’s marine terminals.                                                         Over the years, the waterfront has been domi-
At the southern end lies Oakland International  The Estuary is an urbanized edge that has de-      nated by the development of the Port of Oak-
Airport. Between the seaport and the airport    veloped over a span of more than 100 years of      land. Extensive backland area and rail connec-
is the five-and-a-half-mile Estuary shoreline   city history. Unlike the hillside areas of the     tions have given the Port the competitive edge
(Figure I-4). The Oakland Estuary is one of     city, this area is intensely developed, with ur-   needed to become one of the largest container
California’s most diverse shores, encompass-    banization extending all the way to the water’s    ports on the West Coast. Additionally, the
ing a variety of physical environments and set- edge. Very little open space or vegetated area     Oakland Airport’s central location within the
tings, each with its own distinct quality and   exists, with the notable exceptions of Estuary     prosperous bay region has made it one of the
character.                                      Park and the Martin Luther King, Jr. (MLK)         fastest growing air passenger and cargo facili-
                                                Regional Shoreline.                                ties in the United States. These two centers
Today, the Estuary can be viewed as a single                                                       support more than 20,000 direct jobs within
community resource that binds together the      Oakland’s waterfront figures prominently in        the region, but they are both land intensive
shorelines of Alameda and Oakland. Com-         the history and life of the city. It is both the   operations that make it difficult for residents
pared to other parts of the bay, the Estuary is birthplace and birthright of what is now a mod-    to take advantage of the waterfront.
Section I: Background                                                                                                                             11

Most of the improvements were made once the      ping. This shift in technology proved to be a     trial purposes. In the mid 1800s, the village
City wrested control of the waterfront from      valuable investment for the City and the          of San Antonio on San Antonio Creek (now
the railroads in the early 1900s. The shoreline  Port—one that would establish Oakland’s           within the incorporated limits of Oakland)
was extended westerly to the San Francisco       position in the region and West Coast as a ma-    supported an active wharf and lumber indus-
incorporated limits following a momentous        jor international port of call for the transship- try supplied by redwoods from the nearby hills.
court case that finally settled the long-stand-  ment of goods.                                    In what is now Jack London District, early
ing controversy between the City and the rail-                                                     uses included fishing, shipping and maritime
roads over tidelands.                            As a result of this growth, Oakland’s water-      commerce, and iron works located along First
                                                 front has been dramatically transformed           and Second streets west of Broadway. With
After that, Oakland experienced a period of      through filling, dredging, and shoreline stabi-   the advent of rail access, the Estuary became
city building that brought municipal docks,      lization efforts. The shoreline was once a se-    the terminus for agricultural goods and pro-
quays, wharves, and belt line railways to the    ries of coves, bays, inlets, and tidal marshlands duce, and agricultural processing facilities, such
waterfront.                                      fed by creeks and watercourses from the hills;    as Con Agra, were also built.
                                                 over time, human activity advanced it incre-
With the advent of air travel in the late 1920s, mentally outward into the bay. The Estuary        In recent decades, the industrial and commer-
the City acquired land for a commercial air-     was narrowed by filling and lengthened by         cial character of the Estuary area have contin-
port that became the starting point for many     dredging until it became a linear tidal canal     ued to evolve.
history-making transpacific flights. In 1936,    that connects San Francisco Bay with San Le-
the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge was         andro Bay.                                        In the southern and inland portions of the
completed, signaling the emergence of the                                                          shoreline (San Antonio, Fruitvale and Central
automobile for personal travel; thirteen years   At the same time, Oakland residents have long     East Oakland areas) business offices and large-
later, in 1949, the six-lane Eastshore Freeway   supported the notion of a commercial water-       scale commercial uses have been developed in
(now I-880) was constructed through Oak-         front. A number of major investments in           what was once a traditional industrial area char-
land.                                            shoreline and infrastructure improvements         acterized by manufacturing and agricultural
                                                 were approved, primarily for the purpose of       processing. Further to the north and west, in
Following the ship-building years of World       expanding trade and commerce.                     the area now known as Embarcadero Cove,
War II, Oakland’s port facilities shifted to the                                                   hotels and motels, offices and restaurants have
Outer Harbor, where a good supply of             In addition to the port facilities, the Estuary   been built along the narrow stretch of shore-
backland could support containerized ship-       has historically served commercial and indus-     line once occupied by marine-related busi-
12                                                                                                                     Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

nesses, and marinas have been built along the
water’s edge, providing for recreational boat-
ing use.
The Ninth Avenue Terminal still remains in
use—one of two such maritime facilities east
of the Alameda-Oakland Tubes (the other be-
ing the Encinal Terminals across the Estuary
in Alameda).
The Jack London District is far more com-
mercially oriented than any other portion of
the Estuary shoreline, and has seen the great-
est amount of change along the waterfront in
the past 20 years. The mix of restaurant, re-
tail, theaters, entertainment and office uses has
transformed Jack London Square into a pri-
mary entertainment venue, and has provided
opportunities for Oakland residents and visi-
tors to experience the waterfront.
                                                  Throughout the Estuary, development patterns    the grid pattern of streets and older warehouse
Furthermore, the development of work/live         vary. There are large superblocks of industrial buildings within the Jack London District cre-
housing has added to the traditional commer-      land; islands of remnant neighborhoods; the     ates an attractive urban scale that is well con-
cial manufacturing and industrial character of    narrow, arching shoreline along the old Brook-  nected with the surrounding city.
adjacent inland areas, and has helped to estab-   lyn Basin; and the urban grid that extends from
lish this inland area as a lively urban mixed-    the surrounding city through the Jack Lon-      On the other hand, barriers to the water exist
use district.                                     don District to the water. Variations in the    in many forms along the Estuary. Interstate
                                                  urban pattern affect the opportunities for con- 880 is the most obvious of many physical bar-
                                                  nection and infill development. For instance,   riers that separate the waterfront from the rest
Section I: Background                                                                                                                           13

of the city. At the Lake Merritt Channel, the    Throughout the study area, infrastructure and      Also included in the study area are lands and
rail lines, a major sewer line and the overhead  other built facilities are aging. Although there   water within the jurisdiction of the Port of
freeway combine to create a formidable physi-    have been some recent transportation improve-      Oakland. The Port is a unique agency of city
cal and visual barrier that interrupts the link  ments (e.g., the Amtrak station at Jack Lon-       government, which is given the responsibility
between Lake Merritt and the Estuary. To the     don Square, removal of the Union Pacific           by the Oakland City Charter to own, develop
south of the Lake Merritt Channel, the free-     tracks on 3rd St.), little investment has been     and manage lands along the Estuary within
way becomes an at-grade facility, and thus an    made over the years in ongoing maintenance         the specified area of Port jurisdiction.
even more imposing barrier.                      and repairs. There are many areas of the wa-
                                                 terfront where improvements are needed, not        In its development role, the Port acts as a land-
Major thoroughfares, which traverse the en-      so much to expand capacity, but to upgrade         lord; offering sites to lease to the private de-
tire length of the city, may lead to the Estuary conditions. Along the I-880 freeway, which         velopment community and taking an active
shore, but often in an unceremonious fash-       is now nearly 50 years old, substandard con-       role in project development. The Port also
ion. Broadway, one of the city’s most impor-     ditions exist relative to the spacing of intersec- has the unique authority to undertake its own
tant streets, terminates in an ambiguous zone    tions, and seismic improvements are needed.        land use planning, project planning, and project
of parking, service delivery trucks, and pedes-  Roads and utilities need to be repaired, and in    approval. It reviews and approves building
trians in the area south of the Embarcadero.     some areas the shoreline needs to be reinforced.   projects on private property within its area of
                                                                                                    jurisdiction, and undertakes its own environ-
East of the Lake Merritt Channel, Fifth Av-         MULTIPLE JURISDICTIONS                          mental review and certification process.
enue crosses under the freeway and changes
alignment as it meets the Embarcadero. Other     Like most other urban waterfronts, many gov-       Although the Port manages these lands, it does
important streets— 16th Avenue, Fruitvale        ernmental agencies have jurisdiction within the    so “in trust” on behalf of the State of Califor-
Avenue, High Street, and 29th Avenue/Park        Estuary area (Figure I-5). The study area in-      nia. Ultimate authority over their use is main-
Street—enter the Estuary area, and immedi-       cludes significant amounts of inland areas,        tained by the California State Lands Commis-
ately shift alignment or meet difficult inter-   within which the City has jurisdiction and         sion under the public trust (aka ‘Tidelands
sections, and thus add to the overall sense of   provides regular municipal services. Planning      Trust’) doctrine. Tidelands Trust properties
disorientation experienced along many por-       and development within the jurisdiction of         are limited to uses that promote maritime
tions of the waterfront today.                   the city are subject to typical municipal regu-    trade, transportation and commerce, public
                                                 latory review and permitting authority.            recreation and open space.
14                                                                                                                      Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Port jurisdiction includes a much larger area    dates. Also, a number of quasi-public agencies     to approximately 10,000 acres within the Bay
than Port-owned land within the Tidelands        and institutions, including Laney College and      Area.
Trust, and includes private as well as public    the Peralta Community College District, con-
properties.                                      trol lands within the Lake Merritt Channel         In the East Bay, several military bases in Oak-
                                                 area .                                             land and Alameda have closed; each with its
In addition to the City, the Port and State                                                         own implications for the region and for the
Lands Commission, the San Francisco Bay          Private land parcels tend to be relatively smaller Estuary planning area. For instance, the 125-
Conservation and Development Commission          in size, with the exception of certain indus-      acre FISC site in Alameda, across the Estuary
(BCDC ) exercises considerable influence over    trial sites such as Con Agra and Owens-            from Jack London Square, is being pursued as
Estuary sites that lie within a 100-foot ‘Shore- Brockway. However, some key parcels have           a mixed commercial, office and residential
line Band’ that surrounds the entire San Fran-   been assembled under single ownership and          project, which would help to reinforce this part
cisco Bay. Within its area of jurisdiction,      could undergo dramatic changes. Such parcels       of the Estuary as an activity center.
BCDC insures that development is consistent      include those associated with the Produce Mar-
with the San Francisco Bay Plan and the San      ket in the Jack London District, Fifth Avenue      Within Oakland, the reuse of the Oakland
Francisco Bay Area Seaport Plan. Addition-       Point, and Tidewater Business Park.                Army Base provides an opportunity to con-
ally, BCDC reviews and has permit authority                                                         solidate maritime activities away from the In-
over all individual waterfront projects that are     TRENDS IN MILITARY USE                         ner Harbor into the Outer Harbor. Currently,
developed within the Shoreline Band, to in-              OF THE SHORELINE                           significant portions of the Estuary area are used
sure that they maximize public access to the                                                        for maritime support: (e.g. truck and container
Bay and minimize the amount of bay fill that     From a regional perspective, several current       storage, break-bulk cargo handling, and port-
is used.                                         trends will help to shape the future of the Es-    related operations). Locating these activities in
                                                 tuary. Perhaps the most significant of these is    areas such as the former army base could not
In addition, other large public property own-    the changing status of military lands. For over    only improve efficiency of operations, but also
ers within the Estuary area will play a role in  50 years, much of the shoreline in the Bay         free up the Estuary shoreline for a variety of
the implementation of this Plan. They in-        Area has been occupied by military uses estab-     uses beneficial to surrounding neighborhoods.
clude Alameda County, the East Bay Munici-       lished at the onset of World War II. Recent
pal Utility District (EBMUD), the East Bay       downsizing of the armed services has brought
Regional Park District (EBRPD), and a myriad     about the closure of many bases, amounting
of state agencies with specific functional man-
Section I: Background                                                                                                                              15

16 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
Section I: Background 1
                                                  As a protected water space, it is one of the most tion of the Jack London Cinema and Yoshi’s
                                                  attractive sites within the Bay Region for wa-    jazz club to the existing restaurants has also
  EMERGING ROLES FOR THE                          ter-oriented sports, particularly boating. Sail-  contributed greatly to the attractiveness of the
       ESTUARY SHORELINE                          ing has an established presence in the estuary,   area as an entertainment destination in the East
                                                  which has become the largest single focus of      Bay.
Changes in military lands, transportation         recreational boating in the Bay Area. There is a
technology, and the economy of the city pro-      long-established tradition of rowing, canoeing    Traditional industry, warehousing and gen-
vide the opportunity to transform the declin-     and kayaking, all of which are well suited to     eral commercial uses continue to play an im-
ing industrial waterfront into one of the city’s  the calm, smooth waters of the area.              portant part in maintaining the role of the
most vibrant and valuable assets. Already, a                                                        Estuary as a place of employment.
number of new roles for the Estuary have be-      Throughout the Estuary area, urban pioneer-
gun to emerge. They form the fundamental          ing is underway, with the introduction of work/   Both traditional and emerging roles for the
building blocks for the creation of an urban      live and artist studio spaces into mature indus-  estuary area could be further reinforced as trans-
waterfront which accommodates diverse ac-         trial and commercial districts. New neighbor-     portation projects are undertaken. The projects
tivities, and which is physically accessible to   hoods are being established, and existing neigh-  will create a stronger link between the water-
residents and visitors.                           borhoods are expanding and diversifying. New      front and the surrounding city. Recent rail-
                                                  uses are occupying older buildings, forming       road consolidations resulted in the removal of
The Estuary area is a unique environment          idiosyncratic combinations within distinctive     one set of tracks that transverse the Estuary
which intrinsically lends itself to active and    districts.                                        shoreline. Seismic improvements planned for
passive recreation. The shoreline offers op-                                                        the I-880 freeway by Caltrans offer the po-
portunities for a wide variety of water-ori-      Adjacent to downtown, the Jack London Dis-        tential to modify existing interchanges and
ented recreational activities, including fishing, trict is evolving into a citywide and regional    provide greater access to the waterfront.
viewing, sitting, bicycling, jogging, walking,    center for urban recreational pursuits, includ-
and birdwatching. The Bay Trail and the           ing dining, shopping and entertainment.           Finally, public access improvements planned
MLK Regional Shoreline, in the southern                                                             by the Port and City, in conjunction with the
portion of the estuary, contribute greatly to     Through the concerted efforts of the Port of      City of Alameda, will result in new opportu-
the emerging role of the Estuary as a place       Oakland, Jack London Square has also become       nities for pedestrian and bicycle movement
for recreation and open space.                    the city’s primary venue for celebrations, pa-    along the shoreline.
                                                  rades, races, and major events. The recent addi-
18                                                                                                                      Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

 This is a unique moment in time for
 Oakland’s waterfront. Guided by a long-range
 plan and goal for sustainability, livability, and
 accessibility, revitalization of the waterfront
 can occur, and the Estuary can become an at-
 tractive amenity that adds to the identity and
 overall livability of the city as a whole.
Section I: Background                              19

20 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
      II             Objectives
Section II: Objectives          21
   The Estuary shoreline will support a broad range of land uses and activities.
22                                          Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Land Use
During the past several decades, with the ad-                MARKET TRENDS                          Warehouse, Distribution, and Storage. Ware-
vent of containerized cargo handling facilities                                                     housing, distribution and storage activities are
and the development of the Inner and Outer       Traditional Heavy Manufacturing. As in             prominent along the waterfront as well as in
harbors at the Port of Oakland, the traditional  other urban areas, older heavy industrial uses     other industrial areas of Oakland. The seaport,
role of the mid Estuary shoreline as a place for continue to decline along the waterfront as        the airport, major freeways, and a central lo-
maritime trade, transportation, commerce, and    markets change, facilities become obsolete, and    cation in the region are the factors supporting
industry has declined. Although the only cargo   the region expands outward. Existing opera-        the transportation and wholesale trade indus-
handling facility remaining in the Estuary plan- tions remain because of significant investments    tries in the planning area. Facilities are gener-
ning area is the Ninth Avenue Terminal, a        in facilities and continued good proximity and     ally characterized by large land areas and rela-
number of industries still remain that were once access to markets and suppliers. The enclave       tively minimal warehouse structures and dock-
water related or provided support services for   of food-related businesses in the San Anto-        ing facilities. While there is a demand for such
an economic base that has now shifted else-      nio/Fruitvale area is an example where some        facilities, the planning area does not offer sig-
where. The closure of large military bases on    older operations have remained and newer,          nificant locational advantages over other loca-
the waterfront is likely to further the trend    more specialized operations have moved in          tions in East Oakland, West Oakland, and else-
toward consolidation of maritime industries      because of the availability of facilities and good where along the I-880 corridor. Over time,
to the west, and could open up new market        proximity to markets. The Owens-Brockway           improvements that capitalize on the water-
opportunities for the future of the Estuary      facility is an example of a large production fa-   front location and enhance the attractiveness
shoreline.                                       cility with significant capital investment that    and value of the planning area for other uses
                                                 is likely to remain viable.                        are likely to make the area less desirable for
                                                                                                    warehouse, distribution and storage activities.
Section II: Objectives                                                                                                                            23
24 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
Section II: Objectives 2
Construction Industry. The construction in-        Light Industrial Activities. Within the plan-     uses. Locations in the planning area with the
dustry has remained healthy in Oakland. There      ning area, there have been some transitions       strongest potential for such development in-
are a number of construction-related business      from heavier industrial to lighter industrial     clude those offering an attractive, high-ame-
operations in the planning area. These busi-       uses. Examples of light industrial uses in the    nity environment; good access and proximity
nesses are there because of the area’s central     area include light manufacturing firms, boat      to services; a quiet, somewhat contained site
location, freeway accessibility, and available     repair and sales operations, artisans, graphics   area; and a certain critical mass or minimum
land. Investment in capital facilities is not      and printing businesses, construction contrac-    scale of development.
substantial in most cases. Like the warehouse,     tors and special trades, and security and busi-
distribution and storage uses, the planning area   ness service firms. Most of these types of uses   A waterfront setting, views, recreation facili-
no longer offers significant locational advan-     have located in existing older buildings, adapt-  ties, and open space all enhance the market-
tages for construction uses, and water access is   ing space as needed, although the stock of large, ability for such uses. Although Oakland has
not as critical. It is likely that, over time, the older buildings is not always well-suited for     not established itself in the R&D market, at-
planning area will become less desirable for       this market.                                      tributes of portions of the planning area could
such uses.                                                                                           be competitive.
                                                   There is the potential for future growth of
Wholesale Produce Industry. The wholesale          light industrial activities in the planning area. Office. Office uses have been growing within
produce industry in Oakland is centered at the     Development of flex-type space that allows        the planning area. The mix of uses and his-
Oakland Produce Market in the Jack London          businesses with different activities and func-    torical quality of the Jack London District
District. However, market operations are not       tions would be desirable, as would improve-       support a less-traditional office niche in close
expected to remain there over the long term.       ments to enhance the desirability of older in-    proximity to the Oakland Central Business
A recent City study identified that physical       dustrial areas by providing some level of ame-    District (CBD). The area’s convenient loca-
conditions of the existing facilities are inad-    nity, upkeep, and security.                       tion and its opportunities for new space, for
equate for modern, efficient operations, and                                                         interesting space in older industrial buildings,
that the type of modern distribution facility      Research and Development. Research and            and for owner-occupied office space have at-
needed cannot be provided at the current lo-       Development (R&D) and various high-tech-          tracted a wide variety of smaller office ten-
cation. Eventual relocation of the wholesale       nology uses have been expanding in the inner      ants, including architects, consultants, media-
produce market will offer opportunities for        East Bay as growth continues in these sectors     related firms, and insurance, law, and other
reuse of the area.                                 throughout the region. Campus-type business       professional service firms. The demand for
                                                   park development is desired by many of these      office space is expected to continue to grow.
26                                                                                                                       Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Lower cost office space in the Embarcadero       Outside of Jack London Square, eating and           ity to downtown, and the availability of large
Cove area has also attracted office uses. That   drinking establishments that take advantage         warehouse buildings. These types of locations
location’s relative isolation from other office  of water views and ambiance are evident, but        in the planning area are likely to remain at-
activities has been offset by a waterfront set-  not plentiful. There is potential for growth        tractive to larger retail uses.
ting and lower cost space with surface park-     of these uses as new development occurs, pub-
ing.                                             lic access and open space improvements are          Hotels/Motels. Hotels and motels in the plan-
                                                 made, and larger numbers of people are attracted    ning area have been very successful. Lodging
Commercial. A range of commercial uses and       to the waterfront.                                  in the Embarcadero Cove area offers moder-
activities exist along the waterfront, and have                                                      ately priced rooms on the waterfront with
been increasing in importance over time. Po-     Larger scale retail uses also have been success-    good freeway accessibility and proximity to
tential exists for increased commercial activity ful in the planning area. A mix of retailers of-    the Oakland Airport. Additional hotel devel-
throughout the planning area.                    fering home furnishings, children’s and spe-        opment will soon be under construction in
                                                 cialty items, and off-price goods provide a         that area. Lodging in the Jack London Dis-
As a destination for dining, entertainment and   shopping attraction in the Jack London Dis-         trict includes moderately priced hotel/motel
retail uses, Jack London Square’s performance    trict. Retailers are doing well and sales have      units and a full-service hotel at the waterfront.
has improved significantly since the early       been increasing. There is potential to add simi-    Potential exists for a higher amenity waterfront
1990s. Major new attractions (Jack London        lar types of retailers nearby. Oakland and the      hotel in the Jack London District. Over time,
Cinema, Barnes and Noble, Yoshi’s), estab-       inner East Bay are very underserved in goods re-    hotels are a potential use for other waterfront
lished restaurants, and numerous special events  tailing.                                            locations, particularly in the Oak -to- Ninth
now bring thousands of people to the area.                                                           area, after new open space and recreation uses
There is momentum to build on and great          Good freeway accessibility and visibility, the      are developed there.
potential to strengthen and expand the area as   availability of a large, formerly industrial sites,
a stronger and desirable destination for retail, and a location on a major route (I-880) are         Housing and Work/Live. Residential uses in
dining and entertainment activities.             key factors in the recent development of a large    the planning area range from single-family
                                                 new retail uses such as the Super K-Mart in         units in the Kennedy Tract neighborhood to
Additional unique uses and attractions, as well  the San Antonio/Fruitvale area. Other large         higher density units and loft housing in the
as physical improvements, will be important      retailers (e.g. Arvey’s Paper) have located in the  Jack London District and work/live units in
to create a more inviting “people place” that    more industrial areas of the Jack London Dis-       transitioning industrial areas. The mixed-use
better capitalizes on its waterfront setting.    trict because of freeway accessibility, proxim-     character of the planning area makes it attrac
Section II: Objectives                                                                                                                             27

tive for work/live activities, which are com-    There also is the potential for additional work/      neighborhoods mitigated. The new uses can
patible with both the industrial and residen-    live and loft housing in the Jack London Dis-         help to strengthen the economy of the city
tial areas. Work/live studios in the older in-   trict in the future. There are some opportuni-        and shape Oakland’s identity as a waterfront
dustrial waterfront areas are relatively afford- ties for additional conversions of warehouse          city an identity that will be a source of pride
able among such uses in the East Bay, and are    buildings to work/live lofts and some oppor-          and enjoyment for residents and visitors for
attractive to artisans and craftspeople working  tunities for new construction. Prices and rents       years to come.
on the premises as well as to incubator-type     in the area will eventually reach levels high
businesses. Work/live and loft housing in the    enough to cover the costs of newly constructed        More specifically, the Estuary Policy Plan rec-
more central portions of the Jack London         loft housing and work/live projects. The              ommends reconfiguring land use patterns
District is more attractive to East Bay artisans district’s industrial/artistic feel, its mix of uses, along the shoreline, to build upon the follow-
and entrepreneurial professionals, and com-      and its urban development pattern are impor-          ing opportunities:
mands higher prices and rents. Throughout        tant aspects of the area’s desirability for urban,
the planning area, work/live and loft housing    nontraditional types of housing.                      ! Urban Entertainment and Mixed Uses
has been developed through the conversion and                                                             Extending from the Waterfront to the City
rehabilitation of older warehouse and indus-        ISSUES & OPPORTUNITIES                                Center and Chinatown. The Jack Lon-
trial buildings.                                                                                          don District has been established as a re-
                                                 With the decline of its historic industrial, ware-       gional destination for retail, dining and en-
There is the potential for more work/live uses   housing and commercial uses, there is the op-            tertainment, and as a lively mixed-use dis-
and housing in the planning area in the fu-      portunity to establish a new role for the Estu-          trict. There is now the distinct potential to
ture. Improvements that capitalize more on       ary—one that emphasizes a publicly spirited              build on the successes of the area, create a
the waterfront location in the San Antonio/      place that is tied more closely to the surround-         stronger regional destination, and establish
Fruitvale District could enhance the attractive- ing neighborhoods and districts.                         activity centers that benefit the city as a
ness of that area for additional conversions of                                                           whole. The strength of the entertainment/
existing buildings to work/live activities. The  In the future, successes in certain areas (such as       mixed-use segments of the economy offers
development of new housing in this formerly      Jack London Square) can be extended, exist-              an opportunity to realize a long-held city
industrial area would require public investment  ing residential neighborhoods reinforced, new            objective to connect the waterfront (physi-
in infrastructure and amenities, and would       mixed-use neighborhoods established, viable              cally and economically) to downtown Oak-
need to be done at a scale large enough to cre-  industries supported, and incompatibilities              land. Intensifying these uses at Jack Lon-
ate a neighborhood identity.                     between heavy industrial uses and residential            don Square, and expanding them along the
28                                                                                                                         Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

   Broadway Street corridor will realize that        area offers the largest single opportunity in  Objective LU-1: Provide for a broad mix-
   objective.                                        Oakland to provide for dramatic, large-        ture of activities within the Estuary area.
                                                     scale economic development, plus a main
! Redevelopment of Declining Commercial              public space at the waterfront.                As the waterfront changes away from indus-
   and Industrial Areas. Some portions of                                                           trial, warehousing and maritime support uses,
   the Estuary shoreline are underutilized, due       A system of inter-connected open spaces       a broader range of new uses should be encour-
   in large part to the decline of the industrial    can connect the Estuary shoreline with Lake    aged that are complementary with the exist-
   base that historically has dominated the Es-      Merritt. There is potential to build upon the  ing uses that remain. Development should
   tuary. Today, the Estuary provides an op-         diverse nature of the shoreline and provide    build upon the value of the waterfront as a
   portunity area for new uses that contribute       for a variety of water-oriented recreational   community amenity and attraction.
   to and/or benefit from a waterfront envi-         activities (both passive and active). These
   ronment. It can also be a valuable resource       recreational uses can be complemented by       A variety of uses can contribute in making the
   in fostering nontraditional land uses within      public-oriented activities, including hotels   Estuary of value to Oakland’s community and
   existing buildings (such as work/live, arti-      and restaurants, as well as nonprofit insti-   an attractive regional destination. A balance
   san studios, incubator, commercial and            tutions, cultural facilities, and existing ar- of uses and activities such as commercial, rec-
   R&D).                                             tisan studios on private property.             reation, and residential - both traditional and
                                                                                                    non-traditional - will add to a dynamic water-
  At the same time, these older buildings rep-          LAND USE OBJECTIVES                         front. Additionally, innovative mixes of cul-
   resent the history of the city. To the extent                                                    tural arts, institutions, and events that entice
   possible, they should be preserved and         Objectives for land use recognize the Estuary     people to experience and enjoy the waterfront
   adapted to contemporary re-use.                as an attractive location for development op-     in a variety of ways should be included. Mea-
                                                  portunities and intensification of a variety of   sures should be established to protect against
! Reuse of the 5th Avenue to 9th Avenue           activities. They are based on and reinforced      incompatibilities between diverse uses.
   Area. The possibility of consolidating         by the objectives in the General Plan Elements
   maritime operations in the Oakland Outer       addressing Land Use & Transportation (1998),      Objective LU-2: Provide for public activities
   Harbor creates opportunities for a major       Open Space, Conservation & Recreation             that are oriented to the water.
   redevelopment effort in an area extending      (OSCAR; 1996), Historic Preservation (1994)
   from the Ninth Avenue Terminal to the          and Housing (1992).                               The Estuary waterfront should be developed
   mouth of the Lake Merritt Channel. This                                                          in keeping with the spirit of the public trust,
Section II: Objectives                                                                                                                           29

Objective LU-3: Expand opportunities and                       promote economic development and                   All of this economic activity will succeed in
enhance the attractiveness of the Estuary as                   employment opportunity in Oakland.                 the Estuary area because of the unique business
a place to live.                                                                                                  environment created by the waterfront’s
                                                               Waterfront locations are attractive areas for      amenities. Strong economic links should be
The Estuary has been a place for people to                     businesses and commercial uses. Oakland’s          forged between the waterfront and the rest of
live, with neighborhoods established close to                  Estuary can accommodate a wide variety of          the City, so that the benefits derived from
jobs on inland sites. The mix of jobs and                      uses which will add to the economic helath         waterfront development are realized in the
housing is characteristic of urban waterfront                  and well-being of the City. Opportunities          Estuary study area and beyond.
locations, and provides a precedent for modern                 range from hotels, restaurants, and
day mixed use. It should remain so.                            entertainment venues to retail, general office     Objective LU-5: Provide for the orderly
                                                               space, cultural facilities, and business parks. At transformation of land uses while
In the future, opportunities to develop hous-                  the same time, existing commercial and             acknowledging and respecting cultural and
ing should be supported in the Estuary study                   industrial uses that are already extablished and   historical resources.
area. An expanded residential population and                   which also contribute to the City’s tax and
associated services would support commercial                   employment base should be encouraged to            Transformation of the Estuary should take
and recreational uses, and over time generate                  expand. These are all ‘growth industries’, which   place in an orderly fashion, incrementally, and
neighborhoods. A larger day and night popu-                    present the opportunity for Oakland’s              in consideration of the long-range goals of the
lation would add to the safety and livability                  residents and business community to receive        city.
of the waterfront. Development should be                       direct and indirect economic benefits.
designed to avoid the feeling of ‘gated’ or pri-                                                                  The Estuary Policy Plan calls for changes in
vate communities.1                                             Employment opportunities, the tax base, and        land use and new development projects that
                                                               spin-off activities should expand with the         will be implemented over an extended time
Objective LU-4: Develop the Estuary area                       introduction of new waterfront developments.       frame, within the context of a dynamic urban
in a way that enhances Oakland’s long-term                     In addition, the tax revenue derived from new      environment. Infill of vacant and underutilized
economic development.                                          development will add to the ability to develop     parcels, as well as demolition or buildings
                                                               the open space and other amenities which are       adapted for reuse should occur while respect-
The waterfront has historically been, and                      envisioned.                                        ing cultural and historic resources, when ap-
continues to be, an important place to                                                                            plicable.
1
  See Oakland General Plan, Land Use Transportation Element, Policy W9.3.
30                                                                                                                                    Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

The waterfront is one of the city’s most his-                   should be aligned and designed to enhance
toric areas. There are several districts, sites and/            greater continuity of land use. This will allow
or buildings of significance, which should be                   the Estuary area to become a more integral
respected, assessed, and preserved, if feasible.2               part of the city. More specifically, Broadway,
                                                                Webster, Fifth, 29th, Fruitvale, 42nd and High
Objective LU-6: Create greater land use                         Streets should be assessed and carefully de-
continuity between the Estuary waterfront                       signed when they are reconstructed to promote
and adjacent inland districts.                                  clear and safe means of access from inland
                                                                neighborhoods to the waterfront.
The historic development patterns in the
Estuary study area have resulted in a unique
juxtaposition of industrial, residential, and
commercial uses, plus divisive transportation
corridors. It is an objective of the Estuary Plan
to minimize the adverse impacts associated
with incompatible uses.
Currently, there is a break in the land use
pattern as it meets the Estuary shoreline.
Adjacent neighborhoods and districts are
interrupted by transportation corridors, thus
exaggerating the contrast between activities
along the shoreline and those in inland areas of
the city.
While the regional transportation corridors are
here to stay, local-serving roadways and streets
2
  See Oakland General Plan, Historic & Preservation Element, Policies 3.0 series.
Section II: Objectives                                                                                          31

The Estuary shoreline will include a wide range of open space experiences.
32                                                                         Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Shoreline Access & Public Spaces
The planning of open space in Oakland has       However, Robinson identified a significant       However, recreational activities such as fish-
long focused on the physical features of the    problem which has only partially been re-        ing, viewing, sitting, bicycling, jogging, and
city—in particular, the creeks and canyons      solved: Residents had “no access to their glo-   walking, have increased in recent years, along
leading from the hills to the Estuary.          rious waterfront on one of the most beautiful    with recognition of the shoreline’s value as
                                                bays of the world.”                              habitat for wildlife and as a place for
Over 100 years ago, in 1888, landscape archi-                                                    birdwatching, nature walks, and interpretive
tect Frederick Law Olmsted made a proposal      Although Lake Merritt, the creeks and hill-      and educational experiences.
for a “wildwood” chain of parks throughout      sides were viewed as important elements in
the city. Later, in the early 1900s, Mayor Mott Olmstead’s chain of parks and open spaces                 SHORELINE ACCESS
engaged the world-famous planner Charles        within the city, the shoreline was not origi-
Mulford Robinson to prepare a plan for the      nally conceived in open space terms. At the      Efforts to develop public access along the
city. The 1905 Robinson plan established a      turn of the century, when parks and play-        shoreline have been guided by BCDC, which
system of parks and playgrounds under the       grounds were being built in inland areas, docks  (in a joint effort with the City and the Port) is
newly created Oakland Park Commission, and      and wharves, were being constructed on the       currently preparing a public access plan for the
laid the foundation for a regional park sys-    waterfront. Although the Robinson plan had       entire Oakland waterfront, including the Es-
tem. Following bond approval, a period of       identified the concept of building a recre-      tuary shoreline. In addition, the EBRPD is
park development ensued. Lakeside Park sur-     ational pier at the foot of Broadway, the wa-    developing plans to extend the Martin Luther
rounding Lake Merritt was developed, and        terfront was principally seen as a place of com- King, Jr. Regional Shoreline (an environmen-
Lake Merritt itself became the first official   merce.                                           tal reserve on the eastern end of the planning
wildlife refuge in the state of California.                                                      area).
Section II: Objectives                                                                                                                         33

34 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
Section II: Objectives 3
         San Francisco Bay Trail                  the city. In particular, recreational boating has   tire Jack London waterfront and occur over a
                                                  expanded dramatically.                              day or weekend (such as the boat show, Festa,
Regional interest in a continuous pedestrian                                                          etc.). Major concerts have been very success-
and bike path along the bay has resulted in       Plans are underway by the Port, City, and other     ful, and over the past three years, attendance
efforts coordinated by the Association of Bay     entities to improve and expand boating facili-      has tripled to crowds as large as 15,000. Other
Area Governments (ABAG) to create a 400-          ties. Specifically, the Port is rebuilding its 160- events include weekly farmers’ markets, con-
mile Bay Trail in nine bay counties. In Oak-      berth marina at Jack London Square and Cal          certs, special celebrations and rallies, which
land, 21 miles of the Bay Trail are planned,      Crew has proposed the relocation and expan-         typically attract around 1,000 people and are
but only 8.5 miles have been completed, pri-      sion of its boathouse within the Union Point        typically staged at the foot of Broadway.
marily on existing public streets in the Em-      area. In addition, a new Aquatics Center is
barcadero Cove and Jack London Square ar-         planned in Estuary Park, which would expand            ISSUES & OPPORTUNITIES
eas.                                              the programs that currently take place on Lake
                                                  Merritt and provide boating instruction and         What was evident to Charles Robinson in
               Water Spaces                       similar activities.                                 1905, to the League of Women Voters in 1993,
                                                                                                      and to the General Plan Congress in 1996, is
Certain recreational activities fit well within                   Special Events                      still an issue today. Although several places
the confines of protected water of the Estu-                                                          exist where public waterfront access has been
ary. Small boat sailing, rowing, canoeing, and    Through the efforts of the Port of Oakland,         provided (eg., MLK Regional Shoreline, Jack
kayaking established a presence along the wa-     the waterfront has increasingly developed into      London Square, Estuary Park, Portview Park,
terfront, and are activities well suited to the   the primary location for Oakland’s civic            several fishing piers, etc), the Estuary shore-
calm, smooth waters of the Estuary. The tra-      events, community celebrations, and cultural        line is not a cohesive open space system.
dition of rowing dates from the early 1900s,      activities. Some of these are major events at-
when the University of California (Cal Crew)      tracting several thousand people, such as Cir-      Existing sites are isolated from one another
located its boathouse in the area amid ware-      que du Soleil, the Fourth of July fireworks,        and from the rest of the city and often not
houses and agricultural industrial businesses.    lighting of the Christmas tree, and boat pa-        well identified or developed. Open space is fre-
Recreational interest in the shoreline has in-    rades.                                              quently shared with automobile traffic. The
creased with time, particularly as industrial and                                                     only existing city park within the area, Estu-
warehouse activities have shifted away from       Others are large events that are somewhat less      ary Park, is difficult to find and is poorly main-
the mid Estuary to the western periphery of       intensive, and may be spread out over the en-       tained. Furthermore, some of the prominent
36                                                                                                                          Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

spaces that are used for major civic celebra-     ! Continuous Shoreline Access / Fill In Gaps         ! Tidelands Enhancement. Additional tidal
tions and events are subject to future develop-     in the Bay Trail. A continuous Bay Trail              marshland enhancement areas to provide
ment.                                               immediately adjacent to the shoreline, with           valuable habitat for birds and other wild-
                                                    a separated pedestrian path (where physi-             life species, and new opportunities for bird
Despite tremendous community interest in ex-        cally feasible) as well as a continuous recre-        watching and other educational/interpretive
panding open space and recreational opportu-        ation-oriented boulevard that accommo-                experiences.
nities along the Estuary, the creation of a co-     dates pedestrians and bicyclists and provides
hesive open space system has been stymied by        for vehicular and transit access.                  ! Connections to New Parks and Open
existing ownerships and water-related busi-                                                               Spaces. Connections to new parks and
nesses, interrupted roadways, and barriers cre-   ! Waterfront Parks. New waterfront parks                open spaces planned along the opposite
ated by rail spurs.                                 along the Bay Trail, ranging from additional          shore, in Alameda and on Coast Guard Is-
                                                    urban spaces for intensive recreational ac-           land, to reinforce the Estuary as a primary
Yet, the waterfront offers many opportunities       tivities to large open areas for performances,        open space for the communities adjoining it.
to add to the amount and quality of public          competitive events, or civic celebrations.
recreational space. It has the capability to sup-                                                             SHORELINE ACCESS &
port a wide variety of recreational activities,   ! Boating and Water-Oriented Recreation.                PUBLIC SPACE OBJECTIVES
(particularly water sports), and the potential      Additional facilities for boating, in particu-
to provide visual relief, opening up intensely      lar, to facilitate the transition of smaller craft Objectives for access and public spaces recog-
developed urban areas to the bay. A number          (canoes, rowboats, kayaks) into the water.         nize the emerging role of the waterfront as a
of opportunities exist to create a “necklace” of                                                       key place for open space and recreation within
open spaces along the Estuary. As changes in      ! Link to Lake Merritt. A public open space          the city and region. It builds upon the objec-
land use occur, continuous public access punc-      and pedestrian linkage along Lake Merritt          tives for public access, open space, and recre-
tuated by larger open spaces and linked to the      Channel between Estuary Park and Lake              ation articulated in various planning docu-
rest of the city, will become an attractive ele-    Merritt, to build upon the recreational            ments, most notably the Open Space, Conser-
ment of a revitalized waterfront.                   value of the lake and the Estuary, and to          vation and Recreation Element (1996) and the
                                                    create stronger ties with the surrounding          Land Use and Transportation Element (1998)
Opportunities to establish a larger and more        communities, in a manner that maintains            of the General Plan.
coherent network of shoreline access and public     the high quality of regionally significant
recreational spaces include:                        wildlife habitat.
Section II: Objectives                                                                                                                             37

Objective SA-1: Create a clear and              Cove, Brooklyn Basin and Coast Guard Is-         A number of parks and larger open spaces are
continuous system of public access along the    land; and the lively areas within the Jack Lon-  proposed that would build on the intrinsic
Estuary shoreline.                              don District. Each of these special qualities    character of the shoreline and provide for a
                                                should be reflected in the design of parks,      wide range of recreational experiences. The
Provision of continuous shoreline access is an  promenades, and open spaces.                     intent is to create series of parks and other
important goal embraced by both regional and                                                     publicly accessible spaces, capable of accom-
local communities. Futhermore, it is a spe-     General objectives for the provision/enhance-    modating a wide variety of recreational activ-
cific mission of BCDC and ABAG’s Bay Trail      ment of open space and associated facilities at  ity, connected by a shoreline promenade.
program, and a prime objective of the East      all locations include:                           These could include:
Bay Regional Park District. In the Oakland
segment, the intention is to provide a con-     ! Preservation and protection of the natural     ! A portion of the “Meadow” in front of
tinuous system of public waterfront spaces,          features, wildlife and vegetation;               the Port Building in Jack London Square;
and to provide for a continuous open space
network which connects all waterfront ele-      ! An easily identifiable standard sign system    ! A new “Green” to anchor Phase 2 devel
ments, which provides a variety of waterfront       that can be implemented throughout the             opments at Jack London Square;
experiences.                                        open space system, to provide directional/
                                                    orientation/interpretive information;        ! A new “Greenway” extending along Webster
Within the parameters of safety and security,                                                         Street to connect Jack London Square to
development of public facilities should be un-  ! Physical improvements to increase visitor           the inland neighborhoods;
dertaken according to site-specific standards,      comfort, safety, and pleasure (eg. separated
based on the physical capacities and program-       paths, landscaping, lighting, observation    ! Expansion of Estuary Park;
ming needs of the particular site.                  pads, comfort stations, trash receptacles,
                                                    furniture, emergency services, vehicular     ! A series of parks in the 5th-9th Avenue
There is a diverse sequence of spaces along the     parking, etc.)                                    area;
shoreline, including the protected nature of
the Lake Merritt Channel; the marshy habitat    Objective SA-2: Punctuate the shoreline          ! A new park at Union Point; and
that extends to Damon Slough; the expansive-    promenade with a series of parks and larger
ness of the Fifth Avenue Point shoreline edge;  open spaces.                                     ! Expanded and improved facilities along
the sheltered character of the Embarcadero                                                            the MLK Regional Shoreline.
38                                                                                                                   Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Objective SA-3: Emphasize visual corridors         junction with the EBRPD, neighborhood or-         awareness and understanding of the contribu-
and open space links to surrounding inland         ganizations and other interested parties to en-   tion the Estuary makes to the quality of life in
areas.                                             sure that the recreational activities provided    Oakland today, all waterfront facilities should
                                                   help to meet identified needs.                    be considered as potential visitor centers. To
To make the Estuary shoreline more accessible,                                                       the extent feasible, significant historic sites and
links to inland areas should be strengthened.      Objective SA-5: Enhance natural areas along       buildings should be preserved, adapted for re-
Visual corridors and physical links to the wa-     the shoreline.                                    use, and explained. Open space and shoreline
ter should be provided at regular intervals along                                                    access areas should be programmed to include
the shoreline, using the grid of city streets in   There are significant opportunities along the     educational and interpretive elements.. Ac-
their full widths, to enhance the connection       Estuary shoreline and Lake Merritt Channel        tivities such as historic walks and self-guided
between inland areas and the water. In addi-       to enhance remnant tidal marshes and other        tours should continue to be offered. Plaques
tion, the design of open spaces should pro-        natural areas. These areas can add to the visual  or appropriate markers that recognize and
mote opportunities to appreciate views and         enjoyment and diversity of the shoreline, and     commemerorate the waterfront’s history
waterfront amenities from inland areas. At         expand wildlife habitat for birds and other       should be encouraged.3
the same time, key corridors should be extended    species. They can also create outdoor areas for
outward to the Estuary itself, to provide view-    direct learning and experiences related to na-    To the extent feasible, significant historic sites
ing experiences that are unique to the Estuary.    ture.                                             and buildings should be preserved, adapted for
                                                                                                     re-use, and explained. Open space and shore-
Objective SA-4: Develop opportunities for          Objective SA-6: Encourage the development         line access areas should be programmed to in-
recreational activities that are oriented to the   of educational and cultural programs and          clude educational and interpretive elements.
waterfront and serve identified neighborhood       interpretive facilities that enhance
needs.                                             understanding of the waterfront environment.
Recreational areas along the waterfront should     The Estuary shoreline is an ideal site for learn-
meet the needs of the region and the city as a     ing about nature, the history of the city, the
whole, as well as specific adjacent neighbor-      economic activities supporting it, and the
hoods and districts. Programming of larger         unique recreational and leisure activities avail-
recreational areas should be undertaken in con-    able to residents. In order to enhance public
3
  See Oakland General Plan, OSCAR Element, OS 7.3.
Section II: Objectives                                                                                                                                39

40 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
Section II: Objectives 4
A continuous waterfront parkway will provide for pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular movement along the Estuary shoreline
42                                                                                                                      Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Regional Circulation & Local Street Network
Soon after its inception in 1852, Oakland (and   freight operations as major components of       crossings along the line. But the difficulties
the waterfront in particular) became a major     Oakland’s transportation function.              posed by the rail network for local circulation
crossroads within the region, state, and nation.                                                 were magnified by construction of the I-880
An early catalyst for economic development       While Oakland’s comprehensive system of pas-    freeway, which parallels the railroad right-of-
occurred in 1869 with the establishment of       senger and freight transportation represents    way. The combination of the freeway, the rail
Oakland as the western terminus of the trans-    important economic arteries for the Bay Re-     corridor, and the BART corridor creates a
continental railroad. Subsequent development     gion, it has been developed at the expense of   physical barrier to auto traffic as well as pedes-
of transportation infrastructure focused on the  the local circulation system.                   trians and bicyclists.
railroad terminus: steam trains and ferries to
take passengers to San Francisco, wharves and                     BARRIERS                       Additionally, the juxtaposition of the freeway
steamers to move freight, and additional rail                                                    system over the city grid has created a series of
connections to distribute goods up and down      In the Estuary area, the sheer magnitude of     oddly-shaped land parcels that are hard to
the coast.                                       the regional transportation infrastructure has  make use of. Confusing interchanges, sub-
                                                 contributed to the fragmentation of the local   standard ramps, and circuitous routing of traf-
In the years since, Oakland’s strategic location street system, and created a physical and psy-  fic are disorienting to travelers in the Estuary
has helped to enhance the city’s role as the hub chological barrier between the city and its wa- area. The confusing nature of the circulation
of a transportation network serving the city,    terfront.                                       system creates safety problems and disincen-
the San Francisco Bay region, and entire West-                                                   tives for those unfamiliar with the area to visit.
ern half of the United States. BART, Amtrak,     For example, railyards separate the waterfront
aviation services all have joined the historic   and the city, penetrable only at specific grade
Section II: Objectives                                                                                                                          43

Furthermore, it is not possible to walk, bi-      more comprehensible and amenable circula-          interchange improvements can only be un-
cycle, or drive directly from one end of the      tion system that ties together the various at-     dertaken with Caltrans’ approval and in-
Estuary to the other. Crosstown routes that       tractions of the waterfront, and reconnects them   creasingly must rely upon nontraditional
link the hills and the bay are ambiguous, and     to the city. These include:                        sources of funding, consideration should
meet the Estuary shoreline in an awkward or                                                          be given to the creation of full-movement
interrupted fashion.                              ! Embarcadero Parkway. A continuous                interchanges at selected points along the
                                                      parkway connecting Oak Street on the west      freeway (Caltrans standards suggest one-
Crossings of the Estuary to Alameda and               with 66th Avenue on the east could be cre-     mile intervals) and to the removal of sub-
waterborne connections to the larger region           ated. This parkway would not only pro-         standard on and off-ramps.
are fairly limited, considering the proximity         vide a critical link in the circulation net-
of destinations in the two cities. Three bridges      work, but would also provide a sense of       As an integral part of these improvements,
and the two tubes provide vehicular access            orientation, connect diverse open spaces,      it is important to enhance parallel circula-
between Oakland and Alameda, and a ferry              and provide paths for strolling and passive    tion on both sides of the I-880 corridor,
terminal at Jack London Square provides ac-           recreation.                                    but away from the Estuary shore.
cess to Alameda and San Francisco. However,
these connections are clustered at the ends of       The parkway could be designed to accom-        The absence of direct connections from I-
the Estuary, leaving a large reach of the shore-      modate a full range of transportation          880 (Cypress Freeway) to Downtown Oak-
line (Jack London Square to Fruitvale) with-          modes, including automobile, transit, bi-      land and Jack London Square is a concern
out connections across the water that link it         cycles and pedestrians, but managed as a       to the city. Efforts must be made imme-
to Alameda or the larger Bay Region.                  “slow street” to discourage through move-      diately to rectify this severe problem, and
                                                      ment of truck traffic.                         make the waterfront accessible from the
    ISSUES & OPPORTUNITIES                                                                           regional freeway network.
                                                  ! Freeway Access. Simplifying and enhanc-
It is absolutely necessary to clarify and improve     ing freeway access to and through the area   ! Local Access. Local access corridors across
the circulation system to and along the water-        could be achieved by consolidating freeway     the freeway that enable motorists, pedes-
front in order to meet the objective to enhance       ramps and linking them to major thor-          trians and bicyclists to reach the water could
the image and identity of the Estuary area and        oughfares. Existing on and off-ramps oc-       be constructed. Once freeway ramps are
make the waterfront a more integral part of           cur in a seemingly haphazard manner, and       consolidated at the major interchanges,
the city. Several opportunities exist to create a     do not meet current standards. Although        opportunities to create and enhance links
44                                                                                                                    Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

    to inland neighborhoods can be maxi-             don Square with the City Center and be-       reflected in the General Plan Land Use &
    mized.                                           yond, could be implemented. Although          Transportation Element and Bicycle &
                                                     more difficult to accomplish, there is also   Pedestrian Plan.
! Waterborne Transportation. New links               an opportunity to establish a rail transit
    by waterborne transit (eg. ferries, water        link between the Fruitvale BART station       Objective C-1: Improve and clarify regional
    taxis and shuttles) that utilize the Estuary     and Alameda along an existing rail right-     access to Oakland’s waterfront.
    as a corridor for circulation, and which con-    of-way on Fruitvale Avenue, which crosses
    nect future activity centers on both the         the Estuary into Alameda.                     Interchanges along the I-880 freeway should
    Alameda and Oakland sides, can be estab-                                                       be consolidated at arterial roadways and
    lished.                                       ! Parking. As land uses change in the Estu-      brought up to current standards to improve
                                                     ary area, adequate parking will be required   access to and within the Estuary area.
   Ferry service from existing terminals is ex-      to support new uses. Parking areas should
    pected to increase between Oakland/              be strategically located, in accordance with  The I-980 connection to the Alameda Tubes
    Alameda and San Francisco, as well as to         urban design objectives for the area. Park-   at the Jackson Street off-ramp currently routes
    Treasure Island, Angel Island, and other         ing facilities should be evenly distributed   traffic through city streets, and should be im-
    recreational destinations.                       and accessible, while avoiding prime wa-      proved to alleviate congestion on local streets
                                                     terfront spaces and pedestrian precincts.     and clarify access routes to Alameda and on
   In addition, there is the potential for water                                                   Oakland local streets.
    taxi and shuttle service in the upper reaches
    of the Estuary, linking activity centers as                                                    Improved freeway interchanges should be con-
    they develop. While expanded water taxi         REGIONAL CIRCULATION &                         sidered at 5th Avenue, 23rd Avenue, Fruitvale,
    and ferry service has long been pursued in       LOCAL STREET NETWORK                          and High Street/42nd Avenue. A new inter-
    the Estuary, this may be an opportune time                   OBJECTIVES                        change should be investigated to provide di-
    to tie it more closely to new development                                                      rect access from I-880 to Jack London Square
    opportunities.                                Objectives for regional circulation and local    and downtown Oakland.
                                                  street networks recognize the importance of
! Transit Loop. A trolley line along the          circulation and access to support the objectives
    Broadway spine, connecting the Jack Lon-      for land use, public access and public spaces.
                                                  These add specificity to a number of objectives
Section II: Objectives                                                                                                                          45

46 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
Section II: Objectives 4
Objective C-2: Establish a continuous             overview areas, and, where appropriate, park-   Objective C-4: Strengthen local circulation
waterfront parkway; a safe promenade for          ing, and other features which provide a con-    connections between Oakland neighborhoods
pedestrians, bicycles, and slow-moving            tinuous parkway character for pleasant driv-    and the waterfront.
automobiles.                                      ing, walking, and cycling. The parkway should
                                                  be slow-moving. The roadway should be ac-       With anticipated improvements to the re-
For the most part, vehicular circulation should   companied by separate or contiguous bicycling   gional transportation system, better connec-
be accommodated on existing roadways.             and pedestrian paths where feasible.            tions can be made between the waterfront and
However, a continuous waterfront parkway is                                                       inland neighborhoods.
a top priority in the Estuary Policy Plan. The    Objective C-3: Balance through movement
Parkway should take advantage of and stay         with local access along the waterfront.         Specifically, emphasis should be placed on
within the Embarcadero right-of-way, extend-                                                      improving those connections which already
ing from Jack London Square to Park Street.       In many urban waterfronts, shoreline trans-     exist: Washington, Broadway, Webster,
                                                  portation corridors have been allowed to be-    Franklin, Oak, 5th, 16th, 23rd, 29th Avenues,
Beyond Park Street, it may be necessary to        come freeway-like environments, providing       Fruitvale and High Streets. These links can be
purchase additional right-of-way to allow the     through movement at the expense of local ac-    strengthened through alterations of street
parkway to be connected through to Fruitvale      cess. The concept of the Embarcadero Park-      alignments or extensions of existing roadways,
Avenue and beyond to Tidewater Avenue and         way, described above, aims to properly bal-     relocating parking areas, and improving pedes-
66th Street.                                      ance local access with through movement.        trian facilities.
West of Oak Street, the parkway should meet       Traffic-calming methods should be incorpo-      Objective C-5: Promote transit service to and
the city grid, providing several routes west to   rated into roadway design throughout the        along the waterfront.
Mandela Parkway.                                  study area, to ensure that vehicular movement
                                                  is managed in consideration of recreational and Land and water-based transit services should
The configuration and cross-sectional charac-     aesthetic values. The parkway should not be-    be extended to and along the waterfront. Tran-
ter of the roadway will likely vary, depending    come an overflow or alleviator route to the I-  sit services should be focused along Broadway,
on availability of right-of-way, adjoining land   880 freeway, and it should prohibit through     Washington, Franklin, Third, and Fruitvale.
uses, and traffic conditions. The parkway and     truck movement.
all other waterfront roads should treated with
appropriate landscaping, lighting, signage, rest/
48                                                                                                                    Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
A special transit loop linking Jack London       Objective C-7: Provide adequate parking
Square with other significant activity centers   without diminishing the quality of the urban
(eg., Old Oakland, the Oakland Museum,           environment.
and the Lake Merritt and City Center BART
stations), should also be encouraged. Passen-    In the Jack London District in particular, pro-
ger rail service between Fruitvale BART and      vision of adequate parking is critical to
Alameda should be studied further.               accomodate both existing and future demands.
                                                 Several sites currently used for surface parking
Redevelopment on both the Oakland and            are subject to future development. In addi-
Alameda sides of the Estuary may, in the future, tion, parked vehicles are ‘spilling over’ into
warrant increased ferry and water taxi service.  pedestrian areas, to the detriment of the
Water taxis can link activity centers on both    District’s attractiveness. To resolve this, a com-
sides of the Estuary, transforming the water-    prehensive parking management strategy
way into a viable boulevard that brings together should be developed to plan for and provide
the Oakland and Alameda waterfronts.             adequate parking.
Objective C-6: Improve pedestrian and
bicycle circulation.
Bicycle and pedestrian networks should be
extended throughout the waterfront. By en-
hancing the Embarcadero Parkway, a continu-
ous pedestrian path and bicycle route can be
established along the waterfront. Links from
the parkway to upland neighborhoods are pro-
posed along connecting routes, including Oak,
Lake Merritt Channel, 2nd Street to 3rd
Street, Fifth, Fruitvale, and Alameda to High,
as well as the grid of streets in the Jack Lon-
don District.
Section II: Objectives                                                                              49

50 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
    III District Recommendations
Section III: District Recommendations 51
Aerial view of the Central Jack London District.
52                                               Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Jack London District
The Jack London District encompasses ap-          Over the past several decades, the Jack Lon-     to the port’s maritime services in the middle
proximately 225 acres of land situated between    don District has experienced tremendous          and outer harbors.
Adeline Street on the west and Oak Street on      change. The westward growth of the port and
the east. Properties within the district are pre- development of container terminals on filled     The construction of regional transportation
dominantly in private ownership, but also in-     land, as well as the decline in shipbuilding and projects in the 1960s, such as the Webster Tube
clude some large public land holdings (Figure     fishing after World War II, brought about a      to Alameda and the Nimitz Freeway, and the
III-1). In particular, the Port of Oakland has a  transformation in the area. Many of the ser-     siting of large-scale public buildings along the
significant presence, with ownership of 31        vice support and industrial uses that tradition- freeway corridor, contributed to the physical
acres of land on the water side of the Embar-     ally occupied the district declined and left the isolation between this area and the rest of the
cadero, as well as additional parcels inland. The area. Some buildings were vacated as these       city (Figure III-2).
Jack London District historically served as an    uses moved elsewhere; others continued to be
important center of maritime trade and com-       used, but not fully; and still others were       Today, the transformation of the Jack Lon-
merce, and today is associated with the figure    adapted to new uses.                             don District is well underway. Uses such as
of Jack London, his seafaring adventures, and                                                      retail, dining and entertainment have expanded
spirit of rugged individualism. These historic    Although industrial and distribution uses re-    along the waterfront. Home improvement
resources are represented in the historic prop-   main dispersed throughout the district, they     and off-price retail outlets are emerging to the
erties and districts that exist throughout the    are particularly concentrated in the western     west of Broadway, with office, work/live and
Jack London District (Appendix A).                portions of the district between Adeline Street  loft residential uses are increasing to the east.
                                                  and Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard, close     It is an opportune moment to capitalize upon
                                                                                                   these positive trends and realize longstanding
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                            53

54 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
Section III: District Recommendations 5
                                                                                                                                        LAND USE
                                                                                                                      The policies for land use emphasize strength-
                                                                                                                      ening the district’s economic role within the
                                                                                                                      region, building on existing trends and poten-
                                                                                                                      tials, and broadening the appeal and quality
                                                                                                                      of the area. Envisioned for the area is a mix of
                                                                                                                      uses that builds on the amenity of the water-
                                                                                                                      front and provides a strong connection with
                                                                                                                      the downtown.
                                                                                                                      Specifically, within the Jack London District,
                                                                                                                      the Estuary Policy Plan reinforces existing
                                                                                                                      trends toward commercial and residential land
                                                                                                                      uses (Figure III-3). New uses should be pro-
                                                                                                                      moted as infill development at Jack London
                                                                                                                      Square and along the Broadway spine to cre-
                                                                                                                      ate an intense area of public interest and activ-
The Jack London waterfront is becoming a significant regional destination. The Cirque du Soleil attracted hundreds of ity that seamlessly links the waterfront to
thousands of visitors in 1997.
                                                                                                                      downtown Oakland.
community objectives for renewal of the dis-                  ued redevelopment of the Jack London Dis-
trict as a whole.                                             trict is essential not only for the district itself,    To the east of Broadway, new residential de-
                                                              but also as part of a citywide and downtown             velopment that is compatible with the existing
The Jack London District should play an in-                   improvement strategy that will help to repo-            industrial use and character of the area should
creasingly important role in contributing to                  sition the downtown as a multidimensional               be encouraged. A residential population in this
Oakland’s quality of life and making the wa-                  activity center.                                        area can infuse new vitality into the district as
terfront a more visible part of the city. The                                                                         a whole. West of Broadway, the trend toward
area is closely tied to downtown Oakland,                                                                             off-price retail should be continued and en-
both physically and functionally. The contin-                                                                         couraged.
56                                                                                                                                        Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Section III: District Recommendations 5
For ease of discussion, the Jack London Dis-      JL-1.1: Expand commercial uses along the           should be developed as active publicly-oriented
trict has been subdivided into 7 subdistricts.    entire five-block frontage of Lower                attractions such as retail, dining or entertain-
Land use policies for each are presented as fol-  Broadway. The plan recommends that a               ment uses.
lows:                                             coordinated redevelopment effort be pursued
                                                  by the Port, the City, and the private sector to   Infill developments should be carefully de-
             Retail, Dining, &                    revitalize Lower Broadway as an integral           signed to insure that views and shoreline ac-
         Entertainment District                   extension of the waterfront and downtown.          cess are maximized, and that the continuity of
                                                  (See also Policy JL-13.1) These blocks are         pedestrian areas is maintained. In order to in-
POLICY JL-1: REINFORCE RETAIL, DINING             particularly important for retail, dining, and     tensify the continuity of pedestrian activity
AND ENTERTAINMENT USES ALONG THE                  entertainment uses. Upper level office uses        within the area, several infill and development
WATERFRONT, AND EXTEND THESE USES                 and ground-floor retail uses should be             opportunities are identified. These include:
ALONG    BROADWAY TO CREATE A REGIONAL            encouraged, to promote activity and daytime
ENTERTAINMENT DESTINATION.                        populations on the streets.                        ! A “flagship” retail anchor or entertainment
                                                                                                        attraction, on the vacant site at the south-
The Jack London Square has been established       If necessary, acquisition and assembly of selected    west corner of Broadway and the Embarca-
as a significant regional destination for retail, frontage properties for development projects          dero. Development of this site should gen-
dining and entertainment. The Estuary Policy      should be facilitated by the use of redevelop-        erate significant activity and interest at this
Plan recommends that existing pattern of uses     ment tools as part of an overall strategy of in-      key intersection. This development should
be expanded and intensified within the Phase      tensification and enhancement.                        be of a landmark design befitting its strate-
I portion of Jack London Square (i.e., be-                                                              gic location.
tween Clay and Webster Streets), and that the     JL-1.2 Intensify Phase I of Jack London
district to be expanded northward along the       Square. Within the Phase I portion of Jack         ! A freestanding restaurant, dining pavilion,
Lower Broadway corridor between the Embar-        London Square, (i.e., between Clay and                or other attraction adjacent to the proposed
cadero and Fifth Street.                          Webster Streets) the Estuary Policy Plan rec-         ‘Meadow Green’ open space and historic boat
                                                  ommends the intensification of retail, dining,        basin at FDR Pier. (See Policy JL-9.1). This
More specific policy guidance for development     office, hotel, and entertainment activities in        development should create a strong desti-
within this area includes:                        conjunction with the enhancement of water-            nation at the western terminus of the Wa-
                                                  front open spaces and other shoreline ameni-          ter Street corridor.
                                                  ties. All ground-level frontages of buildings
58                                                                                                                       Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

! Additional kiosks and retail extensions in         office building and the courtyard between          Commercial-Recreation District
   the plaza adjacent to the existing Barnes &       the two buildings.
   Noble bookstore. The kiosks, food carts, etc.                                                     POLICY JL-2: ENCOURAGE THE REDE-
   should help to intensify activity on a daily      Ground-level uses that face on Water Street     VELOPMENT OF PHASE II OF JACK LON-
   basis, and provide patrons with high-qual-        and the shoreline promenade should be           DON S QUARE BETWEEN WEBSTER AND
   ity food services and an attractive environ-      publicly accessible, and include retail, res-   ALICE STREETS.
   ment for outdoor eating, with views to the        taurants, public attractions, or other simi-
   water.                                            lar uses. While visitor pick-up and drop-       The Phase II portion of Jack London Square
                                                     off should be accommodated, all parking         represents a generation of waterfront redevel-
    In addition, expansion of existing retail        should be off-site. (See Policy JL-13)          opment undertaken in the 1960s and 1970s.
   uses on the south side of the plaza will es-                                                      Today, many of the buildings at Jack London
   tablish a stronger retailing edge. Water Street ! Redevelopment of the block bounded by the       Village are in deteriorating condition. Conti-
   should be maintained as a through prom-           historic boat basin, the Embarcadero, Clay      nuity of public pedestrian access between Jack
   enade. The design of the pavilions and re-        and Jefferson streets for public-oriented com-  London Village and the rest of the Jack Lon-
   tail extensions should contribute to the fes-     mercial-recreational and/or cultural use (e.g., don District is circuitous and unfriendly.
   tive visual environment.                          maritime museum). This longer term              While the Heinolds First and Last Chance Sa-
                                                     project should be pursued to help activate      loon and Jack London’s cabin provide a unique
! A cafe extension on the south side of 77 Jack      the water’s edge and create a major activity    sense of the historic waterfront, they are iso-
   London Square (the Oakland Tribune build-         anchor at the western edge of the Jack Lon-     lated in relation to surrounding activities.
   ing). A cafe extension or similar structure       don waterfront.
   should be constructed to create a more in-                                                        This and adjacent sites currently used for park-
   teractive environment along this segment        ! Upper level office use throughout this sub-     ing are the only viable opportunities to de-
   of the Water Street promenade.                    area. Similar to the Lower Broadway area,       velop additional commercial and recreational
                                                     upper level office uses should be encour-       uses, and add to the luster of Jack London
! Hotel Expansion. The Waterfront Plaza              aged to promote an active daytime popu-         Square as an entertainment venue. However,
   Hotel should be encouraged to expand              lation. Development should be carefully         development of these sites requires extraordi-
   within the ‘footprint’ of the existing ho-        sited and designed to avoid shadowing of        nary sensitivity to the waterfront location, the
   tel/restaurant, the “Water Street III” retail/    the Water Street axis.                          shoreline edge, and to surrounding activities.
                                                                                                     Specific policy direction is provided:
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                              59

JL-2.1: Encourage the redevelopment of              fully sited and designed to avoid shadow-          complementary to the character of the ad-
Phase II of Jack London Square for commer-          ing of the Water Street axis.                      jacent warehouse district. (See Policy
cial-recreational and waterfront-oriented                                                              JL-13)
uses. Phase II of Jack London Square should       ! Integrated parking to serve the hotel/con-
be redeveloped comprehensively, in a manner         ference/office center. Parking facilities      ! A pedestrian bridge across the Embarcadero
that provides significant public attractions, and   should be designed to conceal the parking          and rail tracks to the Phase II development
unimpeded shoreline access around and               functions from the Marina Green and the            should be encouraged to supplement at-
through the site. This shoreline access should      waterfront. Parking for bicycles, as well as       grade access. The design of this structure
surround the proposed ‘Marina Green’ (See           rooftop recreational uses could be included.       should complement the existing bridge at
Policy JL-8.2), providing perimeter activities                                                         the Washington Street garage and Amtrak,
and attractions that complement and enliven       ! Heinold’s First and Last Chance Saloon should      and add to a sense of arrival at the water-
the waterfront environment.                         be retained in its present location, either as     front district.
                                                    a stand alone feature (if feasible) or by in-
Redevelopment efforts should incorporate the        corporating it within the new frontage at              Off-Price Retail District
following:                                          the current site, as a landmark element.
                                                                                                   POLICY JL-3: ENCOURAGE THE EXPAN-
! A high-quality hotel and conference center.     ! A distinctive visual landmark at the east-     SION OF OFF-PRICE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS
                                                    ern terminus of Jack London Square and         WEST OF BROADWAY.
! Ground-level retail, restaurants, public at-      Marina Green. The design and height of
   tractions, and other amenities facing the        buildings along Water Street could create      Currently, in the area west of Washington
   Marina Green and the shoreline prom-             this visual landmark.                          Street to MLK Boulevard, there is an eclectic
   enade, with office and/or housing uses                                                          mix of uses that includes offices, studios, re-
   above.                                         ! Inland of the Embarcadero a parking struc-     tail, warehouse and light industrial uses. These
                                                    ture should be constructed where it can serve  businesses tend to fit well in this environment,
! Upper level office use throughout this sub-       visitors of both Phase I and Phase II portions which bridges the more intense regional en-
   area. Upper level office uses should be en-      of Jack London Square, as well as the Pro-     tertainment and dining attractions at the
   couraged to promote an active daytime            duce District and the Loft District. The       water’s edge and the heavier industrial and ser-
   population. Development should be care-          parking structure should incorporate active    vice commercial uses inland and to the west.
                                                    ground-level uses and be designed to be
60                                                                                                                      Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Opportunities exist to expand and strengthen               POLICY JL-4: PRESERVE THE HISTORIC                tention of the historic character and ambiance
this unique district with additional retail space          CHARACTER OF THE PRODUCE DISTRICT,                of the Produce District should differentiate it
within rehabilitated warehouse buildings and/              AND ENCOURAGE ACTIVITIES THAT CREATE              from other Oakland destinations, and should
or new construction. Therefore, the lower                  A VIABLE URBAN MIXED-USE DISTRICT.                complement nearby retail, dining and enter-
intensity nature of the district should be main-                                                             tainment activities along Broadway and the wa-
tained, and some of the convenient surface                 The Produce District represents the most sig-     terfront. All efforts to preserve the existing
parking that exists should be retained.                    nificant concentration of food-related busi-      structures are encouraged, whenever feasible;
                                                           nesses within the city. It is also among the      however, if not feasible, development shall
However, additional structured parking will                oldest enterprises along the Estuary, dating      incorporate elements depicting the unique his-
also be required to serve the area and Jack Lon-           from 1917, when the City relocated the facili-    toric character and features of the buildings
don Square in the longer term. Consideration               ties from 11th and Webster streets to the vi-     (eg., canopies, overhangs and arcades, etc.).
should be given to a future garage within the              cinity of Third and Franklin. Today, it encom-
general vicinity of Cost Plus. The Off-Price               passes several blocks and occupies approxi-       JL-4.2: Provide for a mix of new uses in the
Retail District should also be included within             mately 130,000 square feet of space operated      Produce District. Recognizing market and
a larger parking district to ensure reciprocal             by 13 merchants, the majority of whom sell        financial factors, the plan recommends a di-
parking arrangements. (See Policy JL-16)                   directly to local restaurants. In addition, the   verse range of uses, including existing whole-
                                                           Oakland Grill, at the heart of the district, has  sale and distribution activities. Priority should
                Produce District                           established a restaurant business that caters to  be given to attracting food-oriented retailers
                                                           Produce District customers and lunchtime of-      that can maintain the character of this market
                                                           fice workers, as well as regional patrons.        district, particularly at the key intersection of
                                                                                                             Third and Franklin Streets. Other uses, includ-
                                                           The Produce District is recognized by many for    ing office, retail, work/live lofts and warehous-
                                                           its distinctive market buildings, with wide cano- ing, should also be encouraged.
                                                           pies and broad openings, as well as the morning
                                                           activity of large trucks and forklifts moving     JL-4.3: Encourage the location of a farmers
                                                           produce on the sidewalks and in the streets.      market along Franklin Street. In order to
                                                                                                             retain the market character of the Produce Dis-
A mixture of home improvement and off-price retail         JL-4.1 Encourage the sensitive rehabilitation     trict, it is recommended that Franklin Street
businesses have created an attractive district immediately
west of Jack London Square.
                                                           and adaptive reuse of existing buildings. Re-     be improved as an expanded venue for the
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                                       61
weekly farmers market, which currently oc-               The area east of Broadway to the Lake Merritt        !      Active, publicly oriented ground-level
curs at Jack London Square. This recommen-               Channel, between I-880, the Embarcadero and                uses with windows and doors oriented
dation would require closure of the street to            2nd St. east of Oak Street is characterized by a           toward the street, and build-to lines along
traffic and parking on market days. (See Policy          number of food-related businesses, warehouses              streets are encouraged.
JL-16)                                                   used for storage and distribution of products,
                                                         some office uses, as well as a mixture of ser-       !      Use of industrial materials (e.g. corru-
              Mixed Use District                         vice and support uses.                                     gated metal, glass, steel) should be encour-
                                                                                                                    aged.
POLICY JL-5: IN AREAS OUTSIDE THE EX-                    A mix of uses, including housing, should be
ISTING BOUNDARIES OF THE HISTORIC DIS-                   encouraged in order to support the retail and        !      On-site parking and loading should be
TRICT     (API) AND EAST TO THE LAKE                     entertainment uses in the adjacent districts, and          concealed from view from the street and/
MERRITT CHANNEL, ENCOURAGE THE DE-                       to help promote a more secure and vital envi-               or encapsulated within the buildings. Sur-
VELOPMENT OF A MIX OF USES, INCLUDING                    ronment with a day and nighttime popula-                   face parking lots should be well land-
HOUSING, WITHIN A CONTEXT OF COM-                        tion.                                                      scaped.
MERCIAL, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL/MANUFACTUR-
ING USES, AND ANCILLARY PARKING.                         Other uses, including light industrial, ware-        The existing plaza at the Amtrak Station
                                                         housing and distribution uses, should also be        should be retained as open space and for tran-
                                                         encouraged to remain within this area. To ac-        sit drop-off. Development on the remainder
                                                         commodate the desired mixture of uses and            of the site should be designed to accentuate
                                                         minimize land use conflicts, new development         the civic gateway function of the rail terminal
                                                         should incorporate appropriate measures to           building.
                                                         recognize these existing uses and related activities
                                                         and provide appropriate buffers to adjacent land
                                                         uses.
                                                         New development should maintain the char-
                                                         acter of the existing multistory warehouses and
The historic produce market with its projecting awnings  industrial buildings.
and vibrant street-life is a unique district in downtown
Oakland.
62                                                                                                                                 Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
    Waterfront Warehouse District                           Primary Importance (API). This district has     rate physical features that reinforce the
                                                            a significant concentration of well-preserved   district’s unique scale, historic flavor and
POLICY JL-6: ENCOURAGE THE PRESER-                          warehouses whose unique physical                activities. Zoning regulations should be
VATION AND ADAPTIVE REUSE OF EXISTING                       characteristsics are associated with the        flexible enough to accommodate the diverse
BUILDINGS IN A NEW WATERFRONT WARE-                         historic use of the Estuary. The district is    mixture of uses and activities that define the
HOUSE DISTRICT.            USE OF BUILDINGS AND             currently a viable warehouse district with a    district. The following should be pro-
NEW INFILL DEVELOPMENT SHOULD IN-                           variety of industrial activities.               moted:
CLUDE JOINT LIVING AND WORKING QUAR-
TERS, RESIDENTIAL, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL,                        The district is also home to new residents,     ! Active, publicly oriented ground-level
WAREHOUSING & DISTRIBUTION, WHOLE-                          artists & artisans, and professionaals. Recent       uses or habitable spaces built to prop-
SALING, OFFICES AND OTHER USES WHICH                        private initiatives have adapted many                erty lines with windows and doors that
PRESERVE AND RESPECT THE DISTRICT’S                         existing buildings for re-use as residential,        are oriented toward the street,
UNIQUE CHARACTER.                                           offices, joint living and working quarters,
                                                            and smaller commercial tenants such as          ! Build-to lines along streets.
The Waterfront Warehouse District occupies                  design firms, computer and multi-media
portions of the nine blocks, bounded by the                 businesses, law firms, consultants, restau-     ! Adequate setbacks and separations
entire existing historic district Area of                   rants, etc. This mixture of uses and activities      between adjacent buildings.
                                                            should be encouraged to help promote a 24-
                                                            hour population.                                ! Distinguish building mass or elevations
                                                                                                                 into different components of approxi-
                                                            Other uses, including office, light industrial,      mately one-quarter block or less.
                                                            warehousing, distribution, and ancillary
                                                            parking, should continue to be encouraged.      ! Character-defining architectural fea-
                                                                                                                 tures and appurtenances, including
                                                            Adaptive re-use of existing buildings, as well       multi-paned sash windows, parapets
                                                            as new infill development, should be en-             and simple restrained cornices, sidewalk
                                                            couraged. In order to preserve the character         canopies and awnings, flat roofs,
Over the past five years numerous work/live and loft studio of the district, development should be               rooftop features , historic signs. etc.
projects have been developed in the
Jack London District.                                       compatible with adjacent uses, and incorpo-
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                                    63

! Balconies and areas of private open             fice and retail uses should be encouraged within   surrounding area, and with the
     space should be discouraged on the           this area as well, to promote economic diver-      waterfront.These developments can be
     front elevations of buildings. Rather,       sity. These uses should be carefully screened      enhanced with exterior site treatments which
     they should be in the back of the            to ensure that they are compatible with exist-     use common features (such as lighting and
                                                                                                     street furniture), coordinated landscaping and
     building, between buildings, or as roof-     ing industrial activities and with the adjacent
                                                                                                     architecture, and other amenities. It is
     top terraces, and designed to avoid          West Oakland neighborhood north of the I-          particularly important that the waterfront
     privacy impacts on adjacent buildings.       880 freeway.                                       promenade be a unifying feature which ties
                                                                                                     together the disparate developments and
! Use of industrial materials (e.g. concrete,     Light industrial uses should also be consid-       maintains continuity of waterfront access. At
     masonry, metal, brick, glass, steel), to re- ered within other portions of the Jack Lon-        the same time, site enhancements should strive
     inforce the interesting mix of exterior      don District, including the Off-Price Retail Dis-  to strengthen connections between the
     building materialsr..                        trict and the Produce District.                    waterfront and inland areas. In addition, the
                                                                                                     boundaries of these sites with the adjacent Jack
                                                                                                     London Square Phase II projects (See Policy
!     On-site parking and loading concealed           Waterfront Mixed Use District                  JL-2) and Estuary Park (See Policy OAK-2.1)
     from view from the street and/or encap-                                                         should be carefully considered as projects
     sulated within the buildings. Surface        POLICY JL-8: ENCOURAGE THE MIX OF                  develop, to enhance compatability.
     parking lots should be well landscaped.      U SES E AST OF A LICE S TREET TO
                                                  PROMOTE L AND USE COMPATIBILITY,                          SHORELINE ACCESS &
        Light Industrial District                 WHILE MAINTAINING AND ENHANCING                                 PUBLIC SPACES
                                                  WATERFRONT VIEWS AND ACCESS.
POLICY JL-7: MAINTAIN          LIGHT INDUS-                                                          While Jack London Square has established it-
TRIAL AND WAREHOUSING USES WEST OF                Along the waterfront East of Alice Street are      self as a popular regional destination, the full
MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. BOULEVARD.                two large residential developments (Portobello     potential of its public environment is still un-
                                                  condominiums and the planned complex on            realized. Simply providing additional retail
The Estuary Policy Plan recommends main-          the Port’s 9-acre ‘Site B’), separated by the      and entertainment venues, while important,
taining light industrial activities, including    KTVU television station. Given the
                                                                                                     is not enough to make the district an attrac-
                                                  differentiation of land uses, and the large-scale,
warehousing and distribution uses, west of                                                           tive, inviting destination. It is equally impor-
                                                  self-contained nature of each, development
Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard where a                                                            tant to enhance the public spaces and to offer
                                                  continuity is lacking. They should be better
concentration of industrial activities exist. Of- integrated with each other, with the               opportunties for general interest activities out
64                                                                                                                       Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Section III: District Recommendations 6
66 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
side of the buildings.                           ! Maximizing opportunities to use the            ! The “Meadow Green”: Approximately
                                                     water                                            two-thirds of the existing open area west
Currently, public space along the Jack Lon-                                                           of the Waterfront Plaza Hotel (referred to
don District waterfront is inconsistent.         ! Insuring continuity and cohesiveness of            as “Site A” or the “Meadow”) should be
Sprinkled throughout the district are good           design                                           maintained as open space. The site should
examples of areas for public access, gathering,                                                       be enhanced by maintaining the lawn, and
and overall enjoyment of the water’s ameni-      ! Maintaining and enhancing views                    adding street furniture, lighting and other
ties. However, there are also areas where easy                                                        amenities for active and passive use. Exist-
access and enjoyment are not as evident; where   ! Staging of special events                          ing surface parking along the shoreline edge
access is interrupted or constrained at key                                                           should be removed to extend the park to a
points; where pedestrian areas are compro-       ! Minimizing pedestrian/vehicular conflicts          pedestrian promenade along the edge of the
mised by conflicts with automobiles; where                                                            water.
dramatic views to the water from inland areas    POLICY JL-9: ESTABLISH A WELL STRUC-
are not evident; where design of amenties is     TURED SYSTEM OF WATER-ORIENTED OPEN                  This open space should be designed and
not cohesive or inviting.                        SPACES, CONSISTING OF THE FOLLOWING                  programmed to take advantage of the ex-
                                                 ELEMENTS.                                            traordinary activities that surround it. Ex-
It is not the total amount of open space that is                                                      isting views of the Howard Terminal cranes
at issue, but rather where the open space is     JL-9.1: Improve existing shoreline access,
located and how it is designed, structured and   open spaces, and connections between inland
managed. Therefore, policies promoting bet-      areas and the water:
ter shoreline access and enhanced public use
within the Jack London District emphasize:       The grid of city streets should be the basis for
                                                 establishing public access between the inland
! Improving existing public spaces               areas and the water. Thee full width of the
                                                 street grid system should be preserved, and
! Adding additional open space for variety       whereever feasible, be extended to the Estuary
      of recreational pastimes                   shoreline.
                                                                                                  Much of the open space in Jack London Square is shared
                                                                                                  with automobiles which creates pedestrian conflicts and
                                                                                                  confusion.
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                                    67

   and the Estuary, proximity to the historic      the space as an extension of their outdoor     Significant segments of the promenade are
   boat basin, FDR Pier, the ferry terminal,       dining facilities.                              scheduled to be developed as part of the
   the Waterfront Plaza Hotel, Port building                                                       adjacent marina reconstruction project at
   as activity centers all contribute to the       In addition, the plaza should accommodate       Jack London Square, and by the develop-
   uniqueness and popularity of the site. These    creation of a suitable landmark terminus        ment of ‘Site B’between Jack London Vil-
   elements should be reinforced as the site is    of Broadway, in keeping with significance       lage and KTVU. The remainder prom-
   upgraded.                                       of Broadway’s role and civic importance.        enade should be completed as soon as pos-
                                                                                                   sible or as adjacent projects are realized. Por-
   The remainer of the site should be devel-       The plaza should be designed to accom-          tions of the existing waterfront walkway
   oped as a freestanding restaurant, dining pa-   modate service and emergency vehicles.          that are currently obstructed or otherwise
   vilion, or other attraction that is carefully   Valet parking currently servicing the restau-   substandard should be improved as oppor-
   oriented to complement the Meadow               rants should be limited to drop-off and         tunities arise.
   Greetn and the surrounding activities. (See     pick-up only. Specifically, automobiles
   Policy JL-1.2) .                                should not be stored or parked in the plaza.  ! Extend the promenade to the historic boat
                                                   Visitor parking should be accommodated          basin: A walkway and/or pile-supported
! “The Broadway/Franklin” Plaza: The               in the Barnes & Noble garage or other suit-     deck along the eastern edge of the historic
   Barnes & Noble plaza, including the adja-       able parking facilities. (See Policy JL-13)     boat basin between Clay and Jefferson
   cent Broadway and Franklin street ends,                                                         streets should be established to provide
   should be reconfigured as necessary to cre-   ! Shoreline Promenade: The shoreline walk-        public access to the water and vessels.
   ate an active pedestrian-friendly open plaza.   way between the Waterfront Plaza Hotel
   The plaza should function as the ‘main          and Estuary Park should be improved.          ! Remove Pedestrian/Auto Conflicts:
   square’ of the Jack London district. It         Currently, it is not a continuous path and      Throughout Jack London Square, public
   should be designed and programmed to ac-        it lacks continuity. It should be upgraded      areas should be designed and managed to
   commodate events, kiosks, displays, the an-     as a ‘promenade’, suitable for comfortable      avoid pedestrian/automobile conflicts, so
   nual Jack London Christmas tree, and            casual strolling, with appropriate landscap-    that pedestrians take priority. On the wa-
   other temporary uses and activities which       ing, lighting, benches, and other pedestrian    ter side of the Embarcadero, parking lots,
   attract large groups of people. Surround-       amenities.                                      valet services, deliveries, and vehicular ac-
   ing restaurants should be encouraged to use                                                     cess generally should be limited to what is
                                                                                                   absolutely necessary. Necessary vehicular
68                                                                                                                   Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

   services should be designed and managed          acre open space to be located adjacent to       of the waterfront, in addition to marina
   to insure that vehicles are hidden from pub-     the marina, between the water, Webster and      related and other public services.
   lic view and circulate in off-hours, avoid-      Harrison Streets. This space, referred to as
   ing pedestrian activities.                       the “Marina Green”, would complement         ! “Webster Street Green”: Webster Street (be-
                                                    the “Meadow Green”, a similar space at the      tween the water and I-880) should be
   As the waterfront becomes a destination in       western end of the Jack London Square           reconfigured to create an attractive
   itself, it is no longer essential for individual project.                                        greenway that can function both as an im-
   restaurants to have front door drop-off,                                                         portant pedestrian route to the waterfront
   unless to accommodate the elderly or dis-        The Marina Green should be developed to         and as an attractive open space amenity for
   abled. In no cases should cars be parked in      accommodate a multitude of passive recre-       the mixed-use loft district that is emerging
   the plaza areas. To ensure convenient at-        ational activities. Framed by a proposed        around it.
   tendant parking when needed, valet park-         hotel on the existing Jack London Village
   ing kiosks should be relocated to an area        site, the marina, and other development to      The Webster Street right-of-way is adjoined
   near the entrance to the Barnes and Noble        the north and east (See Policy JL-2), the       by an easement over the Webster tube to
   garage or other nearby garage locations (ex-     Marina Green should provide an attractive       Alameda. As such, it is unbuildable. By
   isting and planned). (See Policy JL-16)          place for people to gather for casual recre-    relocating the surface parking lots above the
                                                    ation, passive enjoyment, or to attend an       tube, the easement and street right-of-way
JL-9.2: Create new open spaces that expand          event.
the opportunities to view, appreciate, and
enjoy the water’s edge. New waterfront open         The Marina Green should also be designed
spaces should be created: one along the water-      to connect to the planned “Webster Street
front in the Phase II portion of Jack London        Green” (see below) and the waterfront
Square, and one that connects this space to-        promenade and greenway between Alice
ward downtown Oakland, along Webster                Street and Estuary Park. The harbormaster
Street.                                             building for the Jack London marina
                                                    should be located on the Marina Green. It
! The “Marina Green”: Development of                should be carefully sited and designed to
   Phase II of Jack London Square (See Policy       complement the green and to provide views    Views to the maritime activities of the Howard Terminal
                                                                                                 should be preserved as a unique eature of Oakland’s
   JL-2) should include an approximate one-                                                      waterfront.
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                                 69

   can be designed to create the Webster Street     structed that extends to the pier-head line         between the working and urban water-
   Green.                                           at the terminus of Broadway to afford pe-           fronts, and should be maintained as a
                                                    destrians the opportunity to go beyond the          unique feature of Oakland.
! To develop additional open spaces, provide        marinas for views up and down the Estu-
   setbacks from the water’s edge for generous      ary, toward San Francisco and the Howard        ! Views of the Estuary from Water Street across
   areas of greenways, promenades, and other        Terminal.                                           the proposed Marina Green and from the
   public gathering places between Clay and                                                             foot of Webster Street to Harrison Street.
   Alice streets.                                JL-9.3: Maintain and enhance view corri-
                                                 dors to the Estuary. Maintain the full width       ! Opportunities for public viewing of the Es-
  Generous setbacks should be provided from      of existing view corridors, and establish ad-          tuary, the Inner Harbor, and the San Fran-
   the water’s edge and be well integrated with  ditional view corridors. The streets provide           cisco skyline should be provided from upper
   any development in the area. Outdoor ca-      important view corridors to the waterfront             levels of development projects adjacent to the
   fes and seating should be encouraged along    which should be maintained. Where the grid             Meadow Green, the harbormaster building
   the frontage of Water Street and the water-   pattern of streets is interrupted, other view cor-     on the proposed Marina Green, and the pro-
   front promenade.                              ridors should be established, if feasible. Sev-        posed hotel in Jack London Square, Phase II.
                                                 eral key viewsheds are important to maintain
! A new public access pier at the foot of Broad- or establish, as follows:                          JL-9.4: Maximize opportunities to use the
   way. A public access pier should be con-                                                         water. Ensure that the use and treatment of
                                                 ! Views of the Estuary, from along Water Street.   water spaces reinforce public enjoyment of
                                                                                                    the Estuary. The Estuary, as it passes through
                                                 ! Views of the marina and Estuary from the         the Jack London District, is a narrow expanse
                                                    intersection of Franklin and Water Streets,     of water, 700 to 900 feet in width. The water
                                                    and from along the shoreline promenade.         space provides an ever-changing stage of activ-
                                                                                                    ity; one can view 1,000-foot-long container
                                                 ! Views of the Howard Terminal cranes and          ships negotiating the channel alongside 25-foot
                                                    operations, from the intersections of Water and recreational sailboats. Other activities, such as
                                                    Washington streets, and Water and Clay          rowing competitions, lighted boat parades,
                                                    Streets. These views provide the most dra-      powerboat races, etc., all offer the opportunity
The Estuary is a popular venue for rowing
and other recreational boating.
                                                    matic juxtapositions of scale and activity      for people to use the water and appreciate its
70                                                                                                                       Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

value as a recreational resource. In addition, the    further enhanced as a historic boat basin,     Franklin Plaza at foot of Broadway (See Policy
public is invited to participate in aquatic recre-    featuring the lightship Relief, the Potomac,   JL-8.a.1), the Meadow Green, Water Street,
ation, via the provision of sailing and rowing        and other vessels as appropriate. The boat     the proposed Marina Green between Webster
classes, recreational boating, marina services,       basin should continue to accommodate fire      and Harrison streets (See Policy JL-8.2), and
kayak launching, bay excursions on charter ves-       boats for the adjacent fire station, unless    along the linking streets of Franklin, Webster,
sels, fishing, etc. These activites should be pro-    the station is relocated to accommodate        Washington and Broadway. The use of shuttles
moted, and supported with high-quality                additional development.                        from the downtown and remote parking sites
facililties, services and educational programs                                                       will be more critical during events. Shuttle
which encourage the public to participate in the   POLICY JL-10:          CONTINUE       TO STAGE    services and transit should be promoted and
wide range of aquatic activities.                  SPECIAL EVENTS.                                   accommodated. (See Policy JL-16)
! Jack London Marina. The pending recon-           Continued use of the waterfront spaces for
    struction of the Jack London Marina            special events is an extremely important func-        REGIONAL CIRCULATION,
    should be accomplished as soon as possible.    tion. It not only serves community needs, but                 LOCAL STREET
    The Port should insure that it                 also reinforces the retail, dining and entertain-    IMPROVEMENTS, TRANSIT
    accommmodate a variety of boats, plus as-      ment activities. However, existing spaces that                    & PARKING
    sociated services, programs, transient slips,  are suitable to accommodate these events are
    temporary dockage for ferries, water taxis,    reaching their capacity. Furthermore, it is be-   As it transforms from a predominantly indus-
    charter operations, yacht sales, and ceremo-   coming increasingly difficult to accommodate      trial district into a regional destination of
    nial events.                                   parking and other services necessary to attract   mixed use, the Jack London District is expe-
                                                   crowds and stage events.                          riencing increasing problems of traffic conges-
   In order to preserve the remaining areas of                                                       tion, parking deficiencies, and discontinuous
    open water, no additional marina slips (be-    Major events will need to be staged at other      bicycle and pedestrian paths. The following
    yond the current marina improvement            locations along the waterfront or elsewhere       policies provide for the improvement of ac-
    project) should be developed between the       within the city. However, it is important that    cess and circulation by all modes at both a re-
    foot of Harrison Street and Estuary Park.      events continue to be staged within the Jack      gional and local scale, and the development
                                                   London District.                                  of a comprehensive approach to ameliorating
!Historic boat basin. The existing cove be-                                                          existing and future parking problems.
    tween Jefferson and Clay streets should be     Event locations should include the Broadway-
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                            71
72 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
            Regional Circulation                     Harrison and Seventh) to gain access to the         The recently built I-880 (Cypress Freeway)
                                                     Jefferson Street on-ramp to I-880.                  does not accommodate direct access to or from
POLICY JL-11: WORK                WITH   CALTRANS    Congestion on city streets by regional traffic      downtown or Jack London District. Auto-
TO IMPROVE DIRECT ACCESS FROM I-880                  has a direct effect on the ability of these streets mobiles coming from the San Francisco area
TO THE A LAMEDA T UBES TO REDUCE                     to provide efficient local access. Improvements     with destinations to downtown Oakland or
REGIONAL TRAFFIC ON LOCAL STREETS IN                 should be pursued, in conjunction with              Jack London District must take the follow-
THE JACK       LONDON DISTRICT.                      Caltrans, the City of Alameda, the                  ing three, less direct options: (1) bypass the
                                                     Metropolitan Transportation Commission,             new freeway addition of I-880, take I-980
Vehicular traffic between the city of Alameda        and the Alameda County Congestion                   and exit on 14th or 11th Street; (2) take I-
and other parts of the Bay Area is currently         Management Agency. Accordingly, specific            880, exit on the new Union Street off-ramp
dependent on the local streets of the Jack           improvements should be made to the                  and take local streets; or (3) from I-980, exit
London District. As a result, there are chronic      Alameda Tube connections with the freeway           at Jackson Street and double back taking local
congestion problems at key entry points to           viaduct:                                            streets.
the waterfront district.
                                                     ! The Jackson Street eastbound ramp from I-         This has had a debilitating effect on the at-
Similarly, traffic from Alameda using the Posey         980 should be modified to allow a direct         tractiveness of two of the City’s primary visi-
Tube must negotiate through city streets (i.e.,         exit to the Webster Street Tube without          tor destinations. Preliminary traffic assess-
                                                        traveling on Fifth Street.                       ments reveal that off-ramps from I-880 to
                                                                                                         downtown and Jack London District are po-
                                                     ! The walls of the Posey Tube north of the por-     tentially feasible. The City should continue
                                                        tal structure should be modified, and the        to work with the Port, Alameda Congestion
                                                        capacity and channelization of traffic im-       Management Agency (CMA), and the City
                                                        proved.                                          of Alameda to develop plans for off ramps
                                                                                                         which directly serve the area.
                                                     POLICY JL-12: WORK WITH CALTRANS
                                                     TO PROVIDE EXIT OFF-RAMPS FROM I-880
                                                     TO DIRECTLY SERVE DOWNTOWN OAKLAND
The I-880 overpass along Broadway creates a physical AND THE JACK LONDON DISTRICT.
and psychological barrier between downtown
and the waterfront.
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                                73

       Local Street Improvements                   At a minimum, the local streets should have                    are expected, from Martin Luther King, Jr.
                                                   continuous sidewalks, improved lighting, and                   Boulevard to Oak Street, and along streets that
POLICY JL-13: IMPROVE THE STREETS                  street furniture. And, the streets should be                   will provide critical links to adjacent neigh-
WITHIN THE JACK LONDON DISTRICT TO                 designed to “calm” traffic. Convenient on-                     borhoods . These include Broadway, Wash-
CREATE AN INTEGRAL SYSTEM OF OPEN                  street parking should be provided. (See Fig-                   ington, Franklin, Webster and Third Street.
SPACE, LOCAL ACCESS, AND OVERALL CIR-              ure III-7)
CULATION , WHILE PROVIDING BETTER                                                                                 JL-13.1: Improve Broadway in a manner
LINKS BETWEEN INLAND AREAS AND THE                 Streetscape improvements should be made in                     appropriate to its civic scale and role in con-
WATERFRONT.                                        areas of the Jack London District where the                    necting the waterfront with the downtown.
                                                   greatest concentrations of pedestrian activity                 Broadway is Oakland’s principal ceremonial
In the Jack London District, with its multiple
destinations and attractions, the street system
provides key pedestrian, bicycle, auto and transit
connections from one place to another. The
north-south streets that traverse beneath the
freeway, including Broadway, Washington,
Webster, and Franklin, are particularly impor-
tant in providing linkages between downtown
Oakland and the waterfront.
In addition to their utilitarian function of fa-
cilitating movement, streets and sidewalks play
an important role in establishing a strong pub-
lic environment. Enhancements to the
“streetscape” should improve the overall envi-
ronment and attractiveness of the district, cre-
ate a sense of design continuity, and improve
safety.
                                                   Franklin Street should become an expanded venue for the City’s weekly farmers market.
74                                                                                                                                       Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

and civic street and transit hub, connecting the        complement the existing arch at the foot      the completion of the Jack London Cinema
eastern hillside neighborhoods with the down-           of Broadway. Improving the pedestrian         and Yoshi’s, it has become a busy street in the
town core and the heart of the Jack London              environment beneath the structure with        local network. As the entertainment and off-
District. Like Market Street in San Francisco,          lighting, paving, and signage should be       price retail districts develop and intensify, it
Broadway deserves a treatment and terminus              undertaken immediately.                       will be important for the pedestrian
appropriate to its stature in the city, reflecting                                                    orientation of Washington Street to be
the importance of the coming together of the       ! Lower Broadway: The blocks between               enhanced and extended northward to Old
city and the bay.                                       Sixth Street and the Embarcadero should       Oakland and downtown.
                                                        be upgraded with improved paving, light-
In addition to enhancing the civic identity of          ing, street trees, banners, and other         As development along Washington Street oc-
Broadway and its role as the principal public           streetscape elements that promote the         curs, it should be encouraged to locate pub-
space connecting downtown with the emerg-               street’s identity as the heart of a vital en- lic-oriented activities on the ground floor.
ing waterfront entertainment district: making           tertainment district. The existing side-      Improvements to the street, including new
the following improvements could enhance                walks should be improved to accommo-          lighting, street trees, and paving, should be
the investment climate of the area, and could           date outdoor dining, which can help en-       made along its length.
help attract new development:                           ergize the street as an active public place.
                                                        Consideration should be given to extend       JL-13.3: Reinforce a food and market orien-
!      Public Art: A landmark public art ele-           existing streetscape elements in Jack Lon-    tation on Franklin Street. Since the Produce
      ment should be constructed beneath and            don Square (e.g., lighting, furniture, and    District was established in 1907, Franklin
      against the I-880 freeway viaduct. Mak-           banners) north of the Embarcadero along       Street has played a distinctive role as a market
      ing the viaduct as user friendly as possible      Lower Broadway to forge a stronger vi-        street, lined with projecting canopies and en-
      is absolutely necessary to diminish the           sual link and a sense of continuity of be-    livened with colorful activities. It is desirable
      barrier effect of the I-880 between down-         tween the two areas.                          for the area and the street to retain some as-
      town and the waterfront. In addition to                                                         pects of its original role and character. The
      creating an attractive pedestrian link the   JL-13.2: Strengthen the pedestrian character       Estuary Policy Plan suggests preservation of
      art piece should establish a highly visible  of Washington Street. Washington Street            the existing market buildings and adaptive re-
      and distinctive gateway. The design of       provides an important direct connection from       use and rehabilitation for a variety of uses, in-
      the feature should aim to create a strong    the heart of the waterfront to Old Oakland         cluding food-oriented retailing. (See Policy
      sense of arrival at the waterfront and       and the downtown convention center. Since          JL-4)
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                                75

                                                                                          P                              P
                                                                                  15’      8’       12’        12’       18’       15’
                                                                                                             80’
                                                                                                        Existing ROW
      Washington & 2nd Streets - Jack London District
        (With one vehicular and class II bike lane in each direction.)
                                                                            Typical North/South Street - Jack London District
                                                                                       (With one vehicular lane in each direction.)
                    P                                       P                                   P                            P
           20’      8’         25’        4’      25’       8’         20’         15’          18’           12’    12’     8’      15’
                                      110’ ROW
                                                                                                              80’
                                                                                                        Existing ROW
                                   Broadway                                      Franklin Street - Jack London District
          (With one vehicular lane in each direction and a single shared   (With one vehicular lane in each direction and a single shared
                         turn lane at intersections only.)                                 turn lane at intersections only.)
 FIGURE III-7a=: Jack London District Illustrative Street Cross Sections
76                                                                                                                          Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Accordingly, Franklin Street should be con-               ! As the historic heart of the Produce Dis-         create a distinctive “green” street space and
sidered as an expanded venue for the city’s                   trict, the corner of Franklin and Third streets amenity within the area. (See Policy JL-8.2)
weekly farmers market. Accordingly, the de-                   should be targeted for street-oriented retail-
sign of the street should include:                            ing uses. An emphasis on food would be in       JL-13.5: 2nd & 3rd Streets: Reinforce Sec-
                                                              keeping with the street’s history and iden-     ond and Third Streets as an east-west con-
! The configuration of the street should pro-                 tity and the emerging role of the district as   nector for pedestrian, vehicular and bicycle
   vide enough space and services for food                    a mixed-use residential neighborhood.           movement. Second Street is the principal east-
   stalls along the street, including provisions                                                              west movement corridor through the Jack
   for electrical and water hookups.                      JL-13.4: Develop significant pedestrian im-         London District. This route connects to Third
                                                          provements along Webster Street that create         St. at Brush toward Mandela Parkway and
! The awnings of adjacent buildings should                a strong link to the waterfront. Webster Street     plays an important role as a direct connection
   remain as a principal physical feature of the          is the easternmost north-south street within        between Mandela Parkway in West Oakland,
   street. As new development occurs in areas             the Jack London District, which permits un-         Jack London District, Oak Street and the pro-
   beyond the boundaries of the historic dis-             impeded at-grade pedestrian access to the wa-       posed Embarcadero Parkway along the re-
   trict, the awnings should be extended to               terfront from downtown Oakland. It is pos-          mainder of the Estuary. The removal of the
   provide a continuous pedestrian experience.            sible today to walk along Webster Street from       railroad tracks within the street and the gradual
                                                          Chinatown to the waterfront. As such, the           conversion of industrial buildings, particularly
                                                          street plays an important linking role that         east of Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard, af-
                                                          should be aesthetically enhanced.                   fords the opportunity to improve the visual
                                                                                                              and pedestrian environment of this street.
                                                          As discussed elsewhere, a ‘greenway’ should
                                                          be developed along Webster Street to create         The right-of-way should be improved to accom-
                                                          an open space and pedestrian link to the wa-        modate parallel bike lanes and curbside park-
                                                          terfront. This open space should take advan-        ing. Distinctive landscaping and lighting along
                                                          tage of Caltrans easements which prohibit           the street should be introduced to establish a
                                                          building over the Alameda tubes. It should          strong continuity between West Oakland and
                                                          be located over the tube right-of-way and be        the waterfront.
Many of the streets within the Jack London District are   integrated with streetscape improvements to
unimproved reflecting the historic role of the area as an
industrial warehouse district.
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                                       77

                                 P                                                                                             P
                    12’         18’             12’                              96’                               12’        18’         12’
                                                                                180’
                                                                   Webster Street Green
                                          (With one vehicular lane in each direction and diagonal parking along each side.)
                        P                                 P                                                   Bike                         P  Bike
       10’     13’      8’     12’          14’      12’  8’      13’    10’                      10’   12’    5’    12’      12’      12’      5’ 12’     10’
                                    Center turn lane                                            Setback                                                  Setback
                                    at intersections                                                                       70’ ROW
                                        80’ ROW
                                                                                                Third Street Extension to Mandela Parkway
                                   Oak Street                                                  (With one vehicular and class II bike lane in each direction and a
                                                                                                        single shared turn lane at intersections only.)
        (With one vehicular lane in each direction and a single shared
                         turn lane at intersections only.)
FIGURE III-7b: Jack London District Illustrative Street Cross Sections
78                                                                                                                                       Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

                     Transit                       along 2nd Street, Washington, Oak and               develops with higher intensity uses and
                                                   Franklin Streets (when improved).                   becomes a greater regional destination, the
     POLICY JL-14: PROVIDE FOR IN-                                                                     feasibility of developing a new BART Station
 CREASED TRANSIT SERVICE TO THE JACK               JL-14.2: Expand the downtown shuttle/trolley        should be explored.
                                                   service to the waterfront. The implementation
               LONDON DISTRICT.                    of a reliable, efficient shuttle/trolley service on JL-14.5: Enhance connections to existing
                                                   Broadway is a key action that could strengthen
The continued success and viability of the Jack    links with the downtown. Rubber-tire trolley         transit modes and stations. Connections to
London District as a mixed-use neighborhood        service should be re-established along the          stationss and coordination among ransit modes
and regional entertainment destination will rely   Broadway corridor. The route between                should be enhanced to makae transit use easy,
upon improved transit service. For the district    downtown and the waterfront should be the           convenient and attrractive. For example:
to sustain growth and expansion, it will not       principal focus of this service. As demand
be able to rely solely on the automobile. Tran-    increases, however, routing could be expanded       ! Transit Scheduling. Service schedules of
sit plays an increasingly important role in bring- and a loop system created with connections                current transit providers (AC Transit,
ing people to the waterfront and providing         to the Amtrak station, the Museum District,               BART, Amtrak, Oakland/Alameda Ferry,
convenient circulation within the district.        and the Lake Merritt BART station.                        Broadway Shuttle, etc.) should be
                                                                                                             coordinated.
Enhancement of transit service and facilities      JL-14.3: Support ferry and water taxi service.
should be promoted in the following man-           Increased commuter ferry and water taxi service     !      Street Enhancements. Local streets and
ner, with an overall goal to provide 24-hour       should be encouraged to serve the Jack London             pedestrian corridors leading to existing
service.                                           District and other areas of the Estuary. As               transit stations are important connections
                                                   waterfront redevelopment in both Oakland                  which should be enhanced.
JL-14.1: Expand Bus Service. Broadway is           and Alameda takes place and as development                Improvements along Broadway, Oak,
the main trunk of bus service, accommodating       occurs further up the Estuary, new landing                Webster, 2nd and 3rd Streets would
most of the City’s bus routes. While               sites, facilities and parking should be provided.         provide stronger pedestrian, bicycle and
Broadway should continue to be the primary                                                                   visual connections to District transit
transit corridor, other transit corridors should   JL-14.4: Explore the potential for a new                  stations.
be developed. These should also be focused         BART Station to serve the Jack London
                                                   District. As the Jack London District
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                                79

!      Amenities at Stations: Amenities (e.g.   be provided along the 2nd Street and portions    Existing regular parking resources (eg. surface
      bicycle racks,lockers, lighting, etc.)    of the Third Street corridor, connecting Oak     lots, street parking, Washington Street garage,
      should be provided at all stations.       Street and the Embarcadero on the east with      Barnes & Noble garage, Amtrak Station, etc.)
                                                Mandela Parkway and West Oakland on the          are now fully subscribed during peak hours. It
! Signs: Directional signs to various transit   west.                                            is clear that additional parking facilities are
      stations and other attractions should be                                                   necessary to handle current, if not future
      appropriately placed throughout the       JL-15.2: Establish bike lanes on Washington
      district.                                 Street. Bicycle lanes should also be constructed demand.
                                                on Washington Street north of Third Street
JL-14.6: Encourage incentives for the use of    to provide links to the downtown core and        However, while demand is increasing, supply
alternative modes of transit. Use of all modes  Old Oakland.                                     is decreasing. Policy direction of this plan is
of transit should be encouraged and promoted                                                     to intensify uses throughout the Jack London
through various incentives offered to district  JL-15.3: Provide bike storage areas              District, thereby increasing demand.
employees and visitors.                         inappropriate locations. Parking structures,     Development of sites and/or provision of
                                                transit stations, and employment uses greater    shoreline open space in the district will displace
             Bicycle Circulation                than 5,000 square feet should provide adequate   some of the sites that are currently vacant and
                                                secure bike storage.                             are used for surface parking. (e.g., Site B,
P OLICY JL-15: E NHANCE               BICYCLE                                                    Safeway Lot, Phase II, etc.)
CIRCUL ATION        THROUGH THE           J ACK                     Parking
L ONDON D ISTRICT . Bicycle circulation                                                          Adding to this shortage is the fact that large
through the Jack London District is             POLICY JL-16: DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT              events also place an extra strain on parking
constrained by the lack of clearly designated   A COORDINATED PARKING STRATEGY FOR               resources. Furthermore, necessary loading
routes and conflicts with truck and other       THE DISTRICT THAT OPTIMIZES THE USE              zones for warehouse activity leaves less curb
vehicular traffic. Improved bike routes and     OF PARKING FACILITIES, TAKES MAXIMUM             area for on-street parking. And several policy
facilities should be provided within the        ADVANTAGE          OF     SHARED      PARKING    recommendations in this plan could displace
district.                                       OPPORTUNITIES AND EXPANDS PARKING                existing parking sites.
                                                SUPPLIES.
JL-15.1: Provide bike lanes on Second and,                                                       JL-16.1 Parking Strategy. The City and the
Third Streets. Bicycle lanes (Class II) should  Parking availability is becoming an increasingly Port will collaborate on an effort to address
                                                serious challenge in the Jack London District.   the parking shortage. A specific strategy should
80                                                                                                                   Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
be focused on ways of meeting demand with            # A Valet Management Program, to insure         #    Explore incentives and regulations that
facilities and services that can be used effectively   that valet services occur where they are           encourage use of shared parking facilities.
by multiple users throughout the day and               necessary, without infringing on
week, and that can serve the broader needs of          pedestrian areas.                             JL-16.2: Relocation of existing parking. The
the entire district. The Parking Strategy should                                                     parking starategy should recognize the shortage
consider the following:                              # A Remote Parking Program to secure and        of parking that already exists, and attempt to
                                                       manage parking sites necessary to             address this critical need as soon as possible.
# A thorough analysis of projected district-           accommodate special events or long-term       Existing parking that is recommended to be
      wide parking supplies and projected              parking for district employees, Amtrak        eliminated should not be relocated until the
      future demands, updated regularly.               or BART riders, etc.                          time of site development/improvement, or as
                                                                                                     replacement facilities are developed.
#       A ‘Parking Development Program’, to          #   Development of a shuttle system, to
      identify specific means and locations to         provide shuttle services between existing
      increase the supply of parking to serve the      or new parking sites and Jack London
      entire district; including provision of on-      District activity centers. During special
      street parking, surface lots (e.g. areas under   events, remote parking and shared use of
      I-880), stand-alone parking structures,          facilities should be considered as primary
      facilities within mixed use projects, etc.       strategy.
      All reasonable means of addressing the
      situation are analyzed as projects are         #   Administrative measures should be
      developed. Specific locations should be          investigated and applied, as appropriate,
      identified and investigated, for purposes        to generate revenues for parking
      of testing feasibility. Incentives and           improvements (e.g. assessment districts or
      regulations which encourage use of shared        similar mechanisms, parking overlay
      parking facilities should be explored.           zones, parking demand management,
      Recommendations in the program should            pricing/fee structure strategies, impact fees
      take into account the increased availability     for new development).
      of transit service over time.
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                             81

82 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
Oak - to - Ninth Avenue District
The “Oak - to - Ninth Avenue” District of          main line rail tracks and the cargo handling        Changes in transportation will create new op-
the Estuary planning area is situated south of     facilities at the Ninth Avenue Terminal. As         portunities for reuse and revitalization. With
I-880, east of Oak Street, and west of Embar-      such, it is isolated from the surrounding ur-       the consolidation of the Southern Pacific and
cadero Cove. Encompassing approximately            ban community, perhaps more than other reaches      Union Pacific railroads, the rail tracks along
120 acres, the district includes two distinct sub- of the study area. The district is criss-crossed by Third Street have been abandoned, providing
areas separated by the Embarcadero and the         rail tracks, the freeway, and the Lake Merritt      the opportunity to extend Third Street east-
main line rail corridor. They are the properties   Channel, all of which have become barriers to       ward near West Oakland and will improve bi-
between Fifth and Ninth Avenues, projecting        movement.                                           cycle and pedestrian accessibility from the Es-
into the Estuary south of the Embarcadero.                                                             tuary to Mandela Parkway.
The district includes Estuary Park, the landside   Today, the Oak-to-Ninth District is still domi-
areas between Oak Street and Lake Merritt          nated by warehousing, manufacturing, distri-        Caltrans’ planned seismic upgrade project for
Channel, and the Ninth Avenue Terminal.            bution , storage and transportation activities.     the Fifth Avenue interchange at I-880 could
                                                   However, historic waterfront industries have        be designed to improve local accessibility and
Although the Oak - to - Ninth District does        declined, and waterfront properties have be-        help achieve a better alignment for Fifth Av-
not appear markedly different than it did sev-     gun the process of industrial conversion. New,      enue as well as an improved interchange. Fi-
eral years ago, it has, in fact, undergone a num-  smaller scale and nontraditional uses have also     nally, the prospect of consolidating maritime
ber of changes. Historically, this portion of      emerged within existing underutilized warehouse     activities in the Outer Harbor provides a tre-
the Estuary waterfront primarily served as an      and industrial buildings to create a lively en-     mendous opportunity to improve the Ninth
industrial and warehousing support district,       clave of artist studios and artisan workshops.      Avenue Terminal for greater public access and
oriented to and served by the Union Pacific                                                            use.
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                              83

Several unique circumstances within this dis-
trict afford opportunities for positive changes
that could benefit the entire community.
First, there is a considerable amount of public
land. For example, Estuary Park is a signifi-
cant public asset which can and should be up-
graded. It has a historic relationship with
nearby Lake Merritt and the Lake Merritt
Channel, and there is now a chance to finally
reconnect Lake Merritt with the Estuary.
These opportunities offer the distinct oppor-
tunity to realize long-held community objec-
tives for the creation of a major open space of
citywide scale and significance.
With ambitious plans to change land use, this
area of the shoreline could be converted into a
large-scale network of open spaces and eco-
nomic development that extend for over 60
acres from Estuary Park to Ninth Avenue. The
assemblage of parkland would create the ma-
jor open space resource in Oakland and, at the
same time, establish a recreation asset of re-
gional significance. In areas adjacent to the
open spaces, additional development of ho-
tels, cultural activites, and other attractions that
take advantage of the unique setting, could
help to energize the entire district. And, the
84                                                   Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
                                      artisan community that currently exists in the
                                      area can continue to play a valuable role in the
                                      life of the area, and the City.
Section III: District Recommendations                                               85
       SHORELINE ACCESS &
            PUBLIC SPACES
Shoreline access and public space policies are
intended to establish this area of the Estuary
as the major recreational destination in the city.
The Estuary Policy Plan recommends a series
of large open spaces, intended to provide for a
wide variety of recreational experiences. De-
veloping a series of well-defined open spaces
would change the entire nature of the water-
front in this area, transforming it from an in-
dustrial backwater into a recreational center-
piece of the city. In total, these sites would
represent one of the most significant additions
of urban parkland within the entire Bay Area.
They would create both a regional and local
asset of major proportions.
                                                   A continuous open space and public access link is planned between Lake Merritt and the Estuary.
These spaces are intended to be connected to
each other and to a larger city-wide system of
trails and parks. Policies recommend strong        POLICY OAK-1:                PROTECT         AND EN -         tings. Given the scale and variety of environ-
links to inland communities, Lake Merritt,         HANCE THE NATURAL AND BUILT COMPO-                            ments encompassed by this segment of the wa-
and Lakeside Park, by enhancing the Lake           NENTS THAT ESTABLISH THE WATERFRONT’S                         terfront, many kinds of recreational activity
Merritt Channel. Furthermore, the policies         UNIQUE ENVIRONMENT.                                           can take place. While it is advantageous to pro-
recognize the importance of preserving the                                                                       mote recreationaly activities, the sites’ water-
area’s wetlands, wildlife habitat and other natu-  The Oak-to-Ninth reach of the waterfront has                  front location is unique. It is important to
ral features.                                      the potential to offer many recreational expe-                focus first on preserving the intrinsic qualities
                                                   riences, in both natural and developed set-                   of the shoreline, and to insure that the envi-
86                                                                                                                                      Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

                                                                                                 to nesting and resting areas, seasonal routing
                                                                                                 of pedestrians to avoid sensitive habitats, etc.
                                                                                                 As improvements and projects are considered,
                                                                                                 the City and Port should work with interested
                                                                                                 groups and organizations to ensure appropri-
                                                                                                 ate treatments along the shoreline, particularly
                                                                                                 along the channel on the eastern bank between
                                                                                                 I-880 and Embarcadero.
                                                                                                 OAK-1.2: Provide for continuous pedestrian
                                                                                                 and bicycle movement along the water’s edge.
                                                                                                 In this and other areas of the Estuary, con-
                                                                                                 tinuous bicycle and pedestrian movement is
                                                                                                 essential to achieving goals for access and
                                                                                                 implementation of the Bay Trail.
                                                                                                 In this district, pedestrian and bicycle move-
                                                                                                 ment should be emphasized on all local streets.
                                                                                                 A network of facilities should provide for pe-
                                                                                                 destrian and bicycle routes as close to the shore-
ronmental values of the site are not compro-    function as tidal wetlands, providing marsh      line as possible. It should offer a range of ex-
mised.                                          habitat for fish, migratory waterfowl, and other periences that take advantage of the varying
                                                animals.                                         water spaces along the shoreline.
OAK-1.1: Encourage the preservation and
enhancement of wetland areas. The water-        Improvements should be encouraged that re-       To reduce the barrier effect of channels and
front should be improved in a manner that       store wetland and marsh habitat. Wetlands        waterways that penetrate the land in this area,
maintains and enhances the ecological value of  should be protected by such treatments as set-   the existing Embarcadero bridges should be im-
the area in general and the Lake Merritt Chan-  ting back trails from the shoreline, installing  proved across the Lake Merritt Channel on the
nel in particular. In some locations, tidelands suitable buffer planting to prevent disruption
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                           87

south side of the Embarcadero, to provide for      MAJOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES WHICH                "   Expand & Rehabilitate Estuary Park. If
pedestrian and bicycle routes.                     ACCOMMODATE         A WIDE VARIETY OF AC-             Estuary Park is to fulfill its potential, it is
                                                   TIVITIES AND WHICH TAKE ADVANTAGE OF                  important to make it more visible from
OAK-1.3: Undertake remediation of con-             THE UNIQUE WATERFRONT SETTING.              PRO-      the Embarcadero. It should be expanded
taminants in conjunction with development          MOTE A VARIETY      OF RECREATIONAL EXPE-             and extended to the street, adding to the
and/or improvement of relevant sites. Typi-        RIENCES.                                              total amount of useable public space and
cal of many waterfront areas that have histori-                                                          improving park security.
cally been in intensive industrial use, contami-   There are opportunities to create several new
nation has been documented within this dis-        public spaces and facilities, as discussed below.    The entire park (including the expansion
trict. It will be a consideration in redevelop-    In keeping with their size, location and re-          area) should be improved. It should be
ment of the sites identified.                      gional significance, they should not be devel-        designed and programmed so that it can
                                                   oped as isolated elements. Rather, they should        accommodate the planned Aquatic Cen-
To date, parties have undertaken initial efforts   be developed as an integrated system extend-          ter (see below) and a large space suitable
to characterize surface soil, subsurface soil and  ing along the shoreline and inland to Lake Mer-       for a wide range of informal and orga-
groundwater within the Oak to Ninth area.          ritt and other parts of the city. Looking at          nized field sports such as soccer.
Further investigations should be undertaken        them from west-to-east:
to more accurately characterize contamination,                                                          The existing fishing pier, shoreline seating
and to determine the most appropriate and                        Estuary Park &                          area, and boat launch provide opportu-
cost-effective remediation methods that can           Mouth of Lake Merritt Channel                      nities to use and appreciate the water as a
achieve reuse objectives for this area in a timely                                                       recreational resource. They should be
and coordinated fashion.                           OAK-2.1: Expand Estuary Park. Encour-                 maintained. Consideration should be
                                                   age aquatic sports within the mouth of Lake           given to providing places to observe ma-
The level and type of soil and groundwater         Merritt Channel. Currently, the 5.5-acre Es-          jor civic celebrations and water related
cleanup should be commensurate with the rec-       tuary Park is the only public open space within       festivals (e.g., the lighted yacht parade,
ommended re-use of the affected sites.             the Oak-to-Ninth area, and one of the few             rowing races, etc.).
                                                   parks on the entire waterfront that is close to
POLICY OAK-2: ESTABLISH A WELL-                    activity centers. Although it provides access      " Develop the Jack London Aquatic Center.
STRUCTURED , INTEGRATED SYSTEM OF                  to the water and is used intensively, it also suf-    The new Jack London Aquatic Center is
                                                   fers from a lack of accessibility and visibility.     currently planned for Estuary Park to pro-
88                                                                                                                       Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
FIGURE III-11: Oak to 9th District Bird’s-Eye Illustrative Perspective
      vide city residents a place to learn boat-  " Develop the mouth of Lake Merritt Chan-    OAK-2.2: Create a major new park on the
      ing skills and gain proficiency in sailing,   nel as a protected water space for aquatic east side of the mouth of the Lake Merritt
      rowing, and kayaking. Like the programs       sports. A “no wake” zone or maximum        Channel, at the Estuary. To complement
      now offered in the summer at Lake             speed limit for motorized vessels should   Estuary Park to the west, the former Crowley
      Merritt, the new Aquatic Center will be       be established within the U.S. Pierhead    site on the east side of the channel, between
      oriented to youth, but will focus on boat-    Line to recognize the environmental sen-   the water, a realigned Fifth Avenue (See Policy
      ing in the Estuary.                           sitivity of the mouth of Lake Merritt      OAK-4.1) and the Embarcadero, should be
                                                    Channel.                                   converted into a major park suitable for pas-
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                      89

sive recreation. Promenading, viewing and         " Establish a linear open space composed of a         be provided to create a high-quality moor-
other contemplative activities should be em-       series of smaller parks around Clinton Basin.        ing area, attractive to patrons and comple-
phasized. Shoreline edges should be restored       The basin is hidden behind buildings and             mentary to landside uses within the district.
to tidal wetlands.                                 not highly accessible. In order to improve
                                                   access to the water and visibility of the boat-           Ninth Avenue Terminal
                Clinton Basin                      ing activities, a series of public spaces should
                                                   be developed on both sides of the basin and      OAK-2.4: Establish a large park in the area
OAK-2.3: Enhance Clinton Basin. Clinton            at the head of the basin adjacent to the Em-     of the existing Ninth Avenue Terminal to es-
Basin is a marina that recalls the maritime        barcadero. This network of public spaces         tablish a location for large civic events and
slipways and boat-building activities of a past    should be composed of a series of smaller        cultural activities. Maritime activities and
age. While it has been used as a recreational      connected parks, connected by a continu-         support services that operate in and around
marina for many years, it has fallen into disre-   ous promenade along the edge of the basin        the terminal shed should be relocated. (See
pair, and has become functionally obsolete.        that connects the open spaces.                   Policies OAK-4.3)
" Rehabilitate the marina. If economically         To improve accessibility around the basin         The park is envisioned as primarily an open,
    feasible, the marina should be upgraded to     and to reduce its barrier effect, consider-      unobstructed green field that is flexible in use.
    contemporary standards. In addition to ex-     ation should be given to developing a pe-        It should be large enough to accommodate
    tending the life of the marina, improving      destrian bridge at the bayward end of the        large numbers of people associated with spe-
    the physical condition would provide an        basin. Views into Clinton Basin from the         cial events, cultural activities, city festivals, etc.;
    interesting focus for waterfront activities.   Embarcadero should be maintained and en-         yet, at the same time be designed to be attrac-
    Provisions in the marina for boat rentals      hanced.                                          tive to individuals or small groups of people
    and launches, fishing charters, water taxi/                                                     on a more regular basis.
    ferry services, a limited amount of food ser- " Provide for a limited number of new recre-
    vices, etc., would all contribute to to the    ational slips east of Fifth Avenue. A small      The park should be oriented to maximize ac-
    liveliness of the area, and should be accom-   number of slips for the mooring of recre-        cess and views of the Estuary. It should be
    modated.                                       ational boats should be provided east of         adjoined by commercial, hotels, and public
                                                   Fifth Avenue, with support facilities pro-       uses, which can benefit from the civic events
                                                   vided accordingly. An area for supply drop-      and cultural activity programming. (See Policy
                                                   off and the provisioning of vessels should       OAK-4.2)
90                                                                                                                       Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Recognize that the Ninth Avenue Terminal
shed, or portions thereof, may be suitable for
rehabilitation and adaptive reuse. However,
the terminal building impedes public access
to and views of a key area of the Esstuary.
# The Port and City should investigate the
      feasibility of keeping and reusing the
      building (or portions thereof ). A Spe-
      cific Plan for the entire District should
      be initiated prior to development. (See
      Policy Oak 5)
" Encourage the mooring of vessels adjacent
      to the Ninth Avenue Terminal. Along the
      southern boundary of the Ninth Avenue
      Terminal, a limited amount of vessel
      mooring is encouraged to complement
      the recreational and cultural uses of the The 9th Avenue Terminal provides an exciting opportunity for public-oriented activities and open spaces.
      area.
                                                is proposed to convert the ship into theaters,               for the waterfront. Provisions should be made
OAK-2.5: Provide for mooring of the             gallery space, classrooms, meeting space, stu-               for its permanent mooring in the vicinity of
ARTSHIP. The ARTSHIP Foundation has             dios, and other facilities necessary to support              the Ninth Avenue Terminal. Some landside
recently acquired the Golden Bear, a former     a major arts initiative.                                     facilities, including parking and servicing,
naval training vessel, to serve as headquarters                                                              should also be accommodated.
and primary program venue for the numer-        It is envisioned that the ARTSHIP could be
ous community outreach and art programs run     an integral part of the waterfront, and a major
by the Foundation and other art and cultural    waterfront attraction. It is a project that
organizations. An extensive renovation project  achieves almost all of the identified objectives
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                                    91
          Lake Merritt Channel                   ern side of the channel should be completed     should work with these entities to assemble
                                                 and enhanced. It should be developed to al-     or otherwise gain access to these properties (as
POLICY OAK-3:              LINK THE ESTUARY      low unimpeded movement between the Es-          necessary) to extend areas available for public
TO LAKE MERRITT BY ENHANCING THE                 tuary and Lake Merritt. Where feasible, the     use.
LAKE MERRITT CHANNEL.                            path should be widened and fully integrated
                                                 into adjacent public spaces that are currently                   LAND USE
Although a pedestrian/bicycle path exists, the   underutilized.
link between the Estuary and Lake Merritt is                                                     Public space is planned to be the primary new
dominated by physical obstacles. Given the       Efforts to expand public uses in this area must use within the Oak-to-Ninth District, occu-
significant historical relationship between the  be carried out in a manner that respects the    pying all of the land along the shoreline and
Lake, the Channel and the Estuary, it is in-     wildlife habitat value of the wetland areas     extending inland at Lake Merritt Channel,
congruous that a physical connection between     within and along the channel. Restoration of    Clinton Basin, and a new ‘Crescent Park’. (See
them has not been completed.                     tidal wetlands along the shoreline edges should Policy OAK-2.4). Recreational use of the
                                                 be included as part of the facility development shoreline will be the most significant agent of
The opportunity exists to achieve this long-     programs that would extend through this area.   change within the district. It will create a se-
standing community objective. Most of the                                                        ries of extraordinary amenities and recreational
properties north of the Embarcadero along the    Surface parking should be relocated away from   resources for the community, as well as an at-
Lake Merritt Channel are publicly owned. In      the channel’s edge.                             tractive setting for new and existing develop-
addition plans are under discussion to build a                                                   ment.
pedestrian and bicycle overpass between Estu-    OAK-3.2: Work with public agencies in the
ary Park and the channel shoreline to the north. area to extend the open space system inland     Within the larger framework of a major wa-
                                                 from the Channel. Much of the land inland       terfront open space system, development
To create the strongest possible connection      of the Embarcadero which is recommended         should be guided by the following policies:
between Lake Merritt and the Estuary, two        to be enhanced as publicly-accessible space is
measures should be undertaken:                   owned by railroads, public agencies and insti-  POLICY OAK-4: PROVIDE             FOR LIVELY,
                                                 tutions, including the City of Oakland, the     PUBLICLY ORIENTED ACTIVITIES THAT
OAK-3.1: Create a system of public open          Union Pacific Railroad, Laney College, Peralta  COMPLEMENT THE ADJACENT WATERFRONT
spaces that connects Lake Merritt Channel        College District, and EBMUD. The City           PARKS AND OPEN SPACES.
to the Estuary. The existing path on the East-
92                                                                                                                   Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Development adjacent to the open recreational      taurant use, such as the existing Seabreeze Cafe, OAK-2.3, 2.5 & 4.1). Requisite parking and
spaces should complement them, and should          should also be promoted within the area.          servicing should also be accommodated and,
provide public attractions which add to the                                                          where feasible, consolidated.
variety of activities and experiences found on     It should be noted that enclaves such as this
the waterfront. Development should be en-          are rarely planned. Rather, they develop          "     The Oakland Museum is investigating
couraged on both sides of Clinton Basin, and       through the spontaneous vision and dedica-           options to expand and develop the ‘Trea-
in areas close to the Embarcadero, as follows.     tion of creative, entrepreneurial property own-      sure House’ concept. An appropriate loca-
                                                   ers and residents. By their very nature and          tion for this use would be adjacent to the
            Fifth Avenue Point                     character, these enclaves are economically frag-     planned waterfront open space flanking
                                                   ile. Policies that promote preservation and          Clinton Basin and the Estuary.
OAK-4.1: Preserve and expand the existing          expansion of the Fifth Avenue Point commu-
Fifth Avenue Point community as a neighbor-        nity should be carefully applied, so as not to    " The ARTSHIP Foundation has recently
hood of artists and artisan studios, small busi-   adversely affect property values, or inadvert-       acquired the Golden Bear, a former naval
nesses, and water-dependent activities. West       ently change the very essence of what makes it       training vessel, to serve as headquarters and
of Clinton Basin, the Fifth Avenue Point com-      unique.                                              primary program venue for the numerous
munity is one of Oakland’s most unique neigh-                                                           community outreach and art programs run
borhoods. It has nestled among declining wa-       OAK-4.2: Promote development of educa-               by the Foundation and other art and cul-
terfront industrial uses, creating a spark of life tional and cultural interpretive facilities.
and activity. The artisan work that takes place    The Oak-to-Ninth reach of the waterfront is
there is an economic asset which is valuable       an ideal location for cultural attractions and
for local residents. In addition, the existing     other development. (See Policy OAK-4.4) In
work/live units within the Fifth Avenue arti-      addition to the recreational benefits associated
san village contribute to the inventory of af-     with festivals, etc. (See Policy OAK-2.4 &
fordable studio spaces within Oakland. These       2.5), facilities housing museums, educational
units should be maintained and reinforced          and cultural programs, etc. can be major wa-
through the provision of additional units, in-     terfront attractions. Such facilities should be
cluding artist and artisan work/live studios and   located and developed to add to the atmo-
small light industrial and water-dependent         sphere established by the Fifth Avenue Point
                                                                                                     The 5th Avenue Point community includes a synergistic
businesses. A limited amount of retail and res-    community and Clinton Basin (See Policies         grouping of artists, artisans and small industrial businesses.
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                                        93

    tural organizations. Under an extensive
    renovation project, the ship will be con-
    verted into theaters, gallery space, class-
    rooms, meeting space, studios, and other
    facilities necessary to support a major arts
    initiative.
OAK-4.3: Facilitate the relocation of break-
bulk cargo operations from the Ninth Avenue
Terminal. East of Clinton Basin, a major ex-
isting use within the district is the Ninth Av-
enue marine terminal, which is owned and
operated by the Port of Oakland. In order to
achieve the vision for the waterfront in the
Oak-to-Ninth area, it is necessary that the ex-
isting terminal operations and those related
maritime and warehousing activities adjacent
to the terminal be accommodated elsewhere;
thus enabling reuse of the Ninth Avenue Ter-
                                                 The 5th Avenue Point community will be retained as a unique mixed-use district with work-live units, studios, small
minal site.                                      businesses and water-dependent activities.
         Mixed Use Development                   cent Park (See Policy OAK-2.4), the Embar-                  encouraged as an integral component of the
                                                 cadero and Clinton Basin (See Figure 10).                   development programs of hotel and other uses.
OAK-4.4: Promote development of commer-          Development of these sites should be planned                Recreational elements could be developed as a
cial-recreational uses in the vicinity of the    and carried out in a comprehensive manner,                  part of the projects. Accommodating tennis,
Crescent Park and Clinton Basin. Reloca-         and include possible hotel, conference, restau-             swimming, etc., could add another dimension
tion of cargo handling and clearance of the      rant, retail, and similar commercial-recreational           to the recreational experience of the area.
Ninth Avenue Terminal creates potential de-      uses. A recreational ‘resort’ orientation, along
velopment parcels between the proposed Cres-     with cultural and social programs, should be                New development within this area should be
94                                                                                                                                   Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

promoted along the Embarcadero Parkway,          options available to address these issues in a                  Regional Access
with “windows” to the water at intermittent      timely manner.
points. It should be set back from the shore-                                                      POLICY OAK-6: EXPLORE THE FUTURE
line promenade. (See Policy OAK-5)               A Specific Plan should be prepared prior to       POTENTIAL FOR A NEW BART STATION
                                                 development. Planning should be based on a        AND MAJOR PARKING FACILITY ON BART
OAK-4.5: North of the Embarcadero, en-           strategy which analyzes the area comprehen-       PROPERTY AT FIFTH AVENUE AND EAST
courage a mixed-use district while maintain-     sively and which accounts for the constraints     EIGHTH STREET.
ing viable industrial uses. In the more tradi-   imposed by subsoil environmental conditions.
tional warehouse and industrial area north of    Transformation of the district will require that  As the waterfront develops as a major destina-
the Embarcadero between the Lake Merritt         several outstanding issues be resolved simulta-   tion, opportunities for the creation of a new
Channel and Oak Street, a mixed-use district     neously. Development feasibilities should be      BART station east of Fifth Avenue should be
is encouraged. Emphasis should be placed on      analyzed, phasing of improvements should be       explored. In addition to improving regional
maintaining the existing industrial and manu-    identified, and a funding strategy to finance     transit service, easy BART connections would
facturing uses, as well as providing for nontra- and implement recommended open space              enhance the potential of the nearby waterfront
ditional higher density housing (work/live and   should be addressed. These require that a re-     as a major destination, and reduce parking
artist studios). This area is essentially an ex- alistic development program and site plan be      problems associated with special events. The
tension of a larger mixed-use district to the    developed.                                        site might also include a significant parking
west, extending to Webster Street in the Jack                                                      facility for commuter parking, replacement
London District.                                   REGIONAL CIRCULATION &                          parking for Laney College surface lots, and
                                                               LOCAL STREET                        special events parking for the waterfront.
POLICY OAK-5:             INITIATE  MORE SPE-                 IMPROVEMENTS
CIFIC PLANNING OF THE ENTIRE          OAK-TO-                                                      In addition to serving the waterfront area, a
NINTH DISTRICT.                                  The Oak-to-Ninth area is isolated from other      BART station at this location could have posi-
                                                 parts of the city by regional transportation fa-  tive impacts on the revitalization of adjacent
The Oak-to-Ninth district is large and diverse,  cilities, all of which run parallel to the water- neighborhoods.
with several unique, complicated issues that     front. The following policies are recommended
dominate its real development potential. It      to reduce the effect of these barriers and im-
should be planned in sufficient detail to iden-  proving access to, and circulation through, the
tify all potential issues, and to understand the area.
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                          95

FIGURE III-12: Clinton Basin Illustrative Cross Section
POLICY OAK-7: COORDINATE WITH                 more dangerous place for drivers and pedes-      should be removed and replaced with a con-
CALTRANS ON THE UPGRADE OF THE I-             trians.                                          figuration that provides both eastbound on-
880 FREEWAY TO IMPROVE REGIONAL                                                                ramp and westbound off-ramp connecting to
                                              However, with the current seismic upgrade        Fifth Avenue.
ACCESS TO THE WATERFRONT.
                                              program for the freeway, this situation could           Local Street Improvements
As it passes through Oakland, I-880 is sub-   be remedied to promote highway safety and
standard. On and off-ramps occur in a ran-    to provide clear, safe and convenient access to  POLICY OAK-8: ENHANCE FIFTH AV-
dom manner, creating short merging distances  the waterfront. The City should work with        ENUE AS THE PRINCIPAL PEDESTRIAN AND
and associated safety problems. This is par-  Caltrans to develop retrofit plans for the Fifth VEHICULAR LINKAGE TO THE PUBLIC OPEN
ticularly true in the Oak-to-Ninth District.  Avenue Interchange which also include a more     SPACE SURROUNDING THE MOUTH OF THE
As the area evolves and becomes more of a     direct way to the waterfront. At a minimum,      LAKE MERRITT CHANNEL.
regional attraction, the highway network that the existing on and off-ramps along the Em-
serves the district will become a busier and  barcadero between Fifth and Ninth Avenues
96                                                                                                                Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Fifth Avenue is a significant north-south street, ing, and sidewalk improvements should be       mendations to develop segments of the park-
connecting to Park Boulevard and linking the      undertaken along its entire distance.          way in other sections of this plan, the Embar-
waterfront to downtown neighborhoods and                                                         cadero Parkway concept should be imple-
the Oakland Hills. As such, it is important       POLICY OAK-9:           IMPROVE THE EM-        mented between Ninth Avenue, Lake Merritt
that Fifth Avenue be improved south of the        BARCADERO EAST       OF OAK STREET AS A        Channel and Embarcadero Cove, beyond.
Embarcadero as the principal pedestrian and       MULTIMODAL LANDSCAPED PARKWAY WITH
vehicular connection to this segment of the       BICYCLE, PEDESTRIAN AND VEHICULAR FA-          A three-lane roadway (two moving lanes and
waterfront. It should be realigned and straight-  CILITIES.                                      a center left-turn lane) should be built, wher-
ened to become the edge of the open space                                                        ever feasible, with an adjacent landscaped cor-
and to establish a direct driving route that cir- A key objective of the Estuary Policy Plan is  ridor to accommodate a continuous bicycle
cumvents the Fifth Avenue Point community.        to create a continuous multimodal parkway      trail and pedestrian promenade on the Estu-
                                                  to improve access along the waterfront and     ary side.
In order to enhance the pedestrian environ-       enhance the continuity and identity of the Es-
ment along Fifth Avenue, landscaping, light-      tuary within the city. Consistent with recom-
Section III: District Recommendations                                                                                                        97
   FIGURE III-13: 5th Avenue Illustrative Cross Section
   (With one vehicular lane in each direction.)
POLICY OAK-10: CREATE A NETWORK                 through the district and a comfortable and safe order to create a more public and open feeling
OF PEDESTRIAN-FRIENDLY STREETS THAT             pedestrian environment. The configuration of    along the water and increase accessibility. Con-
OPENS UP VIEWS AND ACCESS TO THE                streets should be aligned to promote views and  nections should be made from this area across
WATER.                                          access to the shoreline, provide convenient ac- the head of Clinton Basin to the Fifth Avenue
                                                cess to and parking for open spaces, and dis-   Point community to ensure that both sides of
Within the Fifth Avenue Point area and the      courage fast-moving through traffic. Streets    the basin are tied together by local streets.
commercial-recreational district east of        should include generous provisions for pedes-
Clinton Basin, a network of local streets       trians and be landscaped in a manner that ex-                      Parking
should be provided to serve individual prop-    tends the open space amenity inland from the
erties.                                         shoreline.                                      OAK-11: DESIGN PARKING TO BE CON-
                                                                                                VENIENT AND COMPLEMENTARY TO THE
In future planning (See Policy OAK-5) this      New local streets should continuously follow    PUBLIC ORIENTATION OF USES WITHIN THE
network should be designed in a block con-      the Estuary and Clinton Basin open space, in    AREA.
figuration to allow for a diversity of ways
98                                                                                                                  Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Convenient and visible parking is important
in ensuring the success of open space improve-
ments as well as new development. In future
planning (See Policy OAK-5) parking should
be provided in a manner that complements
the open space character of the area. Large ex-
panses of asphalt should be avoided in favor
of landscaped roadways with parking along-
side them. Such an approach will minimize
the visual impact of parking while maximiz-
ing access and visibility to adjacent activities.
Parking areas should be well lit and linked to
pedestrian trails.
Development projects should provide all of
their parking requirements onsite, and be gen-
erously landscaped to promote continuity with
open space areas. Parking should be screened
from predominant public view with landscap-
ing and/or encapsulated and architecturally
integrated within buildings. Parking that serves
private uses should be made available to the
public during nonpeak periods.
Permanent onsite parking along roadways can
only satisfy a small percentage of the overall
parking needs. Additional opportunities for
events parking north of I-880 such as the ex-
isting railyards, existing parking facilities at
Section III: District Recommendations             99
Laney College, and private parking facilities
within the waterfront area should be pursued
and programmed.
OAK-12: ESTABLISH             A MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM FOR SPECIAL EVENTS ACCESS AND
PARKING.
A major event at the waterfront (See Policy OAK-
2.4) could attract several thousand people. As
a result, transportation and parking will be sig-
nificant issues. Events planning should include
a comprehensive transportation management
program that includes shuttles, vans, and spe-
cial transit vehicles providing service to the
downtown, the Jack London District, and key
regional transit providers (e.g., BART, Amtrak,
Transbay ferries). Events’ parking should also
be provided within walking distance of the
planned celebration space.
100                                               Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

Section III: District Recommendations 10
The San Antonio/Fruivale Distrit stretches from Embarcadeero Cove to San Leandro Bay.
102                                                                                   Oakland Estuary Policy Plan






















     IV Moving Forward
Section IV: Moving Forward 125
126 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
Steps Toward Implementing the Estuary Policy Plan
The Estuary Policy Plan establishes the         However, implementing this plan’s vision is a      broad awareness of this fact. The major
context, vision, goals, objectives and policies complex challenge. It will take a long time,       products of this planning process are not only
that will guide the transformation of the       and demand significant and constant                planning documents and projects. Rather it is
waterfront:                                     commitments of effort and involvement. It          a community-wide “Estuary Consciousness”;
                                                requires coordinated initiatives by many public    a dedication to work together to achieve the
• It presents the history of the Estuary area   agencies, interest groups, the private sector, and great potential of the waterfront.
and its relationship to the City, providing a   individual citizens. And, in addition to
context for future changes.                     commitments of interest and time, realizing        Guided by this philosophy, a strategy for
                                                the ideas presented in the plan will also require  implementation requires that several initial
• It identifies issues to be addressed and      the dedication of extraordinary amounts of         steps be undertaken immediately. These
opportunities to improve the Estuary’s          financial and other resources, phased over         include the following initiatives:
attractiveness and public use.                  many years.
                                                                                                   ! To begin with, the plan should be
• It provides policy direction for the Estuary  In shifting focus from planning to                      sanctioned by the key decision-making
as a whole, and subdistricts in particular.     implementation, it is important to reaffirm a           bodies which have the responsibility to
Included are recommendations to change the      basic premise about the Estuary. Preparation            oversee the waterfront. Specifically, the
physical appearance of the Estuary, and enhance of this plan was based on a recognition that            City Planning Commission, City
it as a community asset.                        the Oakland Estuary is one of Oakland’s --              Council, and Board of Port
                                                and the region’s -- most important resources.           Commissioners should review and
                                                Successful implementation also depends on a             approve (as appropriate) the Estuary
Section IV: Moving Forward                                                                                                                   127

    Policy Plan and other supporting           The update of the General Plan’s Land Use        tation Guide should be a compendium of spe-
    docments as they are developed.            and Transportation Element (March 1998) was      cific recommendations, ideas, strategies, stan-
                                               prepared and adopted while the Estuary Plan      dards, City/Port organizational relationships,
! Coordinated staff follow-through is very     was underway. Anticipating completion of         funding, financing, and other implementation
    important.         Specific priorities,    the Estuary Plan, the General Plan recom-        techniques which can be used to carry out the
    identification of immediate and catalyst   mends (in Objective W-8) that the                policies of the Estuary Policy Plan.
    projects, development strategies,          city....”Provide (for) a comprehensive planning
    programs, funding, institutional           framework... (for the mixed use waterfront       As opportunities to implement waterfront
    arrangements, and other means of           area). In addition to...(General Plan) objec-    projects present themselves, the
    implementing recommendations should        tives and policies, the Estuary Plan, which will Implementation Guide should be used to
    be identified, assessed, documented, and   be adopted as part of the General Plan, will     clarify Estuary Policy Plan recommendations
    undertaken.                                provide additional detail...”                    and establish basic direction for decisions and
                                                                                                actions. It should be used by Port and City
! Appropriate regulatory controls which        The Estuary Policy Plan achieves this objec-     staff and decision-makers as the basis for
    reflect the recommended land use patterns  tive. The Oakland Planning Commission and        initiating and evaluating waterfront projects.
    and development intensities should be      City Council should take steps to formally
    established and enforced. In addition, the incorporate it as an element of the General      Work programs for critical initiatives should
    overall quality of design should be        Plan.                                            be established, project managers should be
    promoted via specific project review                                                        identified, and commitments by agencies and
    procedures.                                POLICY MF-2: DEVELOP A COMPANION                 stakeholders should be identifed and
                                               DOCUMENT TO THE E STUARY P OLICY                 documented in the Implementation Guide.
! The implications of this plan on private     PLAN, TO BE CALLED THE ESTUARY PLAN              The Implementation Guide should also be
    property rights should be clarified.       IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE.                            used to evaluate development projects
                                                                                                proposed by other public agencies and the
POLICY MF-1: ADOPT THE ESTUARY                 The Estuary Plan Implementation Guide            private sector. Therefore, it should assess and
P OLICY P LAN INTO THE O AKLAND                should be developed and used as a resource by    document appropriate design guidelines
GENERAL PLAN.                                  Port and City decision-makers, as well as the    suggested by the Estuary Policy Plan. The
                                               public, in initiating and evaluating waterfront- guidelines should also form the basis of
                                               related projects or programs. The Implemen-      enforceable regulatory controls, to be drafted
128                                                                                                                Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

and enforced by the City and/or the Port            regulatory controls to be enforced to insure       in the City area and privately-owned pacels
within their respective jurisdictions. (See         project consistency with the Estuary Policy        within the Port area, they should be applied
Policy MF-3).                                       Plan (and ultimately, with the General Plan.)      by parcel.
Implementation of significant project                The new classifications should supersede the      Ultimate densities of specific projects should
initiatives such as those identified in the Estuary single “Waterfront Mixed Use” classification       consider many factors beyond these
Policy Plan typically take time, and undergo        currently in the Land Use and Transportation       maximums, including the context of each
several twists and turns over their lifetimes.      Element of the General Plan. They should           individual district, neighborhood character,
For that reason, the Implementation Guide           also be incorporated into city zoning regula-      zoning regulations, parking, open space, height
should not be a static document that presents       tions and Port development controls.               limits, and all relevant policies of the General
a single way of implementing initiatives.                                                              Plan.
Rather, it should be a ‘working document’,          Each classification is unique in terms of land
updated on a regular basis, to reflect unforseen    uses, desired character, relationship with the     The Port and the City have separate powers
opportunities or constraints to implementing        waterfront, and ability to achieve the goals and   for regulating land uses within their respective
projects. Specific recommendations should           objectives of the Estuary Policy Plan. (See        jurisdictions. The City should amend its
be continually assessed and periodically re-        Land Use Classification Map and Summary            zoning codes, and the Port should amend or
evaluated, based on current market conditions,      Matrix, pages 132-135)                             otherwise establish development standards and
economic feasibility, site-specific physical                                                           restrictions that reflect these classifications.
characteristics, funding options, etc.              The intensity and density standards should be      Furthermore, the two agencies should enforce
                                                    considered as maximums. For residential uses,      their respective controls in a consistent manner,
POLICY MF-3: ADOPT                AND ENFORCE       the density maximums are not entitlements          to insure that a uniform approach to
DEVELOPMENT REGUL ATIONS WHICH                      that apply to every property within a given        development is achieved.
REFLECT        THE    LAND      USE     POLICIES    classification. Similarly, for non-residential
ESTABLISHED BY THE           ESTUARY POLICY         uses, the floor-area-ratios (FARs) are overall
PLAN.                                               maximums; not entitlements that apply to
                                                    every property within a given classifcation.
Eighteen unique land use classifications are        Because there are not specific parcels or definite
recommended by the Estuary Policy Plan.             lot-line delineations, FARs in the Port area
They should form the basis of future                should be applied on an area-wide basis, while
Section IV: Moving Forward                                                                                                                          129

130 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
Section IV: Moving Forward 13
Summary of Estuary Policy Plan Land Use Classifications
Land Use                                                                                                                Desired                                 Maximum
Classification                                           Intent                                                       Character                                 Intensity
LI-1: Light Industrial      Maintain light industrial and manufacturing uses that provide            Future development in this area should be           FAR of 2.0 per parcel.
                            support to the adjacent maritime area and downtown, but are              primarily industrial and manufacturing in            30 units per gross acre.
                            compatible with the adjacent West Oakland neighborhood.                   nature.
ORD: Off Price Retail       Promote the expansion of off-price and home improvement                  Future development in this area should be           FAR of 2.0 per parcel.
                             retail stores that can further establish this area a retail             primarily commercial, with retail,                   30 units per gross acre.
                            destination complementary to the Jack London waterfront and              restaurant, other public-oriented active
                            downtown.                                                                uses.
RD&E-1: Retail,             Intensity and enhance public-oriented uses and activities that Future development in this area should be                      Average FAR over
Dining, Entertainment       strengthen the attractiveness of the area as an active and              primarily retail, restaurant, entertainment,          entire area of 3.5.
(Phase 1: JLS)              pedestrian-friendly waterfront destination.                              marina support, cultural, hotel, upper level
                                                                                                     offices, parks, and open space with active
                                                                                                     uses on the ground level of principle
                                                                                                     streets. Water uses also included.
RD&E-2: Retail,             Enhance and intensify Lower Broadway as an active                        Future development in this area should be FAR of 7.0 per parcel.
Dining, Entertainment       pedestrian-oriented entertainment district that can help to             primarily retail, restaurant, entertainment,          125 units per gross
(Broadway)                  create stronger activity and pedestrian linkages with                    hotel, upper level office, cultural, parks,          acre.
                            downtown Oakland, Old Oakland, and Chinatown.                            public open space, and any other use that is
                                                                                                     complementary to active public-oriented
                                                                                                     ground-level uses.
WCR-1: Waterfront           Extend public-oriented waterfront activities west from                   Future development in this area should be            Average FAR over
Commercial                  Webster Street to Alice Street, in conjunction with enhanced            primarily retail, restaurant, cultural, office,       entire area of 3.0.
Recreation (Phase II)        public access, open space, and recreational opportunities.              hotel, commercial-recreational,
                                                                                                     conference, exhibition, performances,
                                                                                                     shows, parks, and public open spaces, and
                                                                                                     recreational opportunities with active
                                                                                                     public-oriented uses on ground floors on
                                                                                                     streets and adjacent to open space areas.
                                                                                                     Water uses also included.
Definition of Terms:
Intent: the purpose of the classification
Desired Character of the Area: a broad description of the character, types of uses, and activities that are desired in areas designated with the classification. This is descriptive
and not an exclusive definition of use or activity.
Intensity: the maximum intensity of building form, or density in terms of housing units per gross acre. Gross acreage includes all land in the neighborhood, including
streets and parks. To calculate permitted density on any given lot, refer to the Ordinance No.12054 C.M.S.: Guidelines for Determining General Plan Conformity 100-31.
  132                                                                                                                                               Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Land Use                                                                                                                 Desired                                Maximum
Classification                                              Intent                                                      Character                                Intensity
PM: Produce Market           Retain the historic architectural character and integrity of the        Future development in this area should be            FAR of 1.0 per parcel.
(Franklin Street b/w         Produce Market District, and promote uses that maintain the             primarily wholesale food, retail,                    30 units per gross acre.
2nd & 4th Streets)           viability, life, and activity of the area.                              restaurants, office, work/live lofts, cultural,
                                                                                                     outdoor markets, parks, and public open
                                                                                                     spaces and light industrial, warehousing,
                                                                                                     and other uses that are complementary.
WWD: Waterfront              Encourage the preservation and adaptive reuse of existing               Future development in this area should be FAR of 5.0 per parcel
Warehouse District           buildings and new infill development that preserve and                  primarily joint living and working                   100 units per gross acre
                             respect the area’s unique character and historic flavor, within         quarters, residential, light industrial,
                             a context of commercial and light industrial/manufacturing              warehousing, wholesale, office,
                             uses.                                                                   artist/artisans studios, neighborhood
                                                                                                     serving commercial uses, including local
                                                                                                     small scale restaurants with manufacturing,
                                                                                                     assembly, and other uses that are
                                                                                                     compatible with adjacent uses.
MUD: Mixed Use               Encourage the development of nontraditional higher density              Future development in this area should be            FAR of 5.0 per parcel.
District                     housing (work/live, lofts, artist studios) within a context of          primarily light industrial, warehousing,             125 units per gross
                             commercial and light industrial/manufacturing uses.                     wholesale, retail, restaurant, office,               acre.
                                                                                                     residential, work/live, lofts units, parks,
                                                                                                     and public open spaces with
                                                                                                     manufacturing, assembly, and other uses
                                                                                                     that are compatible with adjacent uses.
WMU: Waterfront              Allow for a mixture of uses that complement the waterfront              Future development in this area should be FAR of 2.0 per parcel.
Mixed Use (Site B,           setting, and maintains and enhances views and public access             primarily residential, office, retail, and           40 units per gross acre.
Lincoln Properties,          to the waterfront.                                                      restaurants, parks, and public open spaces.
KTVU, Portobello)                                                                                    Water uses also included.
Definition of Terms:
Intent: the purpose of the classification
Desired Character of the Area: a broad description of the character, types of uses, and activities that are desired in areas designated with the classification. This is descriptive
and not an exclusive definition of use or activity.
Intensity: the maximum intensity of building form, or density in terms of housing units per gross acre. Gross acreage includes all land in the neighborhood, including
streets and parks. To calculate permitted density on any given lot, refer to the Ordinance No.12054 C.M.S.: Guidelines for Determining General Plan Conformity 100-31.
Section IV: Moving Forward                                                                                                                                                      133

Land Use                                                                                                                 Desired                                Maximum
Classification                                            Intent                                                        Character                                 Intensity
PWD-1: Planned               Provide for the transformation of maritime and marine                   Future development in this area should be            FAR of 1.0 and
Waterfront                  industrial uses into a public-oriented waterfront district that          primarily public recreational uses                   30 units per gross
Development (Estuary         encourages significant public access and open space                     including boating clubs, community and               acre for privately
Park to 9th Ave)             opportunities. Encourage a unique mix of light industrial,              cultural uses, parks, and public open                owned parcels.
                             manufacturing, artist lofts and workshops, hotel, commercial-           spaces; with primary uses including light
                             recreation, cultural uses, and water-oriented uses that                 industrial, manufacturing, assembly, artist          Average FAR over
                             complement the recreational and open space character of the             workshops, cultural, work/live studios,              entire area of 1.0.
                             waterfront.                                                             offices, neighborhood commercial, and                Average 30 units per
                                                                                                     restaurants; and including hotel,                    gross acre.
                                                                                                     conference, restaurant, commercial-
                                                                                                     recreational, and cultural. Water uses also
                                                                                                     included.
WCR-2: Waterfront            Encourage a mix of hotel, commercial-recreational and water-            Future development in this area should be            Average FAR over
Commercial                   oriented uses that complement the recreational and open space           primarily hotel, restaurant, retail, marine          entire area of 1.0.
Recreation                   character of the waterfront, enhance public access, and take            services and boat repair, boat sales, upper
(Embarcadero                 advantage of highway visibility.                                        level office, parks, and public open spaces
Cove/Union Point)                                                                                    with water uses.
LI-2: Light Industrial       Maintain light industrial, food processing and manufacturing            Future development in this area should be            FAR of 2.0 per parcel.
(Brooklyn Basin)             uses, allowing a limited amount of office, residential,                  primarily light industrial, food processing,        30 units per gross acre.
                             institutional or commercial uses.                                       wholesale, distribution, work/live,
                                                                                                     residential, parks, and public open spaces.
PWD-2: Planned               Provide for the continuation of existing industrial uses,               Future development in this area should be            FAR of 2.0 per parcel.
Waterfront                  allowing for their future transition to a higher density mix of          primarily industrial, manufacturing in                40 units per gross acre.
Development (Con-            urban uses if the existing uses prove to be no longer viable in         nature, and other uses that support the
Agra/Lone Star/Ready         this area.                                                              existing industrial uses.
Mix)
Definition of Terms:
Intent: the purpose of the classification
Desired Character of the Area: a broad description of the character, types of uses, and activities that are desired in areas designated with the classification. This is descriptive
and not an exclusive definition of use or activity.
Intensity: the maximum intensity of building form, or density in terms of housing units per gross acre. Gross acreage includes all land in the neighborhood, including
streets and parks. To calculate permitted density on any given lot, refer to the Ordinance No.12054 C.M.S.: Guidelines for Determining General Plan Conformity 100-31.
134                                                                                                                                                Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Land Use                                                                                                                 Desired                                Maximum
Classification                                             Intent                                                       Character                                Intensity
RMU: Residential             Enhance and strengthen the viability and attractiveness of the Future development in this area should be                     FAR of 1.0 per parcel.
Mixed Use (Kennedy           Kennedy Tract as a mixed-use residential neighborhood of                primarily residential, work/live, light              40 units per gross acre.
Tract Waterfront)            low to medium-density housing within a fine-grained fabric of industrial, neighborhood-serving retail,
                             commercial and light industrial uses.                                   offices, public parks, and open spaces.
HI: Heavy Industrial         Retain the existing glass recycling and manufacturing                   Future development in this area should be            FAR of 0.75 per parcel.
(Owens-Brockway)             functions within this area, and promote an enhanced                     primarily heavy industrial uses.
                             relationship with the adjoining Kennedy Tract neighborhood,
                             Fruitvale Avenue, and the waterfront.
GC-1: General                Provide for the expansion of regional-serving retail and                Future development in this area should be            FAR of 1.0 per parcel.
Commercial                   commercial uses that can benefit from freeway accessibility.            primarily retail, office, general
(42nd/High Street/                                                                                   commercial, hotel, light industrial, parks,
Super K-Mart)                                                                                        and public open spaces.
LI-3: Light Industrial       Maintain light industrial, wholesale/retail, manufacturing, and         Future development in this area should be            FAR of 0.5 per parcel.
(East of High Street/        public utility uses while providing for enhancement of the              primarily industrial, manufacturing,
North of Tidewater)          waterfront environment.                                                  commercial, and a variety of other uses.
PWD-3: Planned               Provide for the continuation of existing industrial uses on             Future development in this area should be            FAR of 0.5 per parcel.
Waterfront District          properties south of Tidewater Avenue, allowing for their                primarily industrial, manufacturing,
(East of High Street/        transition to light industrial, research and development, and           commercial, office, research and
South of Tidewater)          office uses in a waterfront business park setting.                      development, public parks, and open
                                                                                                     spaces.
GC-2: General                Provide for commercial or light industrial uses that sensitive          Future development should be primarily               FAR of 1.0 per parcel.
Commercial (from             to the area’s proximity to the Martin Luther King Jr.                   light industrial, commercial, public
Oakport site to              Shoreline Park, the I-880, 66th Avenue, sports field, and               utilities, park, or open space.
66th Ave)                    adjacent industrial facilities.
Definition of Terms:
Intent: the purpose of the classification
Desired Character of the Area: a broad description of the character, types of uses, and activities that are desired in areas designated with the classification. This is descriptive
and not an exclusive definition of use or activity.
Intensity: the maximum intensity of building form, or density in terms of housing units per gross acre. Gross acreage includes all land in the neighborhood, including
streets and parks. To calculate permitted density on any given lot, refer to the Ordinance No.12054 C.M.S.: Guidelines for Determining General Plan Conformity 100-31.
Section IV: Moving Forward                                                                                                                                                      135

POLICY MF-4: CREATE A JOINT CITY-                 inefficiencies and incremental planning           Plan shall be interpreted to allow each property
P ORT PROCESS FOR PROJECT                         decisions.                                        owner and each individual or entity holding a
DEVELOPMENT, REVIEW AND APPROVAL,
                                                                                                    protected property interest an economically
                                                                                                    viable use for each parcel or property interest
WITH A SUITABLE FORUM FOR PUBLIC                  P OLICY       MF-5:           C LARIFY      THE
                                                                                                    held by that property owner, incividual, or
INPUT , TO PROMOTE HIGH QUALITY                   IMPLICATIONS OF ADOPTING SPECIFIC MAPS            entity.
PROJECTS WITHIN THE              P ORT A REA      AND TEXT IN THE       ESTUARY POLICY PLAN
( EXCEPT     FOR SEAPORT AND AIRPORT              ON PRIVATE     PROPERTY RIGHTS.                   The policies, goals, objectives, text, and maps
PROJECTS ) TO INSURE CONSISTENT ,                                                                   of the Estuary Policy Plan, where they relate
COMPLEMENTARY ACHIEVEMENT OF                      Several policies, maps and/or text presented      to private property or private property rights,
OBJECTIVES BETWEEN THE          CITY AND THE      in the Estuary Policy Plan make reference to      are not intended to, and shall not be
                                                                                                    interpreted as extinguishing or otherwise
PORT,   WITHIN     90   DAYS OF APPROVAL OF       privately-owned land and/or property rights.
                                                                                                    changing any existing property right or interest.
THE ESTUARY POLICY PLAN.           FAILURE    TO  These policies, goals, objectives, text sections, In particular, Estuary Policy Plan maps,
COMPLY WITH THE FOREGOING SHALL                   and/or maps are NOT intended to establish         including but not limited to maps relating to
RESULT IN ALL PROJECTS FOLLOWING THE              absolute development criteria for specific        public access, public parks, public promenades,
C IT Y    OF     O AKL AND ’ S      STANDARD      parcels.                                          public streets and other public places, shall be
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCESS.                                                                       considered only illustrative. Actual locations
                                                  Further, the Estuary Policy Plan is not intended  of such facilities shall be determined at a later
                                                  to and does not authorize, direct or mandate      date through a public process.
Neither the City nor the Port can achieve the
                                                  the City, Port or any other entity to acquire
objectives articulated in the Estuary Policy                                                        The Estuary Policy Plan is not intended to
                                                  any specific parcel or property interest.
Plan by working alone. Consistent                                                                   and shall not be interpreted as creating any
complimentary achievement of mutual               All policies, objectives, text sections and maps  property right for the Port, City, or the public
objectives is required. To bridge these           in this document shall be subject to the legal    that is greater than those rights existing prior
objectives and to promotte high-quality           maxim that City and Port policies, regulations,   to the adoption of this Plan.
projects, the two agencies will create a joint    and actions cannot deny an owner
                                                  economically viable use of his or her property,   The policies, goals, and objectives included in
process for the review and approval of specific
                                                  and that such policies, goals, objectives,        the Plan are intended to be implemented over
projects. The specifics of this process should                                                      time. It is assumed that lawfully existing land
                                                  regulations, and actions cannot cloud private
be researched and detailed as quickly as          property titles or interests. Therefore, all      uses will continue. The Estuary Policy Plan
possible, so as to give the Estuary area the high policies, goals, objectives, text sections, and   does not require, nor does it specifically en-
priority it deserves, and to avoid project        actions recommended by the Estuary Policy         dorse, any property acquisition method or ac-
136                                                                                                                      Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

tion, including but not limited to, amortiza-
tion, dedication, eminent domain, friendly
purchase or gift, that will extinguish or dimin-
ish existing private property rights or inter-
ests.
In addition, the Estuary Policy Plan shall not
prohibit the City or Port from accepting and
processing development applications, includ-
ing but not limited to General Plan amend-
ments.
Section IV: Moving Forward                       137
138 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
       A           Appendix
Section IV: Moving Forward  139
140 Oakland Estuary Policy Pla
Section IV: Moving Forward 14
                                                                                                         INDEX
ABAG................................................................7, 36, 38   East Bay Regional Park District                                                 Lake Merritt Channel..........................37, 84, 88-90, 92
Alameda...............................................15, 18, 44-45, 71                   (EBRPD).......................5, 7, 39, 112-113, 115                  Land Use
Artship..................................................................91, 94 Embarcadero Cove...................................................106          - Issues & Opportunities.......................................28
                                                                                Embarcadero Parkway.............44, 45, 49, 98, 116, 121                        - Objectives.........................................................23-30
Background/ Introduction (Section I) ..............1-19                         Emerging Roles of the Shoreline..............................18                 - Jack London District............................................56
BART....................................................................96, 121 Estuary Park................................................................88  - Oak-to-Ninth District............................................93
BCDC....................................................5, 7, 15, 33, 38        Estuary Plan Advisory Committee............................6                    - San Antonio-Fruitvale District.........................103
Brooklyn Basin.........................................................106      Estuary Plan Implementation Guide..................6, 128                       - Classifications...... ........................................129-135
                                                                                Estuary Shoreline (Historical Overview)...............11,                       League of Women Voters.......................................v, 3
California State Lands Commission........................14                                                                                 Appendix A          Loft Disrtict.................................................................62
CalTrans.......................................................71, 97, 116      Executive Summary.................................................v             Lower Broadway.............................................57, 73-74
Circulation (See Regional Circulation)
City of Oakland.............................3, 5, 12, 14, 127-137               Fifth Avenue...........................................................97       Market Trends........................................................23
Clinton Basin........................................................90, 95     Fifth Avenue Point................................................93            Martin Luther King Regional
Con-Agra...................................................................107                                                                                            Shoreline..............................18, 112, 113-116
Credits....................................................Back Cover           General Plan (Oakland)...........................3, 5-7, 37, 128                Moving Forward (Section IV).....................125-137,
                                                                                General Plan Congress.............................................5,6                                                                        Appendix A
Design Review..........................................................136
Development Regulations.......................129-135, 137                      High St. (Vicinity).......................................111-113               Ninth Avenue Terminal......................13, 23, 90-91, 94
District Recommendations                                                        Jack London Aquatic Center....................................89                Oakland Museum...................................................94
           (Section III)........................................51-122          Jack London Square............................................18, 27            Oakland Sharing the Vision.....................................6
- Jack London District....................53, Appendix A                        - Phase I............................................................. 57-59    Objectives (Section II).................................21-49
- Oak-to-Ninth District...........................................83            - Phase II.............................................................59-60    Owens-Brockway................................................110
- San Antonio-Fruitvale District.........................103                    Jurisdictions................................................................14
                                                                                                                                                                Parking...................................................................45, 49
East Bay Municipal Utilities District                                           Kennedy Tract..................................................109-110          - Jack London District................................76-77
           (EBMUD). .......................7, 92, 112-113, 115                                                                                                  - Oak-to-Ninth District..................................100
                                                                                                                                                                Plan Organization.........................................................7
                                                                                                                                                                                              (Continued)
142                                                                                                                                                                                           Oakland Estuary Policy Plan
Port of Oakland...........................3, 6, 11-12, 14-15, 18,
                                           53, 127-129, 136-137
Private Property, Implications.................116, 136-137                                               CONSULTANTS
Produce District........................................26, 61-62, 75
Public Access (See Shoreline Access)                                              Roma Design Group                        Gabriel-Roche, Inc.
Purpose & Role of the Plan.......................................6             Boris Dramov, Team Leader                        Janet Roche
                                                                                        Jim Adams                             Michael Fajans
Regional Circulation & Local Street Network                                           David Barnard
- Issues & Opportunities...................................44-45                      Bonnie Fisher                         Korve Engineering
- Objectives....................................................45, 48-49           Robert Holloway                             Hans Korve
- Jack London District.............................................71                 Mikaele Holzer                            Larry Grove
- Oak-to-Ninth District............................................96                  David Kong                              Chi Hsin Shao
- San Antonio-Fruitvale District..........................116                          James Leritz
Roma Design Group, et al...........................................6                  Burton Miller                    John T. Warren & Associates
                                                                                      Laura Nardoza                           John T. Warren
San Francisco Bay Trail............... 36, 37, 87, 114, 116                          Carolyn Radisch
Shoreline Access & Public Spaces                                                     Alfredo Valiente               Economics & Planning Systems, Inc.
- Issues & Opportunities..............................33-37                                                                  James Musbach
- Objectives........................................................37-39     Hanson Murikami Eshima, Inc                     David Zehnder
- Jack London District...........................................64                    John Nelson
- Oak-to-Ninth District............................................86                  Lisa Sullivan                     Archview Media Design
- San Antonio-Fruitvale District.........................113                                                               Thomas M. Simmons
Special Events.......................................36, 70, 90, 100           Hausrath Economics Group                     Norberto Melendez
Study History...........................................................3            Linda Hausrath
                                                                                     Sally E. Neilson
Table of Contents.....................................................i              Robert Spencer
Transit/Water Taxis........................................45, 48, 77
Trust for Public Lands.........................................5, 114
Union Point...............................................................114
Wetland Protection...................................37, 39, 86-87
Section IV: Moving Forward                                                                                                                             143
                                                      CREDITS
            CITY OF OAKLAND                         ESTUARY PLAN                         PORT OF OAKLAND
                                              ADVISORY COMMITTEE
              Mayor & City Council                      George Bolton                   Board of Port Commissioners
              Elihu M. Harris, Mayor                       Carl Chan                          John Loh, President
              Jane Brunner, District 1                 Don Davenport                            Robert L. Harris
               John Russo, District 2                 Carolyn Douthat                             Frank Kiang
              Nancy Nadel, District 3                   Paul Elizondo                             David Kramer
             Richard Spees, District 4
                                                     Dr. Eleanor Engram                            Kathy Neal
         Ignacio DeLa Fuente, District 5
                                                        Ed Fernandez                            Becky L. Taylor
               Nate Miley, District 6
                                                        Frank L. Fuller                             Peter Uribe
                Larry Reid, District 7
           Henry L. Chang, Jr., At Large             Marguerite A. Fuller                         * Celso Ortiz
                                                         Jack Gaskins                             * Ada Cole
            City Planning Commission                  Robert Hamilton                         * James B. Lockhart
                Linda R. Bytof, Chair                  Virginia Hamrick
              Anthony A. Batarse, Jr.                  Stana D. Hearn               Charles W. Foster, Executive Director
                   Arthur L. Clark                       Gary Knecht               Tay Yoshitani, Deputy Executive Director
                  Les A. Hausrath                       Anthony Mar                            Omar R. Benjamin
                     Glen Jarvis                          Keith Miller            Director, Commercial Real Estate Division
                  Vincent B. Reyes                    Rosemary Muller                              John Glover
              Frazier M. Scurry-Scott                 Robert Odermatt               Director, Strategic & Policy Planning
                * Anthony Pegram
                                                      Vincent B. Reyes
                  * C. Peter Smith
                                                    Martha Robles-Wong             Richard J. Wiederhorn, Planning Manager
                 * Phillip H. Tagami
                                                     Sylvia Rosales-Fike                       Barbara M. Szudy
         Robert C. Bobb, City Manager                 Carolyn Sandidge                           Steve Hanson
           William E. Claggett, Director,               C. Peter Smith                            Anne Henny
  Community & Economic Development Agency              Sandy Threlfall                            Vivian O’Neal
                                                      Richard E. Winnie                           Ross Turner
      Andrew D. Altman, Chief of Planning               Cheryl Wong
    Leslie M. Gould, Acting Chief of Planning
                   Katrina A. Koh                Oakland Sharing the Vision
                  Andrew Thomas                Steve Costa, Executive Director
                   Ralph Wheeler                          Toya Ash
             Renee Dowlin (reprinting)               * Deborah Kirtman
                                                                               * Former Officials/Staff
144                                                                                                 Oakland Estuary Policy Plan

                                                                                                         INDEX
ABAG................................................................7, 36, 38   East Bay Regional Park District                                                 Lake Merritt Channel..........................37, 84, 88-90, 92
Alameda...............................................15, 18, 44-45, 71                   (EBRPD).......................5, 7, 39, 112-113, 115                  Land Use
Artship..................................................................91, 94 Embarcadero Cove...................................................106          - Issues & Opportunities.......................................28
                                                                                Embarcadero Parkway.............44, 45, 49, 98, 116, 121                        - Objectives.........................................................23-30
Background/ Introduction (Section I) ..............1-19                         Emerging Roles of the Shoreline..............................18                 - Jack London District............................................56
BART....................................................................96, 121 Estuary Park................................................................88  - Oak-to-Ninth District............................................93
BCDC....................................................5, 7, 15, 33, 38        Estuary Plan Advisory Committee............................6                    - San Antonio-Fruitvale District.........................103
Brooklyn Basin.........................................................106      Estuary Plan Implementation Guide..................6, 128                       - Classifications...... ........................................129-135
                                                                                Estuary Shoreline (Historical Overview)...............11,                       League of Women Voters.......................................v, 3
California State Lands Commission........................14                                                                                 Appendix A          Loft Disrtict.................................................................62
CalTrans.......................................................71, 97, 116      Executive Summary.................................................v             Lower Broadway.............................................57, 73-74
Circulation (See Regional Circulation)
City of Oakland.............................3, 5, 12, 14, 127-137               Fifth Avenue...........................................................97       Market Trends........................................................23
Clinton Basin........................................................90, 95     Fifth Avenue Point................................................93            Martin Luther King Regional
Con-Agra...................................................................107                                                                                            Shoreline..............................18, 112, 113-116
Credits....................................................Back Cover           General Plan (Oakland)...........................3, 5-7, 37, 128                Moving Forward (Section IV).....................125-137,
                                                                                General Plan Congress.............................................5,6                                                                        Appendix A
Design Review..........................................................136
Development Regulations.......................129-135, 137                      High St. (Vicinity).......................................111-113               Ninth Avenue Terminal......................13, 23, 90-91, 94
District Recommendations                                                        Jack London Aquatic Center....................................89                Oakland Museum...................................................94
          (Section III)........................................51-122           Jack London Square............................................18, 27            Oakland Sharing the Vision.....................................6
- Jack London District....................53, Appendix A                        - Phase I............................................................. 57-59    Objectives (Section II).................................21-49
- Oak-to-Ninth District...........................................83            - Phase II.............................................................59-60    Owens-Brockway................................................110
- San Antonio-Fruitvale District.........................103                    Jurisdictions................................................................14
                                                                                                                                                                Parking...................................................................45, 49
East Bay Municipal Utilities District                                           Kennedy Tract..................................................109-110          - Jack London District................................76-77
          (EBMUD). .......................7, 92, 112-113, 115                                                                                                   - Oak-to-Ninth District..................................100
                                                                                                                                                                Plan Organization.........................................................7
                                                                                                                                                                                              (Continued)
142
Port of Oakland...........................3, 6, 11-12, 14-15, 18,
                                           53, 127-129, 136-137
Private Property, Implications.................116, 136-137                                               CONSULTANTS
Produce District........................................26, 61-62, 75
Public Access (See Shoreline Access)                                               Roma Design Group                       Gabriel-Roche, Inc.
Purpose & Role of the Plan.......................................6              Boris Dramov, Team Leader                      Janet Roche
                                                                                         Jim Adams                           Michael Fajans
Regional Circulation & Local Street Network                                            David Barnard
- Issues & Opportunities...................................44-45                       Bonnie Fisher                      Korve Engineering
- Objectives....................................................45, 48-49            Robert Holloway                           Hans Korve
- Jack London District.............................................71                  Mikaele Holzer                          Larry Grove
- Oak-to-Ninth District............................................96                   David Kong                            Chi Hsin Shao
- San Antonio-Fruitvale District..........................116                           James Leritz
Roma Design Group, et al...........................................6                   Burton Miller                  John T. Warren & Associates
                                                                                       Laura Nardoza                         John T. Warren
San Francisco Bay Trail............... 36, 37, 87, 114, 116                           Carolyn Radisch
Shoreline Access & Public Spaces                                                      Alfredo Valiente             Economics & Planning Systems, Inc.
- Issues & Opportunities..............................33-37                                                                  James Musbach
- Objectives........................................................37-39     Hanson Murikami Eshima, Inc                     David Zehnder
- Jack London District...........................................64                     John Nelson
- Oak-to-Ninth District............................................86                  Lisa Sullivan                    Archview Media Design
- San Antonio-Fruitvale District.........................113                                                              Thomas M. Simmons
Special Events.......................................36, 70, 90, 100            Hausrath Economics Group                   Norberto Melendez
Study History...........................................................3             Linda Hausrath
                                                                                      Sally E. Neilson
Table of Contents.....................................................i               Robert Spencer
Transit/Water Taxis........................................45, 48, 77
Trust for Public Lands.........................................5, 114
Union Point...............................................................114
Wetland Protection...................................37, 39, 86-87
                                                                                                                                                      143
                                                     CREDITS
           CITY OF OAKLAND                        ESTUARY PLAN                         PORT OF OAKLAND
                                             ADVISORY COMMITTEE
             Mayor & City Council                     George Bolton                   Board of Port Commissioners
             Elihu M. Harris, Mayor                      Carl Chan                          John Loh, President
             Jane Brunner, District 1                Don Davenport                            Robert L. Harris
              John Russo, District 2                 Carolyn Douthat                            Frank Kiang
             Nancy Nadel, District 3                   Paul Elizondo                            David Kramer
            Richard Spees, District 4
                                                    Dr. Eleanor Engram                           Kathy Neal
        Ignacio DeLa Fuente, District 5
                                                       Ed Fernandez                           Becky L. Taylor
              Nate Miley, District 6
                                                      Frank L. Fuller                             Peter Uribe
               Larry Reid, District 7
          Henry L. Chang, Jr., At Large            Marguerite A. Fuller                         * Celso Ortiz
                                                       Jack Gaskins                             * Ada Cole
           City Planning Commission                  Robert Hamilton                        * James B. Lockhart
               Linda R. Bytof, Chair                 Virginia Hamrick
             Anthony A. Batarse, Jr.                  Stana D. Hearn              Charles W. Foster, Executive Director
                  Arthur L. Clark                      Gary Knecht               Tay Yoshitani, Deputy Executive Director
                 Les A. Hausrath                      Anthony Mar                            Omar R. Benjamin
                    Glen Jarvis                         Keith Miller            Director, Commercial Real Estate Division
                 Vincent B. Reyes                    Rosemary Muller                             John Glover
             Frazier M. Scurry-Scott                 Robert Odermatt              Director, Strategic & Policy Planning
               * Anthony Pegram
                                                     Vincent B. Reyes
                 * C. Peter Smith
                                                  Martha Robles-Wong             Richard J. Wiederhorn, Planning Manager
                * Phillip H. Tagami
                                                   Sylvia Rosales-Fike                       Barbara M. Szudy
        Robert C. Bobb, City Manager                Carolyn Sandidge                           Steve Hanson
          William E. Claggett, Director,              C. Peter Smith                            Anne Henny
 Community & Economic Development Agency              Sandy Threlfall                           Vivian O’Neal
                                                    Richard E. Winnie                           Ross Turner
     Andrew D. Altman, Chief of Planning               Cheryl Wong
   Leslie M. Gould, Acting Chief of Planning
                  Katrina A. Koh              Oakland Sharing the Vision
                 Andrew Thomas               Steve Costa, Executive Director
                  Ralph Wheeler                          Toya Ash
            Renee Dowlin (reprinting)              * Deborah Kirtman
                                                                             * Former Officials/Staff
144

City of Oakland General Plan LUTE Addendum: in chronological order
       Resolution #  Amended LUTE text                                         LUTE       Date
                                                                               Page #     effective
       74219         Adoption of the LUTE                                                 03/24/98
       75037         Adoption of the Estuary Policy Plan                                  06/08/99
       74403         Adoption of the Bicycle Master Plan                                  07/20/99
       75412         Policy N3.3 Facilitating Development of Second            Pgs. 106 - 12/14/99
                     Units                                                     107
                     One accessory housing unit (also known as second or
                     secondary unit) per property should be conditionally
                     permitted outright in all residential zones provided
                     that it meets the setback requirements for the primary
                     structure, is clearly secondary to the primary structure,
                     is compatible with other structures on the site and in
                     the vicinity, and the property owner lives on site. The
                     permitting procedures and performance criteria
                     applied to these units should facilitate construction of
                     units, and not be prohibitive in their requirements.
                     Accessory units should be allowed when a new primary
                     residence is being constructed or maybe added to
                     properties with an existing residence.
       77514         Adoption of the Pedestrian Master Plan                               11/12/02
       78636         Adoption of the 1999-2006 Housing Element                            06/15/04
       78915         Adoption of the Safety Element                                       11/16/04
       79312 (1)     Adoption of the Noise Element                                        6/21/05
       79312 (2a)    Goal A3: Develop General Plan Amendment                   Pgs. 166-  6/21/05
                     Cycles and related procedures.                            167
                     By State law cities are permitted to make
                     amendments to their general plans “if deemed to be
                     in the public interest” and “not more than four times
                     per year” for each mandatory element (with some
                     exceptions). However, more than one amendment
                     may be processed at one time. To avoid erosion of the
                     Plan by piecemeal amendments, The City of Oakland
                     will limit allow General Plan amendments to occur
                     during three distinct cycles per year to be coordinated
                     with the as authorized by state law, which currently
       7/29/2009                                                                                    1

Resolution # Amended LUTE text                                      LUTE     Date
                                                                    Page #   effective
             limits amendments to no more often than four times
             per calendar year per mandatory element and also
             exempts certain affordable housing projects from this
             restriction. Plan’s annual review. Additionally, each
             amendment cycle must include an assessment of the
             cumulative implication of amendments on the
             General Plan, and the City must make strict findings
             that each amendment is consistent with the overall
             goals, objectives and policies and the entire General
             Plan. Findings must specifically address a) how the
             amendment advances Plan implementation; b) how it
             is consistent with the policies in Element; c) any
             inconsistencies that would need to be reconciles; and
             d) examination of citywide impacts to determine if
             the amendment is contrary to achievement of
             citywide goals.
79312 (2B)   The General Plan contains many policies which may      Pgs. 164 06/21/05
             in some cases address different goals, policies and
             objectives and thus some policies may compete with
             each other. The Planning Commission and City
             Council, in deciding whether to approve a proposed
             project, must decide whether, on balance, the project
             is consistent (i.e. in general harmony) with the
             General Plan. The fact that a specific project does
             not meet all General Plan goals, policies and
             objectives does not inherently result in a significant
             effect on the environment within the context of the
             California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). As
             stated in Section 15358(b) of the CEQA Guidelines,
             “[e]ffects analyzed under CEQA must be related to a
             physical change,” Section 15125(d) of the Guidelines
             states that EIRs shall discuss any inconsistencies
             between the proposed project and applicable General
             Plans in the “Setting” section of the document (not
             under impacts). Further Appendix G of the
             Guidelines (Environmental Checklist Form) makes
             explicit the focus on environmental policies and
             plans, asking if the project would “conflict with any
             applicable land use plan, policy or
             regulation…adopted for the purpose of avoiding or
             mitigating an environmental effect.” Even a response
7/29/2009                                                                              2

Resolution # Amended LUTE text                                     LUTE   Date
                                                                   Page # effective
             in the affirmative, however, does not necessarily
             indicate that the project would have a significant
             effect, unless a physical change would occur. To the
             extent that physical impacts may result from such
             conflicts, such physical impacts would be analyzed in
             the appropriate environmental document for the
             project. (Add to the last paragraph of page 161
             Chapter 4 Implementation Program)
80959        Adoption of the Revised Bicycle Master Plan                  12/04/07
7/29/2009                                                                           3
































































































































































































































































            City of Oakland
            Housing Element
                    2015-202
Adopted December 9, 2014
                                                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY............................................................................................................... 1
A.  Evaluation of 2007-2014 Programs ................................................................................................. 2
B.  Existing Conditions/Opportunities .................................................................................................. 5
C.  Land Inventory .................................................................................................................................. 11
D.  Summary of Program Resources .................................................................................................. 15
E.  Analysis of Constraints To Housing ............................................................................................. 16
F.  Housing Element Goals and Policies ........................................................................................... 18
G.  Quantified Objectives ...................................................................................................................... 24
1. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... 26
A.  State Law Requirements ................................................................................................................. 26
B.  Regional Housing Needs Allocation ............................................................................................. 26
C.  Oakland’s Policy Context ................................................................................................................ 27
D.  Public Participation and Policy Development ............................................................................. 33
E.  Organization of the Housing Element ........................................................................................... 35
F.  General Plan Consistency .............................................................................................................. 37
2. EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS .................................................................... 39
B.  Review of the Existing Housing Element ..................................................................................... 46
3. EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES ................................................................ 101
A.  Population and Household Characteristics ............................................................................... 102
B.  Housing Characteristics................................................................................................................ 126
C.  Age and Condition of Housing Stock ......................................................................................... 134
D.  Housing Cost .................................................................................................................................. 142
E.  Foreclosures ................................................................................................................................... 160
F.  Households Overpaying for Housing ......................................................................................... 164

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
G.  Overcrowding ................................................................................................................................. 168
H.  Special Housing Needs ................................................................................................................. 169
I.  Assisted Rental Housing .............................................................................................................. 185
J.  Analysis of Assisted, At-Risk Housing Projects ...................................................................... 193
K.  Population and Employment Trends .......................................................................................... 210
4. LAND INVENTORY ............................................................................................................... 221
A.  Summary of Site Inventory Findings .......................................................................................... 221
B.  Summary of Available Land ......................................................................................................... 232
C.  Group 1: Sites with Housing Projects Completed................................................................... 232
D.  Group 2: Housing Project sites with planning approvals ...................................................... 233
E.  Group 3: Sites with Housing Projects Planned ....................................................................... 237
F.  Group 4: Additional Housing Opportunity Sites ..................................................................... 241
5. HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES ............................................................................. 249
A.  Former Redevelopment Agency Funding and “boomerang funds” ..................................... 249
B.  Other Financial Resources ........................................................................................................... 250
C.  Other Non-Financial Resources .................................................................................................. 250
D.  Housing Programs ......................................................................................................................... 250
6. ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING ........................................................... 255
A.  Governmental Constraints ........................................................................................................... 255
B.  Non-Governmental Constraints ................................................................................................... 282
7. GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS.............................................................................. 293
A.  Context For The City’s Goals and Policies ................................................................................ 293
B.  Goals and Policies ......................................................................................................................... 300
C.  Implementation Program .............................................................................................................. 323
8. QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES............................................................................................... 344

                                                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
9. OTHER REQUIREMENTS.................................................................................................. 346
A.  Consistency with General Plan and Policies ............................................................................ 346
B.  Flood Hazard Land Management ................................................................................................. 352
C.  Coastal Zone Requirements ......................................................................................................... 353
D.  SB 244 (Disadvantaged COMMUNITIES) REQUIREMENTS ................................................... 354
E.  Water and Sewer Priority .............................................................................................................. 355
F.  Opportunities For Energy Conservation .................................................................................... 356
APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND
RESULTS...................................................................................................................................... 359
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING ........................................... 375
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY ................................................................ 392
APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY .................................................... 455
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS ............... 466
APPENDIX F: EMERGENCY SHELTERS ......................................................................... 559
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION ......................................................... 565
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                  LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 2-1 COMPARISON OF HOUSING NEEDS AND HOUSING PRODUCTION, 2007-2014 .............................. 40
TABLE 2-2 MARKET RATE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS (2007-2013) ................................................................... 47
TABLE 2-3 ASSESSMENT OF 2007-14 HOUSING ELEMENT IMPLEMENTATION ................................................ 48
TABLE 3-1 POPULATION BY RACE, CITY, COUNTY, AND STATE (1990, 2000 AND 2010) ............................... 104
TABLE 3-2 AGE DISTRIBUTION (1990, 2000 AND 2010) ....................................................................................... 111
TABLE 3-3 NUMBER OF PERSONS PER HOUSEHOLD (2010) ............................................................................ 113
TABLE 3-4 AVERAGE HOUSEHOLD SIZE BY RACE (2010) ................................................................................. 113
TABLE 3-5 CHANGES IN HOUSEHOLD TYPE (1990 – 2010) ................................................................................ 114
TABLE 3-6 HOUSEHOLD AND FAMILY INCOME (2011) ....................................................................................... 115
TABLE 3-7 DEFINITIONS USED FOR COMPARING INCOME LEVELS ................................................................ 116
TABLE 3-8 2013 INCOME LIMITS, OAKLAND PMSA ............................................................................................. 116
TABLE 3-9 PERCENT OF OAKLAND HOUSEHOLDS BY INCOME (2010) ........................................................... 117
TABLE 3-10 MEDIAN INCOMES IN OAKLAND AND ALAMEDA COUNTY ........................................................... 120
TABLE 3-11 MEDIAN INCOMES IN OAKLAND AND ALAMEDA COUNTY ........................................................... 121
TABLE 3-12-A INCOME BY TENURE (1990 AND 2000) ......................................................................................... 122
TABLE 3-12-B INCOME BY TENURE (2010) ........................................................................................................... 122
TABLE 3-13 MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME BY RACE/ETHNICITY (2011)......................................................... 123
TABLE 3-14 INCOME DISTRIBUTION BY RACE/ETHNICITY (2000) ..................................................................... 124
TABLE 3-15 POVERTY RATES (2000) .................................................................................................................... 125
TABLE 3-16 FEDERAL POVERTY THRESHOLDS (2014) ...................................................................................... 126
TABLE 3-17 HOUSING ESTIMATES, CITY OF OAKLAND (1990 THROUGH 2013).............................................. 127
TABLE 3-18 HOUSING OCCUPANCY (1990, 2000 AND 2010) .............................................................................. 128
TABLE 3-19 TENURE BY RACE AND HISPANIC ORIGIN (1990, 2000 AND 2010) ............................................... 132
TABLE 3-20 HOMEOWNERSHIP RATES BY AGE, OAKLAND (2010) .................................................................. 134
TABLE 3-21 AGE OF HOUSING UNITS (2000)........................................................................................................ 136
TABLE 3-22 INCIDENCE OF LEAD-BASED PAINT (1990) ..................................................................................... 142
TABLE 3-23 MEDIAN VALUE/RENT (1990 TO 2011) .............................................................................................. 143
TABLE 3-24 SELECTION OF BAY AREA CITIES MEDIAN HOME SALES PRICES 2000, 2008 AND 2013 ......... 144
TABLE 3-25 MEDIAN HOME SALES PRICES BY ZIP CODE OAKLAND (SELECTED YEARS, 1990-2013) ....... 146

                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
TABLE 3-26 TOP 5 OCCUPATIONS OF POPULATION EMPLOYED & MEAN ANNUAL WAGES OAKLAND-
FREMONT-HAYWARD METRO DIVISION (FIRST QUARTER 2013) ..................................................................... 147
TABLE 3-27 MEDIAN HOME SALES PRICES 2013 AND INCOME REQUIRED FOR MORTGAGE
PRINCIPAL & INTEREST ......................................................................................................................................... 148
TABLE 3-28 ESTIMATED CITYWIDE MEDIAN ADVERTISED RENTS OAKLAND 2008 TO 2012 ........................ 150
TABLE 3-29 NUMBER OF LISTINGS FOR RENTAL UNITS, 2008-2012 ................................................................ 151
TABLE 3-30 GROSS RENTS FOR OCCUPIED HOUSING UNITS (2000)............................................................... 152
TABLE 3-31 GROSS RENTS FOR OCCUPIED HOUSING UNITS (2011)............................................................... 153
TABLE 3-32 2002-2013 HUD FAIR MARKET RENTS ............................................................................................. 154
TABLE 3-33 2012 FAIR MARKET RENTS AND WEEKLY WORK HOURS REQUIRED TO AFFORD A
MARKET-PRICED RENTAL UNIT ............................................................................................................................ 154
TABLE 3-34 OAKLAND HOUSING AUTHORITY HOUSING PROGRAM WAIT LIST SUMMARY AS OF
MARCH 2014............................................................................................................................................................. 158
TABLE 3-35 RESIDENTIAL NOTICES OF DEFAULT RECORDED ON OAKLAND PROPERTIES 2006 TO
2012 ........................................................................................................................................................................... 162
TABLE 3-36 HOUSEHOLDS PAYING OVER 30 PERCENT FOR HOUSING COSTS (1990, 2000 AND 2010) .... 165
TABLE 3-37 HOUSEHOLDS PAYING OVER 50 PERCENT OF INCOME FOR HOUSING COSTS (1990, 2000
AND 2010) ................................................................................................................................................................. 166
TABLE 3-38 HOUSEHOLDS PAYING 30 PERCENT OR MORE OF INCOME FOR HOUSING (2011) ................. 166
TABLE 3-39 SUMMARY OF OAKLAND HOUSING ASSISTANCE NEEDS............................................................ 167
TABLE 3-40 PERSONS PER ROOM IN ALL OCCUPIED HOUSING UNITS (2010) .............................................. 169
TABLE 3-41 SENIOR POPULATION AND HOUSEHOLDS IN OAKLAND ............................................................. 170
TABLE 3-42 SUBSIDIZED SENIOR HOUSING AND UNITS AND VOUCHERS (2014) .......................................... 171
TABLE 3-43 PERSONS WITH DISABILITY BY EMPLOYMENT STATUS .............................................................. 171
TABLE 3-44 PERSONS WITH DISABILITY BY DISABILITY TYPE ........................................................................ 172
TABLE 3-45 OAKLAND DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED POPULATION* (2015-23) ......................................... 173
TABLE 3-46 FEMALE HEADED HOUSEHOLDS (2000).......................................................................................... 175
TABLE 3-47 HOUSEHOLD TYPE: ALL HOUSEHOLDS/ALL PERSONS ............................................................... 176
TABLE 3-48 2013 HOMELESS SUBPOPULATIONS .............................................................................................. 177
TABLE 3-49 CITY OF OAKLAND HOMELESS SHELTERS .................................................................................... 178
TABLE 3-50 NUMBER OF LARGE HOUSEHOLDS IN OAKLAND (1990, 2000 AND 2010) .................................. 184
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
TABLE 3-51 HOUSING UNITS BY TENURE AND NUMBER OF BEDROOMS (2000) ........................................... 185
TABLE 3-52 PRIVATELY-OWNED ASSISTED HOUSING UNITS, CITY OF OAKLAND (2014)............................. 187
TABLE 3-53 SUMMARY OF OAKLAND HOUSING AUTHORITY HOUSING UNITS AND HOUSING
VOUCHERS, OAKLAND 2014 .................................................................................................................................. 188
TABLE 3-54 AT-RISK HOUSING IN OAKLAND AS OF APRIL 2014 ...................................................................... 194
TABLE 3-55 COST TO PRESERVE AND REPLACE AT-RISK HOUSING IN OAKLAND ...................................... 207
TABLE 3-56 NON-PROFIT HOUSING ORGANIZATIONS INTERESTED IN ACQUIRING ..................................... 209
TABLE 3-57 OAKLAND POPULATION GROWTH .................................................................................................. 210
TABLE 3-58 CITY, COUNTY AND REGIONAL PROJECTED POPULATION GROWTH 2010-2040...................... 211
TABLE 3-59 OCCUPATIONS AND INDUSTRIES OF OAKLAND RESIDENTS (2014)........................................... 212
TABLE 3-60 OCCUPATIONS AND INDUSTRIES IN OAKLAND (2014) ................................................................. 213
                                                                                           RD
TABLE 3-61 OAKLAND TOP 25 SALES TAX PRODUCERS, 3                                               QUARTER 2013 (SORTED BY BUSINESS
TYPE, THEN ALPHABETICAL) ................................................................................................................................ 214
TABLE 3-62 MIXED USE OR NON-RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS UNDERWAY IN OAKLAND ................................ 217
TABLE 3-63 OAKLAND’S 25-YEAR DEVELOPMENT HORIZON (SPECIFIC PLANS) ......................................... 219
TABLE 3-64 OAKLAND’S TOP 20 EMPLOYERS .................................................................................................... 220
TABLE 4-1 REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT FOR THE CITY OF OAKLAND .................................. 224
TABLE 4-2 ACTUAL HOUSING PRODUCTION TO MARCH 2014 AND BALANCE OF UNITS TO BE
PROVIDED ................................................................................................................................................................ 228
TABLE 4-3 SITE GROUPS IN NARRATIVE AND SITE INVENTORY TABLES IN APPENDIX C ........................... 229
TABLE 4-4 SUMMARY TOTALS OF HOUSING UNITS BUILT OR UNDER CONSTRUCTION (THROUGH
MARCH 2014)............................................................................................................................................................ 233
TABLE 4-5 SUMMARY TOTALS OF HOUSING UNITS WITH PLANNING APPROVALS ...................................... 234
TABLE 4-6 APPROVED HOUSING PROJECTS (SITES) ........................................................................................ 236
TABLE 4-7 CHARACTERISTICS OF APPROVED PROJECTS (UNITS) ................................................................ 237
TABLE 4-8 SUMMARY TOTALS OF PLANNED HOUSING UNITS......................................................................... 238
TABLE 4-9 PLANNED HOUSING PROJECTS (SITES) ........................................................................................... 239
TABLE 4-10 CHARACTERISTICS OF PLANNED PROJECTS (UNITS) ................................................................. 240
TABLE 4-11 SUMMARY TOTAL OF HOUSING OPPORTUNITY SITES ................................................................. 243
TABLE 4-12 SUMMARY OF HOUSING OPPORTUNITY SITES BY DEVELOPMENT AREA................................. 245
TABLE 5-1 ESTIMATES OF BOOMERANG FUNDS DEPOSITS ............................................................................ 250

                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
TABLE 6-1 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL FACILITIES AND ACTIVITIES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES ............ 259
TABLE 6-2 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES AND ACTIVITIES IN
COMMERCIAL ZONES ............................................................................................................................................. 260
TABLE 6-3 PERMITTED FACILITY TYPES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES ...... 261
TABLE 6-4 LOCATIONS FOR EMERGENCY SHELTER......................................................................................... 263
TABLE 6-5 PERMIT AND DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES .................................................................................... 269
TABLE 6-6 APPLICATION PROCESSING TIMES ................................................................................................... 277
TABLE 6-7 LAND COSTS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING SITES IN OAKLAND (2014) ....................................... 284
TABLE 6-8 MARKET RATE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT COSTS IN OAKLAND (2014) ........................................ 287
TABLE 6-9 AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT COSTS IN OAKLAND (2014) ......................................... 288
TABLE 6-10 FINANCING COSTS FOR A MORTGAGE OF $347,200..................................................................... 290
TABLE 6-11 EFFECT OF INTEREST RATES ON QUALIFYING LOAN AMOUNT ................................................. 291
TABLE 7-1 IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM ............................................................................................................ 324
TABLE 8-1 CITY OF OAKLAND QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES (JANUARY 2015 – JUNE 2023) ............................ 345
TABLE C-1 PRIVATE SECTOR MARKET RATE (INCLUDES PRIVATE SECTOR AFFORDABLE UNITS)
COMPLETE (01/01/14-03/07/14)............................................................................................................................... 394
TABLE C-2 PRIVATE SECTOR MARKET RATE UNITS-APPROVED (01/01/14-03/27/14).................................... 395
TABLE C-3 PUBLICLY SUBSIDIZED AFFORDABLE-FUNDED AND IN PRE-DEVELOPMENT (MARCH 2014) . 399
TABLE C-4 PUBLICLY SUBSIDIZED AFFORDABLE-SITE ACQUISITION (AS OF MARCH 2014) ...................... 400
TABLE C-5 PRIVATE SECTOR MARKET RATE-IN PLANNING PRE-DEVELOPMENT (3/27/14) ........................ 402
TABLE C-6 ADDITIONAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY SITES ................................................................................. 406
TABLE C-6-A HOUSING OPPORTUNITY SITES ON THE LOCAL REGISTER OR IN HISTORIC
PRESERVATION DISTRICTS ................................................................................................................................... 449
TABLE D-1 HOUSING REHABILITATION PROGRAMS ......................................................................................... 455
TABLE D-2 FIRST TIME HOMEBUYER PROGRAMS ............................................................................................. 460
TABLE D-3 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS ............................................................................................ 461
TABLE D-4 MISCELLANEOUS HOUSING PROGRAMS AND SERVICES ............................................................. 464
TABLE E-1 SUMMARY OF PUBLIC COMMENTS AND RESPONSES ................................................................... 467
TABLE F-1 CHARACTERISTICS OF APPROVED LOCATIONS FOR PERMITTING EMERGENCY
HOMELESS SHELTERS BY-RIGHT ........................................................................................................................ 561

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 3-1 AREAS OF RACIAL/ETHNIC MAJORITIES ........................................................................................ 106
FIGURE 3-2 AREAS OF HIGH AND LOW CONCENTRATION OF BLACK POPULATION .................................. 1067
FIGURE 3-3 AREAS OF HIGH AND LOW CONCENTRATION OF WHITE POPULATION ..................................... 108
FIGURE 3-4 AREAS OF HIGH AND LOW CONCENTRATION OF HISPANIC POPULATION ............................... 109
FIGURE 3-5 AREAS OF HIGH AND LOW CONCENTRATION OF ASIAN POPULATION ..................................... 110
FIGURE 3-6 AREAS WITH A MAJORITY OF VERY-LOW AND LOW INCOME PERSONS (2010) ....................... 118
FIGURE 3-7 AREAS OF HIGH AND LOW CONCENTRATION OF VERY-LOW AND LOW INCOME PERSONS.. 119
FIGURE 3-8 HOMEOWNER VACANCY RATE (BY 2010 CENSUS TRACTS) ........................................................ 129
FIGURE 3-9 RENTAL VACANCY RATE (BY 2010 CENSUS TRACTS) .................................................................. 130
FIGURE 3-10 AGE OF STRUCTURE BUILT: PRE-1970 (2000 CENSUS) .............................................................. 137
FIGURE 3-11 AGE OF STRUCTURE BUILT: 1970-1999 (2000 CENSUS).............................................................. 138
FIGURE 3-12 AGE OF STRUCTURE BUILT: 1999-2000 (2000 CENSUS).............................................................. 139
FIGURE 3-13 OAKLAND MEDIAN HOME SALES PRICES 1988 TO 2013 ............................................................. 145
FIGURE 3-14 OAKLAND AFFORDABLE HOUSING PRESERVATION INITIATIVE NORTH, WEST, AND
DOWNTOWN 2014 .................................................................................................................................................... 156
FIGURE 3-15 OAKLAND AFFORDABLE HOUSING PRESERVATION INITIATIVE EAST OAKLAND, 2014 ....... 157
FIGURE 3-16 DISTRIBUTION OF RESIDENTIAL NOD FILINGS BY PROPERTY TYPE, ...................................... 163
FIGURE 3-17 ASSISTED HOUSING IN NORTH, WEST AND DOWNTOWN OAKLAND, 2014.............................. 189
FIGURE 3-18 ASSISTED HOUSING IN EAST OAKLAND, 2014 ............................................................................. 190
FIGURE 3-19 OAKLAND HOUSING AUTHORITY UNITS IN NORTH, WEST AND DOWNTOWN OAKLAND,
2014 ........................................................................................................................................................................... 191
FIGURE 3-20 OAKLAND HOUSING AUTHORITY UNITS IN EAST OAKLAND, 2014 ........................................... 192
FIGURE C-1 PRIORITY DEVELOPMENT AREAS-PLANNING AREA BOUNDARY MAP ...................................... 450
FIGURE C-2 MARKET RATE DEVELOPMENTS- COMPLETED, APPROVED AND PRE-DEVELOPMENT AS
OF APRIL 2014 ......................................................................................................................................................... 451
FIGURE C-3 MARKET RATE DEVELOPMENTS CENTRAL CITY COMPLETED, APPROVED AND PRE-
DEVELOPMENT ........................................................................................................................................................ 452
FIGURE C-4 AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS IN PRE-DEVELOPMENT AND ACQUISITION AS
OF APRIL 2014 ......................................................................................................................................................... 453
                                                                                                                       CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                              HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
FIGURE C-5 OPPORTUNITY SITES FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ........................................................... 454
FIGURE F-1 CITY COUNCIL APPROVED LOCATIONS FOR PERMITTING EMERGENCY HOMELESS
SHELTER BY-RIGHT ................................................................................................................................................ 560

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
California law requires that jurisdictions identify existing and projected housing needs and create a
housing program that states the City’s housing policy goals, objectives and summary of financial
resources for preserving, improving, and developing new housing units. The City of Oakland’s
Housing Element encapsulates this effort. The contents of this document reflect a combination of
local issues, priorities, and State law requirements. California law (Government Code Section 65583)
requires, in part, that each city and county adopt a housing element that contains:
(a) an assessment of housing needs and an inventory of resources and constraints relevant to
    the meeting of these needs;
(b) a statement of the community’s goals, quantified objectives, and policies relative to the
    maintenance, preservation, improvement, and development of housing;
(c) an inventory of developable sites capable of accommodating development of housing for
    a range of income types to meet the City’s share of the regional housing need; and
(d) a program which sets forth a schedule of actions through January 31, 2023 to implement
    the policies and achieve the goals and objectives of the housing element.
While the Oakland Housing Element addresses the State requirements described above, it also
incorporates a number of important local planning efforts by the City in recent years. Numerous
factors contributed to the changes in the City’s policy context, including a change in the City’s
leadership and administration, the dissolution of the City’s Redevelopment Agency and resulting
changes in the City’s approach to funding housing programs. Recent local planning efforts include:
    1. Priority Development Area (PDA) Planning that encourages housing development in existing
         neighborhoods near transit and jobs;
    2. Specific and Area Planning in Lake Merritt Station Area (Specific) Plan, Broadway Valdez
         Specific Plan, West Oakland Specific Plan, Coliseum Area Specific Plan, and Central Estuary
         Area Plan;
    3. Strategies and programs to maintain and expand the supply of housing affordable to very-
         low, low and moderate income households, as described in the City’s Consolidated Plan for
         Housing and Community Development (2010).
An important part of the Housing Element is the determination of the City’s new housing
construction need. Under California law (California Government Code Section 65584), new housing
construction need is determined, at a minimum, through a regional housing allocation process.
Oakland (along with all other jurisdictions in the State) must plan to accommodate its share of the
housing need of persons at all income levels.
The City’s share of regional housing need is based on a plan prepared by the Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG), the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) that was adopted in 2013.
Under the RHNA, Oakland must accommodate 14,765 new housing units between 2015 and 2023. In
addition, the Regional Housing Needs Allocation describes housing needs by income level (as a
percentage of area median income, or “AMI”), as indicated in the following table.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                     1

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
              Oakland’s “Fair Share” Housing Goals for 2014-2022
                      Very Low                                    Moderate                   Above
                       Income              Low Income              Income                 Moderate
                    (50% of AMI)           (80% of AMI)        (120% of AMI)                Income                  Total
  Number of
  Units                  2,059                  2,075                2,815                    7,816                14,765
  Note: Oakland estimates that 50% of the Very Low Income Need (1029 units) is for households that are Extremely Low Income (at or
  below 30% of area median income)
Cities are required to accommodate these housing needs by providing sufficient sites, with adequate
zoning and infrastructure, to make possible the development of these units, including providing sites
with sufficient density to make possible the development of housing for all income levels.
In addition, the City has identified “housing opportunity sites” capable of accommodating
approximately 10,032 additional units. Most of these sites are zoned for multi-family development
along major corridors, in the downtown, and in transit village areas, and thus could accommodate a
range of households with different incomes, depending only on the availability of adequate financial
subsidies to make possible the development of units for very low and low income households. These
projections are based on conservative estimates of the capacity of these sites. In sum, the City has
identified sites that can accommodate more than its housing needs allocation.
A.        EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
Chapter 2 of the Housing Element includes an assessment of the City’s success in achieving the goals
set out in its previous Housing Element, and an evaluation of the effectiveness of the programs that
were included at that time.
The City’s last Housing Element was completed in 2010, and covered the period from January 1,
2007 to June 30, 2014.
The 2007-2014 Housing Element lists eight housing goals with policies and policy actions to be taken
to achieve those goals. Many of the specific policy goals identified in the 2007-2014 Housing
Element will continue into the next planning period mostly unchanged though there are a number of
modifications based on their effectiveness or changes in priorities. Some policy goals identified will
be discontinued in the 2015-2023 Housing Element because they do not appear to be effective or
address current needs (see Chapter 2, Table 2-3 Assessment of 2007-14 Housing Element
Implementation, discussion on “appropriateness” of each policy action).
Housing Production
The City fell short of meeting the overall housing production requirements. Unfortunately, the City
cannot control the housing market conditions to encourage housing development. In addition,
subsidies available to develop affordable housing units can only stretch so far given the high land and
development costs during this planning period. The City permitted the development of 1,664 very
low-, low-, and moderate-income housing units and 2,033 above moderate-income housing units for a
grand total of 3,697 housing units permitted (See Chapter 2, Table 2-1).
2                                                                                                       EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
 Comparison of Housing Needs and Housing Production, 2007-2014
                                                                                            Building Permits Issued
State Identified Affordability Categories                   2007-2014 RHNA
                                                                                              2007-December, 2013
Very Low (up to 50% AMI)                                             1,900                               1,257
Low (51-80% AMI)                                                     2,098                                385
Moderate (81-120% AMI)                                               3,142                                 22
Above Moderate (> 120% AMI)                                          7,489                               2,033
Total                                                               14,629                               3,697
Source: City of Oakland building permit data, 2007-2013; see “City of Oakland Annual Progress Report on Implementation of Housing
Element, 2013.”
Appropriateness and Effectiveness of 2007-2014 Programs
The 2007-2014 Housing Element established policies and programs to address eight housing goals.
The following summarizes those policy goals and gives a short analysis of actions taken for each
goal.
     1) Provide adequate sites suitable for housing for all income groups: The City adopted a variety
          of policies to encourage housing development. Highlights of these policies include housing
          programs targeted at the Downtown and major corridors of the City, updating and adopting
          Citywide zoning that include updating residential and commercial zones implementing the
          General Plan Land Use and Transportation Element designations and revised development
          standards for multi-family buildings, and increasing residential densities in downtown as part
          of Central Business District zoning update. The City is currently in the process of evaluating
          and revising all of its parking regulations including those for secondary units, which is
          scheduled for adoption in 2014. The City, in compliance with SB2, also recently adopted
          amendments to the Planning Code by identifying a zone or zones where emergency shelters
          can be permitted outright. The city continues its work to encourage inclusion of mobile and
          manufactured housing in appropriate locations and re-use of industrial and commercial
          buildings for joint living quarters and working spaces.
     2) Promote the development of adequate housing for low- and moderate-income households:
          The City has employed a combination of financial assistance and regulatory measures to
          stimulate the production of housing and preserve affordable housing opportunities. The City
          sponsors programs that supports renters and promotes homeownership.
     3) Remove constraints to the availability and affordability of housing for all income
          groups: Some examples of how the City removed constraints to development of housing for
          all income groups include a streamlined permitting process, flexible zoning regulations, and
          generous density requirements. Other examples of removing constraints to development
          includes allowing multi-family housing in most medium- to high-density residential and
          commercial zones, and conditionally permitting multi-family housing in lower-density areas.
          Efforts to improve permitting include implementing discretionary permit processes that
          include objective approval criteria and assigning priority to affordable housing projects.
     4) Conserve and improve older housing and neighborhoods: The City combined public
          investment, code enforcement, financial assistance for commercial revitalization, and
          financial assistance to improve the condition of residential properties. The City funded loans
          for owner-occupied housing in single-family neighborhoods for minor home repair,
          emergency home repair, and lead hazard control and painting. In addition, the City funded
          rehabilitation loans for both owner-occupied and rental buildings. In order to reduce the
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                                               3

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
      number of substandard vacant housing units, the City created a new vacant housing program
      to target acquisition and rehabilitation of these underutilized structures.
   5) Preserve affordable rental housing: The City assisted in the rehabilitation of low-income
      rental housing owned and operated by affordable housing organizations, while the Oakland
      Housing Authority focused on the maintenance and improvement of public housing. Most
      properties with expiring Section 8 contracts have been preserved with extended low-income
      restrictions. Staff support and implementation of City ordinances protecting existing
      affordable housing is another method for preserving affordable rental housing. Existing City
      ordinances include Rent Adjustment, Residential Property Conversion, and Condominium
      Conversion.
   6) Promote equal housing opportunity: In 2010, the City completed its Analysis of Impediments
      to Fair Housing. This analysis is conducted by the City of Oakland’s Housing and
      Community Development Department every five years in accordance with the requirements
      of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Key elements of this
      plan are included as policies in this section of the City’s Housing goals. In 2011, the City
      began to develop written guidelines and an ordinance amending the Planning Code, clarifying
      and publicizing the existing administrative procedures for granting reasonable
      accommodation for fair housing for the disabled. Planning staff and City Attorney's office
      reviewed the proposed program in 2012, and public hearings and adoption is expected in
      2014. In addition, the City promoted equal housing opportunities by supporting local non-
      profit organizations that provide services such as support for fair housing and reasonable
      accommodations. City staff also worked to promote fair lending practices throughout the
      City.
   7) Promote sustainable development and smart growth: The City adopted its Green Building
      ordinance in October 2010 and it is regularly applied to multi-family affordable housing
      development. In the annual Notification of Funding Availability for Affordable Housing,
      new development and rehabilitation projects must meet a minimum threshold of attaining the
      minimum scores in each category set forth in their respective Green Point Checklists.
      Additionally, in an effort to reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions in Oakland, the
      Oakland Energy and Climate Action Plan (ECAP) was adopted by the City Council on
      December 4, 2012. Optimizing the use of energy and minimizing associated energy costs and
      GHG emissions are important components of Oakland's sustainable city vision. The ECAP
      establishes GHG reduction actions, as well as a framework for coordinating implementation
      and monitoring, and reporting on progress. The ECAP outlines a ten-year plan including
      more than 150 actions that will enable Oakland to achieve a 36% reduction in GHG
      emissions. The ECAP assists the City of Oakland in continuing its legacy of leadership on
      energy, climate and sustainability issues. Other efforts supported by City staff include
      working with ABAG and MTC from 2011 to 2013 to develop the region's Sustainable
      Communities Strategy, required by SB 375, foster low-carbon emissions and in-fill
      development via the Citywide Zoning update, and encouraging smart growth via various city
      Transit Villages (Fruitvale, West Oakland, MacArthur, and Coliseum BART stations).
   8) Increase public access to information through technology: Technical advances have enabled
      both City staff and the public to easily access planning related information. The new
      technologies incorporated during this planning period include STELLANT document
      management system, the City’s website with information on current and past planning
      projects. Meeting notices, agendas, reports and minutes for Planning Commission,
      subcommittees, and City Council meetings are available online. The City’s public interactive
4                                                                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
         GIS system was updated to provide developers and the public access to detailed information
         about parcels and neighborhood characteristics. Finally, in 2014, the City replaced its
         outdated Permit Tracking System with Accela software. In an attempt to improve the
         customer relationship management, the City continues to develop and test the technology to
         make payments and service requests online.
B.       EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
Chapter 3 contains a detailed analysis of existing conditions, including a profile of the demographic
and economic characteristics of Oakland’s population, and an overview of the physical and financial
characteristics of the housing stock. The 2010 Census demographic data is the primary data used for
this analysis.
Changes in Population
Changes in demographics in Oakland from 2000 to 2010 brought significant changes to the City.
Oakland experienced a slight decline in the population, decreasing from about 399,484 in 2000 to
nearly 390,724 in 2010.
Race and Ethnicity
Since at least the 1940s, Oakland has had a significantly higher percentage of non-White and
Hispanic residents than other cities of similar size. The most significant change in Oakland’s
population since 2000 has been a decrease in the number and the proportion of residents who
identified themselves as non-Hispanic Black/African-American. The City’s non-Hispanic
Black/African American population declined by 23.9 percent between 2000 and 2010. In
comparison, the population who identified themselves as non-Hispanic White increased, as did the
non-Hispanic Asian/Pacific Islander, and Hispanic/Latino populations. The non-Hispanic White
population increased by 7.8 percent, Asian/Pacific Islander population increased by 7.8 percent, and
the Hispanic/Latino population increased by 13.3 percent. Despite these significant demographic
changes, Oakland’s population continues to be very diverse as evidenced by the in 2010 census: 25.9
percent non-Hispanic White, 27.3 percent non-Hispanic Black/African American, 16.7 percent non-
Hispanic Asian, and 25.4 percent Hispanic/Latino.
The decline in the non-Hispanic Black/African American population since 1990 may have three
causes: some Black/African American families may have moved to suburban locations by choice to
purchase less costly homes, while others may have moved from Oakland due to rapidly rising housing
costs during recent decades. A third reason might be attributable to the foreclosure crisis with its
epicenter in Oakland neighborhoods that have historically been the location of a large proportion of
the City’s Black/African American population.
Oakland’s population mix over the past 50 years has been influenced by economic and suburban
development trends. The loss of many relatively well-paying “blue collar” and military jobs,
combined with rapid suburbanization in the Bay Area between 1950 and 1980, left Oakland with a
higher percentage of lower-income and minority residents. Since the 1980s, increasing numbers of
immigrants from Asia, the Pacific Islands, and Latin American/Hispanic countries have found homes
in Oakland. According to the 2000 Census, nearly 12 percent of Oakland residents were foreign born
and came to the United States between 1990 and 2000. Nearly 90 percent of these new residents
came from either Asia or Latin America.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                     5

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Age Distribution
Although Oakland experienced a significant change in the racial and ethnic mix of its population
between 2000 and 2010, there were only small changes in the age distribution. There was a 4 percent
decrease in the percentage of children between the ages of 5 to 19 years, leading to a 3 year increase
in the median age from 33 years in 2000 to 36 years in 2010. Additionally, Oakland experienced an
increase in the percent of the population in their mid-50s to mid-60s. Even with the slight change in
the proportion of some age groups, the age groups from 5 years to 54 years of age experienced
decreases in population between 2000 and 2010.
Household Size and Composition
Oakland has a high percentage of single adults and other non-family households (unrelated
individuals living together).
     •  Nearly one-third of all households consist of single persons.
     •  Approximately 30 percent of households contain two people.
     •  Average household size decreased from 2.6 in 2000 to 2.49 in 2010. This trend is directly
        related to the decline in proportion of population groups with larger household sizes and the
        increase in the proportion of population groups with smaller household sizes. The change in
        household size might be a reflection of the nationwide trend away from traditional family
        structures.
        The relatively high percentage of small households is explained in part by the lack of larger
        housing units – nearly 70 percent of Oakland’s housing units have two bedrooms or fewer,
        compared to 54 percent for Alameda County as a whole in year 2000. Larger households
        with sufficient income may be moving out of Oakland to secure larger housing units.
     •  54 percent of households are family households (two or more persons related by blood,
        marriage or adoption).
     •  Average family size decreased from 3.38 in 2000 to 3.27 in 2010.
     •  There are substantial differences in household size by race. Non-Hispanic White households
        have an average size of just 2.21, while the average size of non-Hispanic Black/African
        American households is 2.25, and for Asians the figure is 2.66. For households of “other
        race” (primarily Hispanic), average household size is 4.30, while for Pacific Islanders the
        figure is 4.56 (Census 2010).
     •  About 10% of families with children are headed by a single parent.
     •  The number of female-headed single parent families has declined slightly, while the number
        of male-headed single parent families has increased and is approximately 4% of the total City
        population.
These figures suggest a significant need for housing for large families, and for the integration of
services such as childcare into housing developments.
6                                                                                  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Income
Data from the 2011 American Community Survey 5-year Estimate reveals the following information
about household and family incomes in Oakland:
•    Oakland’s median household income was $51,144 and median family income was $58,237.
•    Median income for non-family households (single persons and unrelated adults living together)
     was $41,454.
•    Median household income by Race/Ethnicity shows the highest for non-Hispanic Whites at
     $81,884 and the next highest for those who identify as two or more races at $51,167.
•    68% of all renters were at extremely low-, very low- and low-income levels; 69% of all owners
     were at moderate- or above moderate-income levels.
Housing Characteristics
•    Oakland had a net gain of over 13,113 housing units between 2000 and 2013.
•    Most of the increase in the housing stock between 2000 and 2013 was through the construction of
     multi-family housing. Over 10,100 multi-family housing units were constructed between 2000
     and 2013.
•    About 30% 1 of the multifamily housing constructed since 2000 has been publicly assisted rental
     housing for lower-income households although there has been significant market rate
     development in that same time period.
•    Nearly half of Oakland’s housing units are in single-family detached or attached structures.
•    Nearly one-third of all units are in buildings of 5 or more units.
•    According to the 2010 Census, the effective vacancy rate 2 was three percent for owner-occupied
     housing and eight and a half percent for renter housing.
Tenure
•    59 percent of Oakland households are renters.
•    The racial/ethnic group highest percentage of homeowners is Non-Hispanic Whites (50 percent).
     Ownership rates for other groups range from 28 percent to almost 41 percent.
•    Homeownership rates are closely related to incomes. In 2011, White households had the highest
     median income and the highest ownership rates. However, even though Hispanic households had
1
  City of Oakland data shows that there have been approximately 3,032 new affordable multi-unit housing developments
constructed from 2000 to 2013.
2
  The percent of dwelling units available for occupancy excluding homes that are boarded up, used only part of the year, or
sold or rented and awaiting occupancy.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                                         7

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
     the second highest median income, their homeownership rates lag behind those of Black/African
     American and Asian/Pacific Islander households.
Age and Condition of Housing
•    The age of Oakland’s housing stock suggests the potential for deterioration, although the age of
     housing, by itself, is not a definitive measure of housing condition. Many communities have a
     preponderance of housing more than 40 years old but little housing rehabilitation or replacement
     need. The age of housing, when correlated with income and the proportion of rental housing, can
     provide a reasonable measure of housing condition. Empirical evidence suggests that
     communities with high proportions of housing more than 40 years old, lower-income households,
     and higher rates of rental housing will usually have a higher proportion of housing in need of
     repair than similar communities with higher incomes and a higher proportion of ownership
     housing.
•    Nearly two-thirds (65 percent) of the City’s housing was constructed before 1960 and is more
     than 40 years old.
•    The 2014 Oakland Housing Conditions Survey of exterior housing conditions (“windshield
     survey”) of a sample of approximately 1,700 units estimates the following profile of housing
     conditions among an estimated total of 170,825 housing units in Oakland:
          o   One fifth (20 percent) of housing units in Oakland are estimated to be in need of minor
              rehabilitation or repair. These estimated 34,000 units are in need of minor repairs such as
              partial re-painting or minor repair or replacement of a window or door.
          o   Moderate to substantial rehabilitation or repair is needed for an estimated 2,600 housing
              units in Oakland (less than two percent of all units in Oakland) are in structures that show
              major damage such as missing siding, holes in the roof or a roof that is leaning, a tilted or
              cracked foundation, or missing windows or doors.
          o   An estimated 260 housing units show signs of excessive neglect and appear to require
              demolition or major rehabilitation to become habitable.
Housing Cost and Overpayment
Oakland rents and housing prices rose slowly during much of the 1990s, price increases accelerated in
the late 1990s and continued to increase rapidly until 2007. From 2008 to approximately 2012 prices
declined dramatically as the housing bubble burst and the foreclosure crisis ensued. In 2013 housing
costs (both market rents and home sales prices) have had significant increases with prices in some zip
codes reaching heights close to those at the peak of the housing bubble.
•    Regionally, home sales prices in Oakland are among the lowest compared to other Bay Area
     cities.
•    In recent years this relative affordability has caused median home sales prices to grow at the
     highest rate among a sample of Bay Area Cities. This illustrates that the regional demand for
     housing is impacting the City’s housing values—to the advantage of low-income homeowners but
     also to the disadvantage of the City’s low-and moderate-income population seeking to become
     home owners
8                                                                                   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
•  Home sales data obtained for the period of 2000 through 2013 shows an increase in median home
   sales prices to $390,000 (not adjusted for inflation). This is an 84% increase during that time
   period.
•  When looking at the same period, the sales price data by Oakland zip code still shows median
   home sales price increases from 21% to 224%.
•  50 percent of renter households pay more than 30 percent of income for housing.
•  Among extremely low income level renters 79 percent pay more than 30 percent of income for
   rent.
Overcrowding
•  Nearly 12 percent of the City’s households lived in overcrowded conditions in 2010. Of those,
   4% were owner-occupied units and 8% were renter-occupied units.
Special Housing Needs
Seniors
•  Between 2000 and 2010, the number of seniors increased by 4.2 percent, and the number of
   senior households declined by 6.2 percent.
•  Nearly 45 percent of senior-headed households consist of a single elderly person living alone.
   According to the American Community Service 5-year data from 2006-2010 (ACS 5-year data
   for 2010) Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) Data, 48 percent of seniors
   have very low-incomes and over 30 percent of these seniors paid half of their incomes or more
   for housing.
•  Oakland contains a large number of assisted senior housing units. This level of assistance helps
   about 65 percent of senior households in Oakland (8,096 senior households).
Persons with Disabilities
•  Nearly 23 percent of the population age five and older who live in Oakland reported a disability
   in 2000.
•  Nearly half of the population 65 and older reported having a disability.
•  The proportion of the population in Oakland with disabilities is much greater than countywide
   due to the availability of social services, alternative housing, income support, and relatively lower
   housing costs than in other central Bay Area locations. These factors create a high demand for
   housing and services to meet the needs of persons with disabilities.
•  Among the most urgent needs reported by organizations serving persons with disabilities are
   independent living units with supportive services; treatment for persons with chemical
   dependency, mental illness, and chronic illness; and life and job skills training to increase the
   ability of these individuals to live independently.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                      9

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Single Parent Households
•  According to the 2000 Census, Oakland has 18,314 single parent households, about the same
   number as in 1990. Over three-quarters of these households are female-headed. The number of
   male single-parent households increased by nearly one-third, while the number of female single-
   parent households decreased by six percent.
•  Single-parent householders face constraints in housing due to their lower incomes and the need to
   access childcare and other support services. It is important that single parent households live
   close to schools, local services, child-care, and health care facilities because many lack private
   vehicles. Although the total number of single parent households has remained steady, the
   extremely high poverty rate among female-headed, single-parent households, suggests that the
   City will continue to face a need for additional, affordable family housing with access to support
   services.
The Homeless
•  The most recent information on the number of homeless persons and families in Oakland is
   inferred from the 2013 Alameda Countywide Homeless Count and Survey Report (2013 Count).
   This point-in-time homeless count and survey conducted on January 30, 2013, provides the most
   current data on the homeless population at the county level. Oakland has assumed 52% of the
   County’s homeless population is in Oakland. This is based on findings from the 2009 Homeless
   Count (the last count with regional data), as well as analysis of data in the Homeless Management
   Information System (HMIS). Approximately 2,217 individuals (1,412 households) are homeless
   at any point in time in Oakland.
•  Minorities make up a disproportionate share of this total. As many homeless persons have mental
   and/or chemical dependency problems, supportive services are important.
•  In 2013, women were just over 13% of the unsheltered homeless population; men comprised 84%
   of the unsheltered homeless population.
•  The emergency shelters and transitional housing facilities in Oakland have a combined 1,086
   beds. The average utilization rate across the shelters is approximately 75%.
•  While the City of Oakland has a significant inventory of affordable housing, there are very long
   waiting lists for these units and most of them do not have supportive services or are not
   affordable to the current homeless population. There is tremendous unmet need for housing for
   1,412 unsheltered homeless households or those at risk of being homeless
Large Households
•  Oakland has 10,044 renter and 7,276 owner households with five or more persons.
•  Comparing 2000 and 2010 Census data, there was a decrease in the number of large households
   among both renters and owner-occupants.
Assisted Rental Housing
•  As of March 2014, there are 5,507 privately owned, publicly subsidized rental housing units in
   over 181 developments in Oakland. Of these units, 98 are designated for persons with disabilities
10                                                                                EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
    and/or HIV/AIDS, 2,645 for families, and 1,249 for seniors. Another 112 privately owned
    subsidized rental units are in residential hotels and 141 are transitional housing units for homeless
    individuals and families.
•   The Oakland Housing Authority (OHA) owns and operates public housing units and administers
    the Project-Based Section 8 Voucher Program 3. According to its 2013 Making Transitions Work
    Annual Report, OHA portfolio includes 1,605 public housing units, 915 of which are located at
    large family sites, 383 units are located in one of the five designated senior sites, and 307 units at
    OHA’s HOPE VI redevelopment properties. OHA also provides rental subsidies to 13,565
    households under the Housing Choice Voucher program for low-income residents to use in the
    private rental market through tenant-based or project-based vouchers.
Population and Employment Trends
•   Oakland’s population declined by two percent between 2000 and 2010, while the population of
    the county increased by five percent and that for the State increased by 10 percent during the
    same period of time.
•   As the economic recovery continues in the East Bay—Alameda and Contra Costa Counties—key
    indicators such as employment are showing steady growth. Employment is expected to continue
    to grow steadily in the future, as consumer spending and hiring have improved throughout the rest
    of the country. Oakland and the East Bay, whose economic recovery had lagged behind that of
    San Francisco and the South Bay in recent years, will continue catching up to those regions.
    Strong and growing sectors in Oakland continue to be health care, trade/logistics, manufacturing,
    innovative tech and clean tech.
•   Most of the largest employers are government and education agencies, health care providers,
    and professional/business/service companies. One measure of the change in Oakland’s
    economy since the 1950s is that few of the top 50 employers are manufacturing firms.
C.       LAND INVENTORY
Chapter 4 contains an inventory of sites suitable for development of housing for all economic groups.
The inventory is summarized in the chapter itself, and the detailed inventory may be found in
Appendix C.
According to the RHNA, the City should plan to accommodate 14,765 housing units between January
2015 and June 2023, of which 2,059 should be affordable to very low-income households (of which
1,029 should be for extremely low-income households, 1,030 should be affordable to very low-
income households), 2,075 to low-income households, 2,815 to moderate-income households, and
7,816 to above-moderate-income households. Sites on which such housing might be constructed
should permit adequate densities and contain infrastructure and services to increase the financial
feasibility of producing housing affordable to low-income residents.
State law requires that cities complete an inventory of developable sites and identify those sites that
are adequately zoned and have appropriate infrastructure to support the development of housing units
to meet the regional housing allocation, including providing sufficient housing units for all income
levels.
3
  Appendix B provides a detailed list of these subsidized projects.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                       11

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
The City’s analysis divides sites into four groups:
Group 1: Units Constructed
The first group consists of sites on which projects have been constructed since January 2014, or on
which units were under construction as of March 2014. For sites included in Group 1, the number
and affordability is clearly identifiable since only one actual project exists (61 market-rate units).
There were no publicly subsidized affordable projects completed during this period though there were
a number of them under construction. Those subsidized affordable projects were not counted during
this planning period because they had already been counted towards the 2007-2014 RHNA.
Group 2: Units Approved
 The second group consists of sites with approved development proposals. Because there are specific
 proposals for each site, the number of units and their affordability can be identified. This group
 includes market-rate housing projects that have already been approved by the City (all discretionary
 permits have been issued). Group 2 also includes affordable housing projects that have received
 development funding commitments from the City with Federal HOME funds and/or Low/Mod
 Housing Funds (former Redevelopment Agency tax-increment set-aside for housing) and thus have a
 specific number of affordable units identified.
Group 3: Units Planned
Group 3 contains sites on which projects are planned but that have not yet have secured planning
approvals. This group includes projects that have started pre-application discussions with the City,
and projects that had applications under review as of March 2014. Group 3 also includes
development sites that were acquired by nonprofit developers with funding provided by the Low/Mod
Housing Fund (former Redevelopment Agency tax-increment set-aside for housing) under an
Affordable Housing Site Acquisition program. These sites will be subject to long-term affordability
controls, and have a projected number of units (based on information submitted as part of the
application for site acquisition funding), but the specific mix of very low- and low-income units is not
yet confirmed, as it is dependent on the type and amount of financing that can be secured for each
project.
Group 4: Additional Capacity on Opportunity Sites
The fourth group consists of “opportunity sites” identified by the City as a result of several studies
and planning analyses. The inventory focuses on larger sites suitable for multiple-unit housing
development. Many are sites envisioned for development along the City’s transit corridors and in
higher-density and mixed-use developments downtown.
The results of this analysis show that housing potential on land suitable for residential development in
Oakland is large and is more than adequate to meet Oakland’s allocation of regional housing needs
(RHNA).
Between January 2014 and March 2014, 61 units have been completed and no projects are currently
under construction in Oakland. Again between January 2014 to March 2014, 16 sites had received
planning approvals, but yet not started construction. These projects include 4,409 additional housing
units (including 221 affordable units) for Oakland. Additionally, there are 3,468 units planned and
are noted as “units planned” (including 221 affordable units). Affordable housing units approved or
planned have either preliminary funding commitments or site acquisition assistance from the City.
12                                                                                  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Based on the first three groups of development, the City has identified more than half of the
units, in specific projects that have been built, approved or proposed, to accommodate the units
required to meet its Regional Housing Needs Allocation. To make up the difference in number
of units to meet the RHNA, and because many of these sites were developed or are proposed as
market rate projects, the City has also identified “opportunity sites,” Group 4, which are
suitable for development of multifamily projects that could accommodate very low, low and
moderate income housing as well as additional market-rate units. The City has identified
available “housing opportunity sites” capable of accommodating approximately 10,032
additional units. In sum, the City has identified sufficient sites that can accommodate its
housing needs allocation and specifically meet the needs for affordable housing development.
The following table provides a summary of the housing potential on land suitable for residential
development in Oakland in each of the four categories described above. A detailed inventory listing
the potential sites and additional background information on assumptions and sources of data is
presented in Appendix C.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                  13

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Actual Housing Production, January 2014 to March 2014 and Balance of Units to be Provided
                                                                                                                                                      Units by Affordability Category
                                                                                                                     Total        Extremely              Very                                            Above
                                                                                                                                                                          Low        Moderate
                                                                                                                     Units             Low               Low                                           Moderate
                                                                                                                                                                        Income        Income
                                                                                                                                     Income            Income                                           Income
Oakland's Regional Housing Needs Allocation                                                                              14,765            1,029            1,030            2,075         2,815           7,816
  Group 1: Units Constructed 1/1/14 to 3/27/14 (Permits Issued after 1/1/14)
     C-1: Private Sector Market Rate (includes private sector affordable units)-complete                                     61                                                                                61
  Group 1 Subtotal                                                                                                           61                                                                                61
  Group 2: Units Receiving Planning Approvals
     C-2: Private Sector Market Rate units-approved                                                                       4,188                                                                            4,188
     C-3: Publicly Subsidized Affordable-funded and in pre-development                                                      221                54               99              47              17              4
  Group 2 Subtotal                                                                                                        4,409                54               99              47              17         4,192
  Group 3: Units Planned
     C-4: Publicly Subsidized Affordable-site acquisition                                                                   221                                                187               2             32
                                                                                   1
     C-5: Private Sector Market Rate--in planning pre-development                                                         3,247                                                 72                         3,175
  Group 3 Subtotal                                                                                                        3,468                                                259               2         3,207
  Total Units C-1 to C-5 (completed, under construction, approved, pre-
development):                                                                                                             7,938                54               99             306              19         7,460
Total Sites Needed Given RHNA Requirement -- Surplus/(Deficit):                                                         (6,827)            (975)             (931)         (1,769)       (2,796)            (356)
Sites Needed to comply with Affordable Requirements -- Surplus/(Deficit):                                               (6,471)
     C-6: Opportunity Sites2 (Units with > 30 dua)                                                                       10,032
     C-6: Opportunity Sites (Units with < 30 dua)                                                                            70
1
  Some of these 3,247 units will be affordable.
2
  As per AB 2348 (Mullin), Chapter 724, Statutes of 2004, this California law recognized that 30 dwelling units per acre in metropolitan jurisdictions is sufficient to accommodate housing for very low-
and low-income populations. This is typically referred to as the "Mullin Densities.” While local governments are not compelled to zone at these densities, HCD must accept them as appropriate when
evaluating a jurisdiction's housing element to determine whether the jurisdiction has identified sufficient sites to accommodate its share of the regional housing need.
(http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/plan/he/ab2348stat04ch724.pdf)
14                                                                                                                                                                             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
D.         SUMMARY OF PROGRAM RESOURCES
Chapter 5 provides a description of the program resources available to address the City’s housing
needs. These programs encourage housing rehabilitation, assist first-time homebuyers, support
housing development, and provide miscellaneous housing services to low- and moderate-income
households.
The City of Oakland’s Redevelopment Agency was dissolved as of February 1, 2012. Given this
action there will be no future funding for the Low and Moderate Income Housing Fund from property
tax increment.
In 2011, prior to its dissolution, the Redevelopment Agency, issued a total of $40 million of tax
allocation bonds backed by the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Fund. Annual debt service on
these bonds will be paid by property tax increment as was originally imagined prior to the dissolution
of the Redevelopment Agency. Debt service on these bonds will require about $1.8 million annually
and is called an “enforceable obligation.” Those bond funds are designated to be used for two
affordable housing development projects: $24 million for a development in Brooklyn Basin and $16
million for a development at the MacArthur BART station.
The State statutes governing the dissolution of redevelopment agencies and the wind-down of
redevelopment activities provide for the distribution of former tax-increment funding to taxing
entities. Those taxing entities that will benefit from Oakland’s Redevelopment Agency dissolution
include AC Transit, Oakland Unified School District, City of Oakland, Alameda County, and Peralta
Community College. That distribution of property tax will be from the Redevelopment Property Tax
Trust Fund (RPTTF) and includes funds not needed by successor agencies to fulfill enforceable
obligations. Additionally, there will be distributions to taxing entities sales proceeds and other
revenues from the use or disposition of assets of what are now called “successor agencies” (former
redevelopment agencies). These funds are called “boomerang funds” and represent a windfall in
property tax revenue to the City of Oakland. In late 2013, the City of Oakland committed to setting
aside 25% of the funds distributed to the City as a taxing entity under the Redevelopment dissolution
and deposit them into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Starting in 2015, the Affordable Housing
Trust fund is estimated to receive the following boomerang funds on an annual basis.4
The City also receives federal HOME, CDBG, and other program funds that are allocated for
housing. HOME funds are used primarily for housing development projects. In recent years this
funding source has been cut dramatically. In FY 2013-14, the City received approximately $2.2
million in HOME funds. (This is less than half of what was received at the height of HOME funding,
$4.9 million in Fiscal Year 2011-12). Ninety percent of these funds are used for housing
development activities; ten percent is used for planning, administration and monitoring activities.
The City currently receives annually about $7 million from the federal Community Development
Block Grant (CDBG). In recent years, program income from loan repayments has generated
approximately additional $800,000 per year. The City anticipates allocating approximately $3.2
million for housing activities including loans for rehabilitation of owner-occupied housing, capital
and operating costs of shelter and housing for the homeless, housing counseling and fair housing
services. The City also receives approximately $600,000 in federal Emergency Shelter Grant funds
for support of shelter and services for the homeless.
4
  City of Oakland Ordinance No. 13193 (October 1, 2013).
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                   15

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
In addition to the HOME and CDBG Programs, affordable housing developers in Oakland routinely
apply for low-income housing tax credits. The City of Oakland’s Department of Housing and
Community Development Agency (DHCD) operates the City’s housing programs. DHCD staff
routinely assists affordable housing developers. Thus, one of the crucial non-financial resources that
the City provides is its housing staff.
The City of Oakland’s housing programs also support and fund housing rehabilitation, provide
assistance to first time homebuyers, help fund housing development, and provide other miscellaneous
housing services for low- and moderate-income households.
E.       ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING
Chapter 6 contains a detailed discussion of potential constraints to the City’s ability to provide or
accommodate the provision of housing to meet its identified housing needs. The discussion of
constraints examines those aspects of the City’s policies and procedures that might constitute
constraints.
Governmental Constraints
The term “governmental constraints” refers to the policies and regulations of the City that impact
housing. The City has undertaken an analysis of its General Plan, Zoning Ordinance, development
standards and permit processes to determine what constraints may exist.
Discretionary land use control in Oakland is exercised by the Planning Commission and the City
Council, and administered by the Planning and Building Department, Bureau of Planning. The City
has not identified any specific constraints to the approval of housing resulting from the application of
the General Plan policies or current zoning. To encourage housing production and reduce regulatory
barriers, the City updated its General Plan in 1998, which increased the areas in the City where higher
density residential and mixed use development could be built. These changes to the General Plan
encourage more housing in the City, near job centers, with access to transportation and other services.
Since 1998, the City of Oakland has undertaken actions to reduce the impact of local government
regulations and fees on the cost and availability of housing. Beginning with the General Plan update
in 1998, the City has:
    •    increased residential densities,
    •    created new mixed-use housing opportunities along major transportation corridors and in the
         downtown,
    •    reduced open space requirements in high density residential zones in the Downtown, and in
         the Transit Oriented Development Zone (S-15),
    •    streamlined the environmental review process for downtown projects,
    •    adopted a Density Bonus Ordinance,
    •    adopted a secondary unit ordinance and streamlined the process for approval,
    •    created new fast-track and streamlined permit processes, and
    •    adopted Standard Conditions of Approval to, in part, streamline the CEQA review process.
16                                                                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
The City of Oakland revised its Planning Code to make it consistent with the LUTE. Revisions to the
industrial zones were completed in July 2008, and creation of new commercial and residential zoning
districts in the Planning Code and accompanying maps were completed in 2011. The amendments to
the Planning Code’s industrial, commercial and residential zoning districts brought the City’s zoning
regulations into conformance with the general plan designations, creating a more predictable
development framework. Development standards under the Planning Code permit great flexibility in
the types of housing permitted and the density of residential units. In addition to the provisions of its
residential zones, the City further facilitates the production of affordable housing through density
bonuses, broad provisions for secondary (or “in-law”) units, planned unit development overlay zones,
and permits a wide variety of housing types in commercial zones. Because permitted residential
densities are fairly high in Oakland, density bonuses are rarely necessary as an incentive to produce
affordable housing; however, where applicable, the City is committed to using density bonuses and
other regulatory tools to increase the supply of housing affordable to all income levels. Constraints
posed by parking standards are regularly mitigated through variances and innovative parking systems.
The City does not consider the development standards in the Planning Code to be a constraint to the
production or rehabilitation of housing.
Oakland’s General Plan policies and Planning Code also provide great latitude to developers of
alternative housing types (such as rooming houses, group homes and residential care facilities, single-
room occupancy units, transitional housing, and emergency shelters) for populations with special
housing needs.
The City of Oakland and other public agencies charge a number of planning, building, and
engineering fees to cover the cost of processing development requests, and providing public facilities
and services to new development. Payment of these fees can have an impact on the cost of housing,
particularly affordable housing. Fees are limited by State law, which requires that “a public agency
may not charge applicants a fee that exceeds the amount reasonably necessary” to provide basic permit
processing services (California GC Sec. 65943 (e)). Unlike most surrounding jurisdictions, Oakland
does not charge impact fees for residential development. Fees for water and sewer services are
charged by the East Bay Municipal Utility District, while school impacts fees are charged by the
Oakland Unified School District.
Total building fees typically range from $32,000 and $36,000 per dwelling unit. When compared to
the market cost of producing housing in Oakland (land and site preparation, construction, financing,
etc.), and permit fees, while a cost factor, are not as significant as other cost factors in the production
of affordable housing (such as the market cost of land and State requirements to pay prevailing wages
on construction labor for housing development assisted with public funds). While permit fees are
necessary to pay for the services and infrastructure for which the fees are charged, the City can
mitigate the cost of these fees by providing financial assistance to affordable housing developments.
Such financial assistance has been a past and current practice of the City to facilitate the development
of affordable housing in Oakland.
Non-Governmental Constraints
Non-governmental constraints are those factors that limit and impact the production, availability, and
cost of affordable housing. These non-governmental constraints include land costs, environmental
hazards, land availability, construction costs, financing, and neighborhood sentiment.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                        17

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Market prices for land are high in the desirable, high-cost San Francisco Bay Area and with the
exception of the bursting of the housing bubble and resulting economic downturn in recent years,
values have mostly recovered in 2013. As evidenced in Chapter 3, rents and median sales prices rose
slowly during much of the 1990s, price increases accelerated in the late 1990s and continued to
increase rapidly until 2007. From 2008 to approximately 2012 prices declined dramatically as the
housing bubble burst and the foreclosure crisis ensued. In 2013 housing costs (both market rents and
home sales prices) have had significant increases with prices in some zip codes reaching heights close
to those at the peak of the housing bubble. Long term, however, the desirability and acceptability of
locations in Oakland and other inner cities has increased within the region. Demand for housing close
to employment centers such as Oakland and San Francisco is increasing and is likely to continue to
rise given the appeal of locations near urban centers. Recent sampling of land acquisition costs for
City of Oakland-funded affordable housing ranged from almost $20,763 to almost $72,535 per unit
and is largely a function of project density.
The cost of land and land preparation is further increased in Oakland by the fact that most sites with
housing development potential are relatively small parcels that can be difficult to develop (including
those that might be irregularly shaped). Many sites have existing structures and infrastructure that
must be removed, replaced, and/or reconfigured. The redevelopment of underutilized sites also adds
to the cost of development when contaminated soils or hazardous materials in existing
buildings/structures must be mitigated.
The costs of constructing housing in the Bay Area are generally, and in Oakland in particular, high.
Market factors resulting in high construction costs are further compounded for affordable housing
providers because they must pay “prevailing wages.” Construction costs are typically broken down
by either a per unit cost or per square foot cost. Further, construction costs can be separated into land
costs, “hard” costs or “soft costs.” Hard costs include construction line items such as labor,
demolition, building materials and installed components. Soft costs include items such as
architectural and engineering, planning approvals and permits, taxes and insurance, financing and
carrying costs, and marketing costs. The hard construction costs typically represent about 50 to 60
percent of total development costs. For the 2015-2023 Housing Element, the hard costs (labor,
building materials, installed components, etc.) for an average-quality wood-frame construction for
multi-unit apartment buildings ranged from $378 to $404 per square foot, with costs at the higher end
of the range applicable for four- and five-story construction over structured, above-grade parking.
F.       HOUSING ELEMENT GOALS AND POLICIES
Chapter 7 lays out the City’s goals, policies and planned actions to address its housing needs.
The City has adopted eight goals to address adequate sites, the development of affordable housing,
the removal of constraints to housing, the conservation of existing housing and neighborhoods, the
preservation of affordable rental housing, equal housing opportunity, and sustainable development
and smart growth. This Executive Summary lists the City’s goals and policies. Chapter 7 contains
these goals and policies with implementing actions.
18                                                                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Goal 1:         Provide Adequate Sites Suitable for Housing for All Income
                Groups
Policy 1.1      PRIORITY DEVELOPMENT AREAS HOUSING PROGRAM
       The City will target development and marketing resources in Priority Development Areas
       (PDAs), and in areas for which Specific Plans have been completed or are underway. (See
       also Policy 7.3.)
Policy 1.2      AVAILABILITY OF LAND
       Maintain an adequate supply of land to meet the regional housing share under the ABAG
       Regional Housing Needs Allocation.
Policy 1.3      APPROPRIATE LOCATIONS AND DENSITIES FOR HOUSING
       The City’s Strategic Planning Division initiated five (5) Specific Plans and one (1) Area Plan
       during the 2007-2014 Housing Element period, which will further the housing location and
       density objectives contained in the recently completed residential and commercial zoning
       update. The Lake Merritt Station Area (Specific) Plan, Broadway Valdez Specific Plan, West
       Oakland Specific Plan, Coliseum Area Specific Plan, and Central Estuary Area Plan included
       extensive community outreach processes and have resulted in specific zoning proposals.
       These Specific and Area Plans will facilitate the construction of nearly 17,000 new housing
       units in the City of Oakland.
       The completion of the Specific and Area Plans will provide these substantial housing gains in
       two respects: environmental clearance and community buy-in for future housing projects.
       Each planning process involved extensive community participation which culminated with
       significant community buy-in to the policies and development framework outlined in the
       plans, thus minimizing possible community opposition to future housing development
       projects.
Policy 1.4      SECONDARY UNITS
       Support the construction of secondary units in single-family zones and recognize these units
       as a source of affordable housing.
Policy 1.5      MANUFACTURED HOUSING
       Provide for the inclusion of manufactured housing in appropriate locations.
Policy 1.6      ADAPTIVE REUSE
       Encourage the re-use of industrial and commercial buildings for joint living quarters and
       working spaces.
Policy 1.7      REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS
       The City of Oakland will strive to meet its fair share of housing needed in the region.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                   19

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Goal 2:         Promote the Development of Adequate Housing for Low- and
                Moderate-Income Households
Policy 2.1      AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
       Provide financing for the development of affordable housing for low- and moderate-income
       households. The City’s financing programs will promote a mix of housing types, including
       homeownership, multifamily rental housing, and housing for seniors and persons with special
       needs.
Policy 2.2      AFFORDABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP OPPORTUNITIES
       Develop and promote programs and mechanisms to expand opportunities for lower-income
       households to become homeowners.
Policy 2.3      DENSITY BONUS PROGRAM
       Continue to refine and implement programs to permit projects to exceed the maximum
       allowable density set by zoning, if they include units set aside for occupancy by very low-,
       low-, and moderate-income households and/or seniors.
Policy 2.4      PERMANENTLY AFFORDABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP
       Develop mechanisms for ensuring that assisted homeownership developments remain
       permanently affordable to lower-income households to promote a mix of incomes.
Policy 2.5      SENIORS AND OTHER PERSONS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
       Assist and promote the development of housing with appropriate supportive services for
       seniors and other persons with special needs.
Policy 2.6      LARGE FAMILIES
       Encourage the development of affordable rental and ownership housing units that can
       accommodate large families.
Policy 2.7      EXPAND LOCAL R ESOURCES FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
       Increase local resources to support affordable housing development and develop new sources
       of funding.
Policy 2.8      RENTAL ASSISTANCE
       Increase the availability of rental assistance for very low-income households.
Policy 2.9      PATH PLANFOR THE HOMELESS
       Expand the City’s Permanent Access to Housing (PATH) Plan to prevent and end
       homelessness and increase housing opportunities to the homeless through acquisition,
       rehabilitation and construction of housing, master leasing and short-term financial assistance.
Policy 2.10     PROMOTE AN EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION OF AFFORDABLE
                HOUSING THROUGHOUT THE COMMUNITY
       The City will undertake a number of efforts to distribute assisted housing widely throughout
       the community and avoid the over-concentration of assisted housing in any particular
       neighborhood, in order to provide a more equitable distribution of households by income and
       by race and ethnicity.
20                                                                              EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Policy 2.11     AFFORDABLE HOUSING                      PREFERENCE             FOR      OAKLAND
                RESIDENTS AND WORKERS
       Implement the policy enacted by the City Council in 2008 granting a preference to Oakland
       residents and Oakland workers to buy or rent affordable housing units assisted by City of
       Oakland and/or Oakland Redevelopment Agency funds provided through its annual Notice of
       Funding Availability (NOFA) process.
Goal 3:         Remove Constraints to the Availability and Affordability of
                Housing for All Income Groups
                Governmental Constraints
Policy 3.1 EXPEDITE AND SIMPLIFY PERMIT PROCESSES
       Continue to implement permit processes that facilitate the provision of housing and annually
       review and revise permit approval processes.
Policy 3.2      FLEXIBLE ZONING STANDARDS
       Allow flexibility in the application of zoning, building, and other regulations.
Policy 3.3      DEVELOPMENT                 FEES         AND         SITE         IMPROVEMENT
                REQUIREMENTS
       Reduce the cost of development through reasonable and predictable fees, and improvement of
       project review standards.
Policy 3.4      INTERGOVERNMENTAL COORDINATION
       Promote intergovernmental coordination in review and approval of residential development
       proposals when more than one governmental agency has jurisdiction.
                Non-Governmental Constraints
Policy 3.5      FINANCING COSTS
       Reduce financing costs for affordable housing development.
Policy 3.6      ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
       Explore programs and funding sources to assist with the remediation of soil contamination on
       sites that maybe redeveloped for housing.
Policy 3.7      COMMUNITY OUTREACH AND EDUCATION
       Increase public acceptance and understanding of affordable development and issues through
       community outreach.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                21
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Goal 4:         Conserve and Improve Older Housing and Neighborhoods
Policy 4.1      HOUSING REHABILITATION LOAN PROGRAMS
       Provide a variety of loan programs to assist with the rehabilitation of owner-occupied and
       rental housing for very low and low-income households.
Policy 4.2      BLIGHT ABATEMENT
       To improve housing and neighborhood conditions, the City should abate blighting conditions
       through a combination of code enforcement, financial assistance, and public investment.
Policy 4.3      HOUSING PRESERVATION AND REHABILITATION
       Support the preservation and rehabilitation of existing housing stock with an emphasis on
       housing occupied by senior citizens, people with disabilities, and low-income populations.
       Encourage the relocation of structurally sound housing units scheduled for demolition to
       compatible neighborhoods when appropriate land can be found. Assist senior citizens and
       people with disabilities with housing rehabilitation so that they may remain in their homes.
       Continue to implement the Mills Act program.
Policy 4.4      Anti-displacement of City of Oakland Residents
       The City will consider strengthening existing policies and introducing new policies or policy
       terms to current City policies to help prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and
       to preserve existing housing affordable to low income residents, including both publicly-
       assisted and non-assisted housing that currently has affordable rents.
Goal 5:         Preserve Affordable Rental Housing
Policy 5.1      PRESERVATION OF AT-RISK HOUSING
       Seek to preserve the affordability of subsidized rental housing for lower-income households
       that may be at-risk of converting to market rate housing.
Policy 5.2      SUPPORT FOR ASSISTED PROJECTS WITH CAPITAL NEEDS
       Work with owners of assisted projects that have substantial needs for capital improvements to
       maintain the use of the properties as decent affordable housing.
Policy 5.3      RENT ADJUSTMENT PROGRAM
       Continue to administer programs to protect existing tenants from unreasonable rent increases.
Policy 5.4      PRESERVATION OF SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY HOTELS
       Seek mechanisms for protecting and improving the existing stock of residential hotels, which
       provide housing of last resort for extremely low-income households.
Policy 5.5      LIMITATIONS ON CONVERSION OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
                TO NON-RESIDENTIAL USE
       Continue to use regulatory controls to limit the loss of housing units due to their conversion
       to non-residential use.
22                                                                              EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Policy 5.6     LIMITATIONS ON CONVERSION OF RENTAL HOUSING TO
               CONDOMINIUMS
       Continue to use regulatory controls to limit the loss of rental housing units due to their
       conversion to condominiums.
Policy 5.7     PRESERVE AND IMPROVE EXISTING OAKLAND HOUSING
               AUTHORITY-OWNED HOUSING
       Continue to preserve and improve existing Oakland Housing Authority-owned rental housing.
Goal 6:        Promote Equal Housing Opportunity
Policy 6.1     FAIR HOUSING ACTIONS
       Actively support efforts to provide education and counseling regarding housing
       discrimination, to investigate discrimination complaints, and to pursue enforcement when
       necessary. Provide a one-stop resource center to address all housing issues faced by Oakland
       residents.
Policy 6.2     REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS
       Provide reasonable accommodations to persons with disabilities in access to public facilities,
       programs, and services.
Policy 6.3     PROMOTE REGIONAL EFFORTS TO EXPAND HOUSING CHOICE
       Encourage future regional housing allocations by ABAG to avoid over-concentration of low-
       income housing in communities with high percentages of such housing.
Policy 6.4     FAIR LENDING
       Work to promote fair lending practices throughout the City to ensure that low-income and
       minority residents have fair access to capital resources needed to acquire and maintain
       housing.
Policy 6.5     ACCOUNTABILITY
       Work to promote accountability by City to the policies it has slated in the Housing Element.
Goal 7:        Promote Sustainable Development and Sustainable
               Communities
Policy 7.1     SUSTAINABLE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
       In conjunction with the City’s adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan (ECAP), develop and
       promote programs to foster the incorporation of sustainable design principles, energy
       efficiency and smart growth principles into residential developments. Offer education and
       technical assistance regarding sustainable development to project applicants.
Policy 7.2     MINIMIZE ENERGY CONSUMPTION
       Encourage the incorporation of energy conservation design features in existing and future
       residential development beyond minimum standards required by State building code.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                  23

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Policy 7.3       ENCOURAGE             DEVELOPMENT               THAT       REDUCES          CARBON
                 EMISSIONS
        Continue to direct development toward existing communities and encourage infill
        development at densities that are higher than—but compatible with-- the surrounding
        communities. Encourage development in close proximity to transit, and with a mix of land
        uses in the same zoning district, or on the same site, so as to reduce the number and
        frequency of trips made by automobile.
Policy 7.4       MINIMIZE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS FROM NEW HOUSING
        Work with developers to encourage construction of new housing that, where feasible, reduces
        the footprint of the building and landscaping, preserves green spaces, and supports ecological
        systems.
Policy 7.5       CLIMATE ADAPTATION AND NEIGHBORHOOD RESILIENCY
        Continue to study the potential local effects of climate change in collaboration with local and
        regional partners, such as BCDC. Identify potential adaptation strategies to improve
        community resilience to climate change, and integrate these strategies in new development,
        where appropriate.
G.      QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
State law (California Government Code Section 65583[b]) requires that the City’s Housing Element
contain quantified objectives, relative to the maintenance, preservation, improvement, and
development of housing. The California Department of Housing and Community Development’s
Housing Element Update Guidance December 2012 recommends that housing elements contain three
broad categories of quantified objectives: new construction, rehabilitation, and conservation. A
subset of the conservation objective is the preservation of at-risk subsidized rental housing.
While the City has identified sites sufficient to meet its entire Regional Housing Needs Allocation
(see Chapter 4, Table 4-2 based on the detail in tables found in Appendix C), the City does not
anticipate having sufficient financial resources to ensure that the entire need for extremely low-, very
low-, low- and moderate-income units will be met. A substantial portion of the City’s resources are
anticipated to be devoted to assisting households with the greatest needs – very-low and low income
households.
Table 8-1, Chapter 8, provides a summary of the City’s quantified objectives for these broad
categories by income level. These objectives are a reasonable estimate of what the City may be
able to achieve based on projects that are currently underway but not yet completed, historical
rates of funding and completion, and estimates of likely funding resources over the next eight
and a half years. These objectives also consider new affordable housing construction not
funded by the City. In recent years there have been a number of developments with TCAC
funding and no City Funding.
24                                                                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
   City of Oakland Quantified Objectives (January 2015 – June 2023)
                                                                                Estimated Number of Units
                                                                                   by Affordability Level
                                                       Extremely
                                                                          Very Low             Low              Moderate             Total
                Activity Type                               Low
                                                          New Housing Construction1
 Units Built                                                 450              940              1,550                100              3,040
                                                             Housing Rehabilitation2
 Substantial Rehab                                           520            1,050              1,750                120              3,440
 Moderate and Minor Home Rehab3                             1,150           2,375              1,150                 --              4,675
                                                     Housing Conservation/Preservation
 At-Risk Units
 (See Ch. 3, Table 3-54)                                     200               22                --                  --               222
                                                             Homebuyer Assistance
 Mortgage & Down payment
 Assistance                                                   23               23               142                 142               330
 1
   Includes units for multi-family rental, homeownership, senior, special needs, and permanent supportive housing. Estimate is based on
 units currently planned or approved, and funded, as well as an estimate of the number of additional units that can be completed by 2014
 with present levels of local financial resources.
 2
   Includes substantial rehabilitation of rental or public housing units.
 3
   Includes existing City of Oakland programs such as: Emergency Home Repair, Home Maintenance and Improvement, Lead-Safe
 Housing, and Minor Home Repair.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                                                        25

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
1.       INTRODUCTION
A.       STATE LAW REQUIREMENTS
California law requires that jurisdictions identify existing and projected housing needs and create a
housing program that states the City’s housing policy goals, objectives and summary of financial
resources for preserving, improving, and developing new housing units. The City of Oakland’s
Housing Element encapsulates this effort. The contents of this document reflect a combination of
local issues, priorities, and state law requirements. California law (Government Code Section 65583)
requires, in part, that each city and county adopt a housing element that contains:
(e) an assessment of housing needs and an inventory of resources and constraints relevant to
    the meeting of these needs;
(f) a statement of the community’s goals, quantified objectives, and policies relative to the
    maintenance, preservation, improvement, and development of housing;
(g) an inventory of developable sites capable of accommodating development of housing for
    a range of income types to meet the City’s share of the regional housing need; and
(h) a program which sets forth a schedule of actions through January 31, 2023 to implement
    the policies and achieve the goals and objectives of the housing element.
B.       REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ALLOCATION
An important part of the Housing Element is the determination of the City’s new housing
construction need. Under California law (California Government Code Section 65584), new housing
construction need is determined, at a minimum, through a regional housing needs allocation (RHNA)
process. In the RHNA process, the California Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD) determines the amount of housing needed for all income groups in each region, based on
existing housing need and expected population growth. In February 2012, HCD determined that, at a
minimum, the nine-county Bay Area should plan for 187,990 units between 2014 to 2022 to satisfy
regional demand.
Each City’s share of regional housing demand is based on a plan prepared by the Association of Bay
Area Governments (ABAG), the Regional Housing Needs Allocation that was adopted in July, 2012.
Oakland (along with all other cities and counties in the state) must plan to accommodate its share of
the housing need of persons at all income levels. Under the ABAG plan, Oakland must accommodate
14,765 new housing units between 2014and 2022 to meet its “fair share” of the state’s housing need.
Of these housing units, 2,059 should be affordable to households earning no more than 50 percent of
median income, 2,075 to households earning between 50 percent and 80 percent of median income,
2,815 to households earning between 80 percent and 120 percent of median income, and 7,816 to
households earning more than 120 percent of median income.
The City’s responsibility under state law in accommodating its regional housing allocation is to
identify adequate sites that will be made available through appropriate zoning and development
standards and with services and facilities, including sewage collection and treatment, domestic water
supply, and septic tanks and wells to encourage the development of a variety of types of housing for
26                                                                                       INTRODUCTION

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
all income levels, including multifamily rental housing, factory-built housing, mobile homes, housing
for agricultural employees, emergency shelters, and transitional housing.
Actual Housing Production to Date Compared to Housing Needs
The planning and production of housing has been strong in Oakland since 1998. As a result, the City
has not only demonstrated its capability to adequately meet Oakland’s housing allocation set forth
under ABAG’s RHNA, but also its ability to surpass the formulated requirement. At the same time,
Oakland has also been successful in addressing the specific needs for affordable housing
development. As of March 2014, the following statistics were accurate:
     • a total of 61 units were constructed, with building permits “finalized”
     • between January 2014 and March 2014, 4,188 market-rate units had Planning Bureau
         approvals, and 221 affordable units were funded, but neither group had started construction
     • 3,247 market rate units and 221 affordable units are in a stage of pre-development, either with
         a formal Zoning pre-application on file with the Planning Bureau, or, in the case of the
         affordable housing units, with preliminary funding commitments or site acquisition assistance
         from the City.
Chapter 4 provides a full analysis of these projects as well as an inventory of “opportunity sites”
capable of accommodating 10,032 additional housing units, using the current allowable densities
permitted by the City’s General Plan and Planning Code.
C.        OAKLAND’S POLICY CONTEXT
While the Oakland Housing Element addresses the State requirements described above, it also
incorporates a number of important local strategies that have been adopted by the City in recent years.
Numerous factors contributed to the changes in the City’s policy context, including a change in the
City’s leadership and administration, the dissolution of the City’s Redevelopment Agency and
resulting changes in the City’s approach to providing (particularly funding) housing programs.
Among these are:
10K-Two Housing Initiative
The City’s current administration, in place since January 2011, has unveiled a 10K Two housing
initiative intended to attract 10,000 residents throughout the City, particularly along transit corridors.
This has taken place against the backdrop of the dissolution of Redevelopment Agencies in the State
of California. Prior to dissolution, Redevelopment Agency tax-increment financing was the most
significant source of funding for neighborhood improvement programs including affordable housing
and small business loans in Oakland. It is within this context that the City is addressing new policies
and funding sources for its housing programs.
General Plan Land Use and Transportation Element (LUTE)
Oakland’s current General Plan Land Use and Transportation Element (LUTE) was adopted in 1998.
The LUTE defines the long-range goals and intentions of the community regarding the nature and
direction of future development within the City of Oakland. A major overall theme of the LUTE is to
encourage the growth of new residential development in Oakland and to direct it to the City’s major
INTRODUCTION                                                                                             27

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
corridors, to downtown Oakland, to transit-oriented districts near the City’s BART stations, along the
waterfront, and to infill projects that are consistent with the character of surrounding areas.
The land use and transportation strategies contained in the current LUTE are being implemented by
the City on an ongoing basis as exemplified by the housing projects already approved and in the
predevelopment process in Oakland. The City’s overall residential land use strategy, as described in
the LUTE, underlies the analysis of potential densities on sites suitable for housing development
presented in Chapter 4 of the Housing Element, as well as many of the goals and actions described in
this chapter. However, new policy direction is needed to guide the City of Oakland for the next 20
years.
The Planning Bureau has identified the need for a General Plan LUTE update to refresh the City’s
vision and policy guidance reflecting changing demographics and market forces. Many of the new
policies in this Housing Element chapter will provide important guidance for the next LUTE update.
As of 2014, the City is beginning discussions around identifying potential funding sources for the
next LUTE update, as well as prioritizing this planning process as part of its strategic planning
workload.
Comprehensive Citywide Housing Strategy
Additionally, through the community outreach process undertaken as part of the 2015-2023 Housing
Element, the City has received valuable feedback which has informed the development of new
policies relating to limiting displacement of long-time residents, providing community benefits,
setting targets for affordable housing for new development and promoting market rate housing. In
response, the City has identified the following initiatives: aligning opportunity sites with Priority
Development Areas, fostering a market rate housing strategy by implementing Specific Plans,
modifying its housing policies to address the displacement of long-time residents, addressing the
foreclosure fall out, capturing the value of recent public investment by incentivizing developers to
provide community benefits through a housing overlay zoning approach, and exploring the feasibility
of an affordable housing impact fee program.
The modified policy framework is included in Chapter 7 of the 2015-2023 Housing Element.
Priority Development Areas
In 2008, California Senate Bill 375, the Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act (SB
375), was adopted, which strengthened coordination between regional housing allocation and
transportation planning. Under SB 375, the Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) is
required to incorporate a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS) into the Regional Transportation
Plan (RTP). The SCS is intended to achieve greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions. To that
end, regional housing allocation planning should be designed to achieve GHG emission reduction
goals by developing efficient land-use strategies such as infill, mixed-use, and/or downtown
revitalization strategies, promote and incentivize a variety of housing types affordable to the
workforce and households with lower incomes, and address climate change by reducing vehicle trips.
In an effort to meet overlapping objectives of SB 375 and Housing Element law, the Association of
Bay Area Governments adopted “Plan Bay Area” with the following objectives:
     •   Increase supply, diversity and affordability of housing
     •   Promote infill development and more efficient land use patterns
     •   Promote intraregional relationship between jobs and housing
28                                                                                         INTRODUCTION

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
     •    Protect environmental resources
     •    Promote socioeconomic equity
     •    Plan Bay Area Framework: Priority Development Areas
The Bay Area’s sustainable growth framework known as Plan Bay Area is built around the concept of
“Priority Development Areas” (PDAs). Priority Development Areas are existing neighborhoods near
transit, nominated by jurisdictions as appropriate locations for future growth. In 2010, the Oakland
City Council adopted Resolution No. 82526 designating six established transit-oriented development
centers in Oakland as PDAs. Oakland designated PDAs at the area surrounding the Eastmont Transit
Center (73rd Avenue and MacArthur Blvd), and the areas around the following BART stations:
12th/19th Streets (downtown), MacArthur, West Oakland, Fruitvale, and Airport/Coliseum.
PDAs are intended to designate growth areas. Most of the opportunity sites identified in the Housing
Element fall within the City of Oakland’s PDAs. PDAs are eligible for funding from MTC and other
Bay Area agencies for infrastructure, transportation and housing funding necessary to support
development in those areas. Therefore, Oakland has positioned itself through the identification of
opportunity sites within PDAs to accommodate future growth in a sustainable manner that achieves
regional objectives of enhancing existing neighborhoods, reducing congestion and protecting natural
resources.
Implementation of the Recently Adopted Specific Plans
The City’s Strategic Planning Division initiated five (5) Specific Plans and one (1) Area Plan during
the 2007-2014 Housing Element period, which identify housing policies specific to their study areas:
Lake Merritt Station Area (Specific) Plan, Broadway Valdez Specific Plan, West Oakland Specific
Plan, Coliseum Area Specific Plan, and Central Estuary Area Plan. Each Plan included extensive
community outreach processes and has resulted in specific zoning proposals. These Specific and
Area Plans will facilitate the construction of nearly 17,000 new housing units in the City of Oakland.
The completion of the Specific and Area Plans will provide these substantial housing gains in two
respects: environmental clearance and community buy-in for future housing projects. Each planning
process involved extensive community participation which culminated with significant community
buy-in to the policies and development framework outlined in the plans, thus minimizing possible
community opposition to future housing development projects.
Affordable Housing Strategies
Affordable housing is a major policy priority for the City of Oakland. The City has had an active
housing development program for over 30 years, and has assisted in the development of thousands of
units of newly constructed and substantially rehabilitated housing for very low, low and moderate
income families, seniors and people with special needs. The City has also devoted substantial
resources to preservation of the existing housing stock, including homes owned by low income
families, and to expanding opportunities for low income renters to become homeowners.
The City’s affordable housing strategy is outlined in the Consolidated Plan for Housing and
Community Development prepared in May 2010 (and to be updated for submittal to HUD in 2015).
The Consolidated Plan – which is required as part of the City’s federally-funded housing and
community development programs – sets forth the City’s needs, market conditions, strategies, and
actions for addressing the housing needs of very low and low income households. The plan is
designed to achieve the following goals:
INTRODUCTION                                                                                         29

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                 •    Increase and maintain the supply of affordable supportive housing for low-
                      income and special needs populations, including the homeless;
                 •    Create a suitable living environment through neighborhood revitalization and
                      improvements in public facilities and services; and
                 •    Expand economic opportunities for lower income households.
Key components of this strategy are outlined below.
Expand the supply of affordable rental housing (Rental Housing Production).
The City provides funding to nonprofit and for profit developers to develop affordable rental housing
through new construction and substantial rehabilitation. Major funding sources include the federal
HOME program and property tax “boomerang funds” (formerly Redevelopment Tax-increment). The
City also provides funding to nonprofit developers for certain predevelopment expenses.
The City is also engaging in new innovative strategies to transform its abandoned properties into new
affordable rental housing through the Community Buying Program that in launched in 2014.
Preserve the supply of affordable rental housing.
The City provides funding to nonprofit and for profit developers to preserve existing affordable
housing at risk of converting to market-rate housing. Funding will be provided from HOME funds.
Use restrictions are extended for the maximum feasible period, and owners will be required to
commit to renew project-based rental assistance contracts so long as renewals are offered. The City
supports efforts to secure Federal, State and private funding for these projects.
Expand the supply of affordable ownership housing (Ownership Housing Production).
The City provides funding to nonprofit and for profit developers to develop affordable
homeownership units. Major funding sources include the federal HOME program and
Redevelopment “boomerang funds.” The City generally seeks to make such housing permanently
affordable by imposing recorded resale controls. It is possible that the specific affordability
mechanisms will be modified to respond to changing market conditions and to balance long term
affordability with the objective of allowing homebuyers to retain sufficient equity to move up in the
housing market at a future date, thus making the assisted units available to more first-time
homebuyers. Regardless of the specific mechanisms, the City will strive to ensure that new
affordable ownership housing remains affordable for at least 45 years.
The City is also engaging in new innovative strategies to transform its abandoned properties into new
affordable ownership housing through the Community Buying Program that in launched in 2014.
30                                                                                        INTRODUCTION

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Expand ownership opportunities for first time homebuyers (Homebuyer Assistance).
The City is engaged in a variety of efforts to provide opportunities for first-time homebuyers to
purchase homes. The City’s Mortgage Assistance Program provides deferred payment second
mortgages to low and very low income homebuyers. Other programs provided by the City and by
organizations with whom the City has developed partnerships include counseling and education for
first-time homebuyers, and efforts to provide new and innovative mortgage products.
Improve existing housing stock (Housing Rehabilitation).
Much of Oakland’s housing stock is old and in need of repair and renovation. The City uses
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and HOME funds to assist moderate, low and
extremely low income homeowners to rehabilitate their homes. Funds are targeted to the City’s
Community Development Districts to stimulate revitalization of low and moderate income
neighborhoods. The City’s Housing Rehabilitation includes programs to correct major code
deficiencies, make emergency and minor repairs, and abate lead-based paint hazards.
Provide rental assistance for extremely and very low income families (Rental
Assistance).
For extremely low and very low income households, especially those with incomes less than 30
percent of median income, capital subsidies alone are insufficient. The City actively supports efforts
by the Oakland Housing Authority to obtain additional Section 8 vouchers, and to find new ways to
make those vouchers more effective, including the provision of project-based assistance.
Develop housing with supportive services for seniors and persons with special
needs.
The City provides financial assistance (with HOME and Redevelopment “boomerang funds”) to
develop new affordable housing with appropriate supportive services for seniors and for people with
disabilities. The City also administers Federal grant funds such as CDBG-funded Access
Improvement Program and for the Oakland metropolitan area under the Housing Opportunities for
Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) program.
Prevent Foreclosures and Stabilize Neighborhoods.
In contrast to the height of the subprime mortgage crisis in about 2008, the majority of Oakland’s
homeowners who face foreclosures today have owned their homes for over 6 years, including many
who have owned for several decades. In partnership with community groups and financial
institutions, the City has been engaging in new innovative strategies to prevent foreclosures including
the development of a comprehensive model integrating door-to-door outreach with housing
counseling and legal services with advocacy and bank escalation. The City partnership also
developed a new loan fund to reset mortgages to today’s current market value, as well as new funds to
help homeowners and renters with affordability gap needs.
Additionally, the City’s new Housing Assistance Center assists vulnerable Oakland residents through
a one-stop model program. In 2014, the City launched a new one-stop housing services center that
provided referrals for residents regarding their housing needs as well as dedicated and private rooms
for City staff to meeting with residents regarding available housing services. This one-stop model
allows vulnerable residents to go to one place to address their housing needs and questions.
INTRODUCTION                                                                                          31

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Remove impediments to fair housing (Fair Housing).
The City provides financial support to organizations that provide residents with counseling,
information, and legal advice and referrals. The City’s Fair Housing programs are targeted to low
and extremely low income residents. As a part of this effort, investigation of fair housing complaints
and enforcement of fair housing laws will continue to be funded as part of the effort to expand fair
housing choices. Fair Housing programs support minorities, persons with disabilities, seniors,
families with children and other protected classes.
Implement a “Housing First” homeless strategy via Oakland’s Permanent Access To
Housing (PATH) Plan.
The City’s Permanent Access To Housing (PATH) program is run in parallel to an Alameda County-
wide program called the EveryOne Home plan. Both EveryOne Home and PATH are based on a
“Housing First” model that emphasizes rapid client access to permanent housing rather than
prolonged stays in shelters and transitional housing. What differentiates a Housing First approach is
that the immediate and primary focus is on helping individuals and families quickly access and
sustain permanent housing. The City of Oakland uses a combination of Federal, State and local funds
for PATH Plan implementation.
Housing Equity Road Map
The City’s Department of Housing and Community Development staff, along with Urban Strategies
Council and Policy Link are developing a Housing Equity Roadmap to provide a concrete set of
policy and program recommendations for City implementation in the next 5 to 10 years. The Housing
Equity Roadmap will include information about demographic changes, including at a neighborhood
level that are critical to policy development, as well as best practice research of effective efforts from
other jurisdictions. The housing problems that will be addressed through the Housing Equity
Roadmap include the following:
     •   Housing habitability,
     •   New affordable housing production,
     •   Preservation of existing non-subsidized affordable housing stock, and
     •   Transforming abandoned properties into new affordable housing.
Sustainable Oakland
The City of Oakland is committed to becoming a model sustainable community, in which all people
have the opportunity to live safe, healthy and fulfilling lives; protecting a clean and ecologically
healthy environment; growing a strong economy; maintaining quality housing affordable and
accessible to Oakland residents; and fostering a safe, equitable and vibrant community are all critical
components of this vision.
The Sustainable Oakland program, launched by the Oakland City Council as the Sustainable
Community Development Initiative in 1998, works to advance Oakland’s vision of sustainability
through innovative programs and practices addressing social equity, improved environmental quality,
and sustainable economic development. Program activities include: fostering inter-agency
cooperation to address key sustainability problems and opportunities and improve performance;
32                                                                                          INTRODUCTION

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
tracking and reporting on sustainability performance; promoting Oakland’s sustainability story;
advising on opportunities to improve sustainability performance; performing community outreach;
fostering communication between Citywide stakeholders; and seeking innovative ways to finance
sustainability improvements.
In recognition of the leadership and actions of the Oakland community, SustainLane.com ranked
Oakland 9th among the largest 50 U.S. cities in 2008 in overall sustainability performance 5. The City
of Oakland has adopted a range of significant policies and implemented a number of programs and
projects that help to reduce climate pollution, green the city and move us toward our goal of
becoming a model sustainable city. Individual choices, resourceful collaborations, and the
tremendous dedication and efforts of community members all contribute to help conserve energy,
curb global climate change, reduce our dependence on oil and polluting vehicles, create green jobs,
grow green businesses, reduce waste, enhance our built environment, restore creeks, and green the
natural environment in which we live.
D.        PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND POLICY
          DEVELOPMENT
Public Participation as an Ongoing Process
State law (California Government Code section 65583(c)(8)) requires the City to make “a diligent
effort…to achieve public participation of all economic segments of the community in the
development of the housing element….”
Public participation in Oakland has been an ongoing process since the adoption of the previous
Housing Element. In particular, the identification of housing issues, needs, and strategies has been
part of the following City’s planning processes and ongoing public dialogue on housing issues:
     •    The City’s Strategic Planning Division initiated five Specific and Area Plans including the
          Central Estuary Area Plan, Lake Merritt Station Area Plan, Broadway Valdez Specific Plan,
          West Oakland Specific Plan and the Coliseum Specific Plan. These plans have been
          geographically dispersed throughout the City, have included extensive community outreach
          processes and have resulted in long lists of community desires, including housing needs. All
          public participation efforts are captured on the Strategic Planning Division’s website
          (http://www2.oaklandnet.com/Government/o/PBN/OurOrganization/PlanningZoning/index.ht
          m).
     •    The City’s Strategic Initiatives Division of the Department of Housing and Community
          Development is developing the Oakland Housing Equity Roadmap—an action plan of
          possible City policies, programs, and investments to address Oakland’s current housing crisis.
          The recommendations are based upon new demographic data analysis identifying priority
          housing problems and best practice research. For this effort, staff will be convening meetings
          with stakeholder groups to develop any policy recommendations.
Efforts to Achieve Public Participation in the Housing Element
2015-2023 Update
The ongoing identification of housing issues through these separate processes folded into the needs
assessment and development of goals and policies for the Housing Element update. The City
5
  See Sustainlane, http://www.sustainlane.com/us-city-rankings/
INTRODUCTION                                                                                          33

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
prepared an outreach plan specific to the Housing Element update process. A combination of
internet/social media and public meetings were used to better understand Oakland’s community
housing needs and issues. Each of these methods is described below.
     I.       Internet and Social Media
The City used a variety of internet and social media tools to engage the community in the Housing
Element conversation. “Engage Oakland” is a community online forum where a series of housing
related questions have been posed, on which Oakland residents, business owners, developers, activists
and others have provided ideas and feedback. This input continued to be taken into account by City
staff when refining proposals about housing policy. Following is the link to this website:
http://www.engageoakland.com/
The 2015-2023 Housing Element had an up-to-date webpage where useful links, announcements and
reports can be viewed. The project also has a dedicated email account for receiving feedback.
Further, the City sent emails via its “GovDelivery” distribution system. This system allows interested
parties to sign-up to receive email updates about the Housing Element update. The Housing Element
website address is:
http://www2.oaklandnet.com/Government/o/PBN/OurOrganization/PlanningZoning/OAK045364
City staff compiled an email list of just under 450 email addresses that was used to broadcast Housing
Element 2015-2023 meetings and requests for public comments. The first email was sent in early
February 2014 and subsequent emails were sent approximately bi-weekly up until the date of the
publication of the draft document sent to California Department of Housing and Community
Development. The email list was compiled from interested parties email lists from: Central Estuary
Specific Planning Area, Lake Merritt BART Station Area Planning, Broadway Valdez District
Specific Planning, Neighborhood Associations, Design Guidelines Planning, requests from people
who staff met at various meetings, participants in CDBG’s 7 Community Development Districts,
participants in the former Redevelopment Agency’s Project Area Committees, City Staff, City
Council Members and their staff, and Planning Commissioners.
City staff also publicized Housing Element 2015-2023 update efforts on local and regional housing
organization’s (East Bay Housing Organizations and Non Profit Housing Association of Northern
California) email listserve mailings.
     II.      Public Meetings
Staff has presented informational reports and solicited feedback as part of the outreach process at the
Mayor’s Commission on Persons with Disabilities, Commission on Aging, Planning Commission,
and Community and Economic Development Committee of the City Council. In addition, staff has
incorporated comments on housing development from the five specific and area planning processes
over the last several years. The community has been invited to attend these meetings and participate
in the discussion and voice their opinion. Many of these meetings occurred during the data and needs
collection phase, as well as at the present time, during the presentation of the draft Housing Element
Update. Comments received at all phases will be reviewed and incorporated into the final 2015-2023
Housing Element.
Additionally, Federal funding sources used by the City require public participation in the
development of funding applications and programs, annual performance evaluations open to public
comment, and annual action plan updates that set priorities for the coming year with participation by
the public. Those documents are the Annual Action Plan and the Consolidated Annual Performance
34                                                                                        INTRODUCTION

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
and Evaluation Report (CAPER) for the City’s Five Year Consolidated Plan for Housing and
Community Development. These documents require extensive public notification, and the funding
sources strongly encourage community outreach and participation.
To ensure that all segments of the population can participate in public meetings, the City selected
locations that are accessible to persons with disabilities and attempts to hold public forums in
locations that are accessible to those without private vehicles.
    III.       Distribution of Draft Document and Request for Public Comment
An announcement of the preparation of the Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element was presented to the
public to gain feedback about the housing issues in Oakland and the effectiveness of existing housing
policies. The Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element was also presented to the public, as outlined below
            I.     The preparation of the Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element was presented at the
                   following advisory board meetings and public hearings:
                     •   February 19, 2014, City Planning Commission
                     •   March 5, 2014, Mayor’s Commission on Aging
                     •   March 25, 2014, CED Committee
                     •   April 14, 2014, Mayor’s Commission on Persons with Disabilities
           II.     The Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element was presented to City Planning Commission
                   on May 7, 2014.
          III.     Affordable Housing Focus Group to discuss the Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element
                   on June 11, 2014.
          IV.      A survey on the constraints to developing housing in Oakland was sent to market rate
                   housing developers.
           V.      A request for public comment was circulated via email and postings in newspapers
                   and on the internet.
          VI.      A discussion thread has been posted on the City’s social media site, “Engage
                   Oakland” since March, 2014.
The draft Housing Element was published May 2, 2014 and was made available in both hard copy at
the City Planning Department public counter, at the City Clerk’s Office, at the main branch of the
Oakland Public Library, and on the City’s web site. Additionally, a Notice to Request Public
Comment was emailed to the City’s interested parties email list on May 19, 2014 which requested
comments by June 16, 2014.
E.       ORGANIZATION OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
The Oakland Housing Element, a part of the General Plan, is a comprehensive statement of the City’s
housing needs and strategies. The City has adopted other housing policies and plans that focus on
specific topics (such as fair housing, homelessness, and the use of federal funds for low-income
housing). The Housing Element addresses a broader range of issues than these other planning
documents, including economic, social, planning, and regulatory issues.
INTRODUCTION                                                                                         35

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
The Housing Element provides the guiding principles and over-arching policies that define the City’s
housing strategy although much of the implementation for the Element is defined through the
following other planning documents:
    •   General Plan Land Use and Transportation Element,
    •   Oakland Planning Code,
    •   Consolidated Plan,
    •   PATH Plan, and
    •   Fair Housing Plan (Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing).
The Housing Element incorporates strategies and implementing actions from these other plans and
has been reviewed for consistency with these plans.
This Housing Element is divided into the following chapters:
        Executive Summary. The executive summary provides an overview and road map of the
        City’s findings and conclusions on housing issues and needs; land, funding, and other
        resources to meet those needs; and goals, policies, actions, and quantified objectives.
        1. Introduction provides an overview of State requirements, a description of the public
        participation process, and a summary of the organization of the Housing Element.
        2. Evaluation of 2007-2014 Programs summarizes the City’s achievements in
        implementing programs under the previous Housing Element, which was adopted in
        December 2010. Lessons learned from an evaluation of achievements have been considered
        in the development of new goals, policies, and implementing actions in this Housing
        Element.
        3. Existing Conditions/Opportunities describes current conditions and trends related to
        population, housing, and employment. Topics covered in this chapter include population and
        household characteristics, income and poverty, housing cost and condition, publicly assisted
        housing and housing programs, the status of subsidized rental housing that could convert to
        market-rate rental housing, and employment characteristics. Appendix A describes the
        methodology used for the housing condition survey. Appendix B contains a list of privately-
        owned subsidized rental housing to support the analysis of subsidized housing at risk of being
        converted to market-rate housing.
        4. Land Inventory describes the availability and characteristics of land on which to develop
        housing to meet the City’s future needs. Among the issues covered in this chapter are the
        number, types, and affordability of housing units constructed since the beginning of the
        period covered by the Housing Element; the City’s ability to accommodate its remaining
        share of the region’s housing needs under the ABAG RHNA; and potential constraints that
        could affect development potential on housing opportunity sites. Appendix C contains a
        detailed inventory of sites discussed in this chapter.
        5. Housing Program Resources summarizes programs and funding resources available in
        the City of Oakland to assist in the development, rehabilitation, and conservation of housing
36                                                                                       INTRODUCTION

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
         affordable to low- and moderate-income households. Appendix D contains a directory with
         details on City housing programs.
         6. Analysis of Constraints to Housing describes potential governmental and non-
         governmental factors that could affect the availability and cost of housing, particularly for
         low- and moderate-income households and population groups with special needs.
         7. Goals, Policies, and Actions contains the City’s housing goals, policies, and
         implementation actions—the heart of the City’s strategy for addressing its housing needs.
         The goals adopted in this Element address the provision of adequate sites for the development
         of housing (especially for low- and moderate-income households), constraints to the
         availability and affordability of housing, conservation and improvement of older housing and
         neighborhoods, preservation of affordable rental housing, equal housing opportunity,
         sustainable development, and public access to information through technology. Also
         included in this chapter is an implementation schedule that specifies responsible agencies,
         timeframes, potential funding sources, and objectives for each implementing action.
         8. Quantified Objectives contains a summary of the City’s quantified objectives for housing
         development, rehabilitation, and conservation (preservation of affordable rental housing).
         9. Other Requirements demonstrates consistency with the General Plan and policies, and
         various additional requirements of the 2015-2023 Housing Element including flood hazard
         land management, coastal zone and disadvantaged communities’ requirements, as well as
         water and sewer priority requirements. The chapter also identifies opportunities for energy
         conservation in residential developments.
F.       GENERAL PLAN CONSISTENCY
State law requires the Housing Element to contain a statement of “the means by which consistency
will be achieved with other general plan elements and community goals” (California Government
Code, Section 65583(c)(7)). There are two aspects of this analysis: 1) an identification of other
General Plan goals, policies, and programs that could affect implementation of the Housing Element
or that could be affected by the implementation of the Housing Element, and 2) an identification of
actions to ensure consistency between the Housing Element and affected parts of other General Plan
elements (See Chapter 9).
     1. Other General Plan goals, policies and programs
The City revised the Land Use and Transportation Element of the Oakland General Plan in 1998.
This element outlines the vision for Oakland, establishing an agenda to encourage sustainable
economic development, ensure and build on the transportation network, increase residential and
commercial development in downtown, reclaim the waterfront for open space and mixed uses, and
protect existing neighborhoods while concentrating new development in key areas. The Policy
Framework and Strategy Diagram contained in that document shows areas that will be maintained
and enhanced and those that are targeted for growth and change. In particular, higher density
development is encouraged in the Downtown, along major corridors, at the waterfront, and near
BART stations.
INTRODUCTION                                                                                           37

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Fifteen broad classifications are depicted on the Land Use Diagram, grouped into five major
categories, to graphically depict the type and intensity of allowable future development in various
parts of the City. These classifications are the key to understanding the diagram and the City’s land
use pattern. They are intended to take into account the existing and historical patterns of development
in Oakland. The Land Use Diagram graphically represents the intentions of the Policy Framework
and Strategy Diagram reflecting areas of growth, enhancement, and conservation; it provides a basis
for evaluating future development and future demand for services. The two diagrams satisfy State
requirements that the General Plan designate the general distribution, location and extent of land uses
and establish standards for population density and building intensity.
The General Plan element with the closest relationship to the Housing Element is the Land Use and
Transportation Element, which contains both the policies that direct the location, density, and types
of residential uses throughout the City, and the circulation system to support that development. The
Noise, Open Space and Recreation, and Historic Preservation Elements of the General Plan also
contain goals, policies and programs relevant to building and rehabilitating housing in the City, but
these identified actions do not effect implementation of the Housing Element (see Chapter 9 “Other
Requirements”).
    2. Ensuring Consistency between Housing Element and General Plan
The vision and specific policies contained in the Land Use and Transportation Element seek to
encourage and facilitate the types of infill, re-use, mixed-use, and central city/corridor-oriented
residential development that are the focus of the Housing Element and the City’s ability to
accommodate its regional housing allocation from ABAG. Most of the housing to be provided in
Oakland will result from the development or redevelopment of under-used and infill parcels.
Anticipated development on these sites are expected to be in compliance with policy standards for
noise, safety, open space, recreation, and conservation contained in the other General Plan elements.
The polices in the other General Plan elements will advance the ability of the City to achieve the
objectives contained in the 2015-2023 Housing Element and implement specific housing policies and
programs. Likewise, the Housing Element policies will advance the implementation of policies and
programs in the other General Plan elements. The City has therefore determined that the updated
Housing Element is consistent with the General Plan.
38                                                                                         INTRODUCTION

                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
2.      EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
State law (California Government Code Section 65588 (a)) requires cities and counties to review their
housing elements to evaluate:
    •   the appropriateness of housing goals, objectives, and policies;
    •   the effectiveness of the housing element in the attainment of the community’s housing goals
        and objectives; and
    •   the progress in implementation of the housing element.
The City’s previous Housing Element was adopted December 21, 2010 and covered the period
January 1, 2007 to June 30, 2014.
During the 2007-2014 Housing Element period, Oakland’s Regional Housing Need Determination
was 14,629 housing units. City staff identified opportunity sites to accommodate 8,672 to 10,759
housing units based on low and high estimates. The low estimates were most likely number of
housing units, based on average densities for comparable recent developments (such as those for
housing projects recently completed, under construction, approved, and planned), while the high
estimates were the maximum allowable number of units that were calculated based on the maximum
residential densities allowable under the General Plan. The City was unable to meet the overall
housing production goals and fell short of those production requirements. Unfortunately, the City
cannot control the housing market conditions to encourage housing development. In addition,
subsidies available to develop affordable housing units can only stretch so far given the high land and
development costs during this planning period. The City permitted the development of 1,664 very
low-, low-, and moderate-income housing units with a grand total of 3,697 housing units permitted
(Table 2-1).
The 2007-2014 Housing Element lists eight housing goals with policies and policy actions to be taken
to achieve those goals. Six of those goals are dictated by California statute. Seven of the eight policy
goals identified in the 2007-2014 Housing Element will continue into the next planning period. (See
Chapter 7 Goals, Policies and Actions)
As anticipated, the City encountered some difficulty in achieving very low-, low- and moderate-
income housing production goals in the 2007-2014 planning period. The increasing gap between
housing costs that very low-income household can afford and the cost of producing very low-income
housing units, combined with the limited amount of subsidies to produce such housing, continues to
challenge the City’s ability to meet ABAG’s regional housing allocation for the City for these
households. City staff will continue its work on regulatory incentives and finding new sources of
financial assistance to address as much of the very low-income housing need as possible.
The City continues to encourage affordable housing development by issuing the annual Notice of
Funding Availability. This competitive funding process has created a consistent and well-defined
process for prioritizing and selecting housing projects from a pool of applicants that submit proposals.
The City’s Department of Housing and Community Development continues to improve coordination
of housing assistance programs, regulatory incentives, and other actions to achieve the City’s housing
goals.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                      39

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Housing Production Targets
The City of Oakland’s housing unit production goals established by the 2007-2014 Housing Element
and building permits issued are summarized in Table 2-1below.
                                                           Table 2-1
 Comparison of Housing Needs and Housing Production, 2007-2014
                                                                                                 Building Permits Issued
State Identified Affordability Categories                         2007-2014 RHNA                  2007-December, 2013
Very Low (up to 50% AMI)                                                              1,900                                    1,257
Low (51-80% AMI)                                                                      2,098                                       385
Moderate (81-120% AMI)                                                                3,142                                        22
Above Moderate (> 120% AMI)                                                           7,489                                    2,188
Total                                                                               14,629                                     3,852
Source: City of Oakland building permit data, 2007-2013; see “City of Oakland Annual Progress Report on Implementation of Housing
Element, 2013.”
Appropriateness and Effectiveness of 2007-2014 Programs
The 2007-2014 Housing Element established policies and programs to address the following housing
goals:
     •     provide adequate sites suitable for housing for all income groups
     •     promote the development of adequate housing for low- and moderate-income households
     •     remove constraints to the availability and affordability of housing for all income groups
     •     conserve and improve older housing and neighborhoods
     •     preserve affordable rental housing
     •     promote equal housing opportunity
     •     promote sustainable development and smart growth
     •     increase public access to information through technology.
A summary of policy goals for the 2007-2014 Housing Element is presented below followed by a
detailed analysis of each goal, its policies and actions taken in support of those goals.
Goal 1: Provide Adequate Sites Suitable for Housing for All Income Groups
The City adopted a variety of policies to encourage housing development. Highlights of these
policies include housing programs targeted at the Downtown and major corridors of the City,
updating and adopting Citywide zoning that include updating residential and commercial zones
implementing the General Plan Land Use and Transportation Element designations and revised
development standards for multi-family buildings, and increasing residential densities in downtown
as part of Central Business District zoning update. The City is currently in the process of evaluating
and revising all of its parking regulations including those for secondary units, which is scheduled for
40                                                                                   EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
adoption in 2014. The City, in compliance with SB2, also recently adopted amendments to the
Planning Code by identifying a zone or zones where emergency shelters can be permitted outright.
The city continues its work to encourage inclusion of mobile and manufactured housing in
appropriate locations and re-use of industrial and commercial buildings for joint living quarters and
working spaces.
Goal 2: Promote the Development of Adequate Housing for Low- and Moderate-
Income Households
The City has employed a combination of financial assistance and regulatory measures to stimulate the
production of housing and preserve affordable housing opportunities. The City sponsors programs
that supports renters and promotes homeownership.
The City continued with an annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) process whereby
interested developers can submit proposals when city funds are available. These funds are allocated
through a competitive application process. The City advertised the availability of funds, program
guidelines, and application requirement through its web site and mailed notices to housing providers.
During the Housing Element 2007 - 2014 planning period, the City of Oakland awarded $84,624,251
for new construction of housing for Senior and Special Needs populations and $45,838,781 for
rehabilitation/preservation projects including units for Senior and Special Needs populations.
Housing Development Services provided $489,209 in pre-development loan and grant funding from
2007-2014. The allocation of these pre-development funds resulted in project assessment and
feasibility studies for 10 projects. About half of those projects proceeded from concept to a viable
affordable housing project. This program achieved its goals as planned and as stated in the Housing
Element's policy guidance.
The City in partnership with other organizations has developed and promoted a number of programs
to expand opportunities for lower-income households to become homeowners. Housing
Development Services’ first time homebuyer program provided approximately 372 loans totaling
$22,459,765 from 2007-2014. Working together with the Oakland Housing Authority, the City of
Oakland leveraged Section 8 home ownership vouchers to Section 8 and public housing clients
through the OHA Homeownership program. Since 2007, 80 participants have purchased homes
through the OHA Homeownership Program. OHA achieved the goal of expanding the pool of
Section 8 vouchers by growing its program nearly 25% since the last Housing Element. OHA also
was awarded 265 Veteran's Affairs Supportive Housing Vouchers, which expands the Section 8
program to chronically homeless veterans. The City has worked with the Oakland Community Land
Trust to implement the Neighborhood Stabilization Program to rehabilitate foreclosed properties. By
the middle of 2014, the status of Oakland Community Land Trust’s activities was there were 17
acquired foreclosed homes. One of the homes was demolished due to the condition of the house; 16
homes have been completely rehabilitated. Of those homes, 3 are for sale and 13 of them have been
sold.
The City adopted a revised density bonus ordinance in June 2014 with the intent of permitting
projects to exceed the maximum allowable density set by zoning, if they include units set aside for
occupancy by very low, low and moderate income households and seniors.
The City’s Redevelopment Agency was dissolved as of February 1, 2012. Although there is great
need for continued support of affordable housing development, the City’s Low/Mod housing fund
supported by Redevelopment Agency tax-increment is no longer available. Other affordable funding
sources include the City’s Jobs/Housing impact fee. The Jobs/Housing Impact fee is an important
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                      41

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
effort to link affordable housing development with the development of commercial development and
resultant housing demand. During the 2007-14 Housing Element Planning period $1,085,509 in
Jobs/Housing Impact Fee funds had been deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund for use
toward affordable housing development. These funds were all allocated for affordable housing
developments in FY 2013-14 NOFA awards.
Oakland’s Permanent Access to Housing (PATH) Strategy is an Oakland-specific companion to
Alameda County’s EveryOne Home Plan, a countywide plan to be used as a roadmap for ending
homelessness in the county over the next fifteen years. EveryOne Home is a comprehensive plan for
providing housing and wrap around support services to homeless people in Alameda County and to
those people living with serious mental health illness and HIV/AIDS. Both EveryOne Home and
PATH are based on a “Housing First” program model that emphasizes rapid client access to
permanent housing rather than prolonged stays in shelters and transitional housing. The City services
in this strategy included the development of the pipeline process for permanent supportive housing,
capacity building for homeless services providers and housing developers, the redesign of the
homeless service delivery system and the expansion of street action teams and outreach services.
Goal 3: Remove Constraints to the Availability and Affordability of Housing for All
Income Groups
Straightforward permitting, flexible zoning regulations, and generous density requirements are some
of the methods Oakland uses to remove potential regulatory constraints to housing. Multi-family
housing continues to be permitted in Oakland; with the adoption of the Citywide Zoning Update in
April 2011, the areas of the City where multifamily housing can be built, expanded. A total of 115
multi-family structures were completed within the planning period, 14 of which were affordable.
Special needs housing is conditionally permitted in many residential and commercial zones
throughout the City; furthermore, a Reasonable Accommodations policy was adopted in July 2014
providing flexibility in the application of the Planning Code for persons with disabilities. Also in
July 2014, the City adopted zones to permit emergency shelters by-right. Other efforts to improve
permitting include implementing discretionary permit processes that include objective approval
criteria and assigning priority to affordable housing projects. CEQA exemptions are also used for
development projects where appropriate. The City's Standard Conditions of Approval are continually
updated to reflect current best practices and new legislation. The City is continuing to regularly
update its environmental review procedures (e.g., CEQA guidelines and thresholds and policies) to
further streamline environmental review; a new edition was issued in 2011.
The City continues the use of alternative accommodation and equivalent facilitation of the California
Building Codes to address the special housing needs of people with disabilities and to facilitate the
rehabilitation of older dwelling units and maintain the provisions in the Planning Code for planned
unit developments on sites where the strict application of zoning standards could make development
less flexible. In 2011, City staff began the parking study and are anticipating revising the parking
regulations of the 1965 zoning code during the 2015-2023 Housing Element cycle. The new Central
Business District regulations, including open space regulations, were adopted in 2009 with the intent
of increasing the residential density and to reduce per-unit development costs.
Citizen opposition is a significant obstacle to the development of affordable housing. The City
actively supports East Bay Housing Organizations and other entities in community outreach efforts
and educational campaigns to gain community support for affordable housing.
42                                                                EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Goal 4: Conserve and Improve Older Housing and Neighborhoods
To improve housing and neighborhood conditions, the City combined public investment, code
enforcement, financial assistance for commercial revitalization, and financial assistance to improve
the condition of residential properties. The City funded loans for owner-occupied housing in single-
family neighborhoods for minor home repair, emergency home repair, and lead hazard control and
painting. In addition, the City funded rehabilitation loans for both owner-occupied and rental
buildings. In order to reduce the number of substandard vacant housing units, the City created a new
vacant housing program to target acquisition and rehabilitation of these underutilized structures.
Code enforcement is also an important aspect of multifamily property rehabilitation. The City
continued to implement several code enforcement strategies, including tenant habitability inspections,
graffiti abatement, blight and unsecured property inspections, imminent hazard abatement and tenant
relocation inspections, and certificate of occupancy inspections for vacated units that have been
rehabilitated. The City targeted funding and code enforcement activities in designated neighborhoods
to concentrate and increase the effectiveness these actions.
The Foreclosed and Vacant Building Registration Program for bank-owned properties (REOs) was
implemented in 2010 and amended in 2012 to include properties with a recorded Notice of Default
(NOD) and occupied properties that were either NOD or REO. An on-line registry was developed to
administer the Program more efficiently. If a property is in default but determined to be vacant and
abandoned by the owner, the lender is required to maintain the property. Since the amendment of this
ordinance in September 2012, over 2,300 properties have been registered. As of March 2014, there
were 1,167 properties with active registrations, of which 188 were bank owned. In addition, a new
ordinance was adopted and a new registry was implemented in March 2013 for non-owner occupied
purchases of formerly defaulted properties. This ordinance requires an inspection to confirm building
code compliance. There have been 42 investor registrations to date. The Foreclosed and Vacant
Building Registry enables building services to respond quickly and effectively to complaints
regarding blight and property conditions and monitor monthly inspection reports completed by
property managers. Despite the decrease in the number of foreclosures that end up in bank
ownership, defaults persist. The inclusion of defaulted properties in the registry has become a critical
part of the program's success. The non-owner occupied NOD/REO properties registration program
helps to prevent building health and safety issues from persisting for new occupants of formerly
distressed homes. Proactive spot inspections of 1,073 properties were completed in 2012, over 500
inspections in 2013, and 100 inspections in the first quarter of 2014. As a result of the new systems
put into place, efforts to track all abandoned properties in the City are under discussion, as is restoring
the receivership program to help facilitate abandoned properties back to productive use.
The City continues its efforts for preservation and rehabilitation of existing housing stock with an
emphasis on housing occupied by senior citizens, people with disabilities, and low-income
population. The City continued implementation of Mills Act contracts to stimulate the restoration of
historic properties. The year 2010 was the first year of a permanent Mills Act Program, following a
successful two year pilot program in the City of Oakland. As of 2013, the sixth year of the program,
there are 25 residential properties with recorded Mills Act Contracts approved to receive a property
tax reduction in exchange for a long-term contract to put the property's tax savings into the
rehabilitation of the building. The property must be a Designated Historic Property; the designation
process can occur concurrently with the Mills Act application.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                         43
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Goal 5: Preserve Affordable Rental Housing
The City assisted in the rehabilitation of low-income rental housing owned and operated by
affordable housing organizations, while the Oakland Housing Authority (OHA) focused on the
maintenance and improvement of public housing. Over a seven year period, OHA awarded 1,497
project-based Section 8 vouchers, 1,093 of which are under contract.
A gap in the City’s strategy related to substandard housing conditions has been the development of
adequate incentives and funding in support of rental housing rehabilitation for profit-motivated
property owners. The traditional sources of state and federal funding are no longer available: the
Federal Rental Rehabilitation Program has been eliminated, and HOME requires long-term rent and
income restrictions. Profit-motivated property owners of market rate units are reluctant to restrict the
rents they may charge in exchange for low-interest loans making these funding sources difficult to
use.
The Oakland Housing Authority continues its efforts to rehabilitate and preserve units in the Oakland
Affordable Housing Preservation Initiatives portfolio, extending their long-term viability as an
affordable housing resource. OHA has reduced the number of public housing units in its portfolio to
1,605 units. Tassafaronga was a former 87-unit public housing site and was replaced with project-
based Section 8 and Tax Credit units. Tassafaronga is completed and has 150 units. There are no
public housing units at the site. Phase 5 of Lion Creek Crossings, the final phase, is under
construction with 128 units designated for Senior citizens, and no public housing. All public housing
at Lion Creek Crossing have been rebuilt. Lion Creek Crossings has 4 of 5 phases completed
resulting in 439 units, 157 of which are public housing. These formerly public housing sites now are
mixed-income. There is no new HOPE VI financing available for redevelopment of large sites. OHA
will explore other options, as needed, and will invest Federal Moving to Work funds as available to
operate and maintain high quality units.
OHA completed disposition of 1,615 scattered site units and has an ongoing rehabilitation program
for these units. In 2010, OHA submitted an application to HUD for disposition of 383 units in five
senior properties. HUD continues to review this application in 2014. An important element of
affordable rental housing preservation is the support of capital needs improvements of existing
structures. The City worked with local non-profit owners of affordable housing to advocate for more
State and Federal financing. In addition, the Housing Development Services circulated a NOFA each
year from 2007-2014 for the rehabilitation/preservation of existing affordable housing. During that
time period the City of Oakland awarded $45,838,781 for rehabilitation/preservation projects.
Staff support and implementation of City ordinances protecting existing affordable housing is another
method for preserving affordable rental housing. Existing City ordinances include Rent Adjustment,
Residential Property Conversion, and Condominium Conversion.
Goal 6: Promote Equal Housing Opportunity
In 2011, the City began to develop written guidelines and an ordinance amending the Planning Code,
clarifying and publicizing the existing administrative procedures for granting reasonable
accommodation for fair housing for the disabled. Planning staff and City Attorney's office reviewed
the proposed program in 2012, and public hearings and adoption is expected in 2014.
In addition, the City promoted equal housing opportunities by supporting local non-profit
organizations that provide services such as support for fair housing and reasonable accommodations.
City staff also worked to promote fair lending practices throughout the City.
44                                                                EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
 Goal 7: Promote Sustainable Development and Sustainable Communities
As Americans become more conscious of the threats of global warming, and the green movement
gains momentum nationally, the City of Oakland continues to be a leader in implementing sustainable
development practices. The City adopted its Green Building ordinance in October 2010 and it is
regularly applied to multi-family affordable housing development. In the annual Notification of
Funding Availability for Affordable Housing, new development and rehabilitation projects must meet
a minimum threshold of attaining the minimum scores in each category set forth in their respective
Green Point Checklists. Projects scoring higher in the Green Point Checklist evaluation are given
preference in the NOFA scoring process. New multifamily construction, and renovations over 1,000
square feet must follow the standards and best practices from Build it Green, and LEED for Homes.
The ordinance removes barriers to green building techniques and requires new housing construction
to follow Build it Green or LEED for Homes guidelines. With the intent of minimizing
environmental impacts from new housing, the ordinance has provisions to improve indoor air quality,
reduce water consumption, use of building materials with recycled content and reuse of building
materials in the construction of new multi-family housing, through the application of the Green Point
Rated and the LEED for Homes checklists. The City further requires Construction and Debris
recycling through the building permit process, and household waste recycling. In addition, the
Oakland Green Building ordinance checklists give points for waste reduction efforts. The City
continues to staff the Green Building Resource Center, and enforces the Oakland Green Building
Ordinance.
In an effort to reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions in Oakland, the Oakland Energy and
Climate Action Plan (ECAP) was adopted by the City Council on December 4, 2012. Optimizing the
use of energy and minimizing associated energy costs and GHG emissions are important components
of Oakland's sustainable city vision. The ECAP establishes GHG reduction actions, as well as a
framework for coordinating implementation and monitoring, and reporting on progress. The ECAP
outlines a ten-year plan including more than 150 actions that will enable Oakland to achieve a 36%
reduction in GHG emissions. The ECAP assists the City of Oakland in continuing its legacy of
leadership on energy, climate and sustainability issues.
City staff worked with ABAG and MTC from 2011 to 2013 to develop the region's Sustainable
Communities Strategy, required by SB 375. The result of these regional stakeholder meetings is a
coordinated plan for accommodating the region's housing need while reducing greenhouse gas
emissions called the One Bay Area Plan. The plan was adopted in July 2013. More details on this
plan can be found at the following website: http://onebayarea.org/plan-bay-area.html.
In an attempt to foster low-carbon emissions and development, the Citywide Zoning update, adopted
in 2011, revised property development standards, particularly infill sites on or near the commercial
corridors, with an aim to encourage infill development. The property development standards also
conform to the Land Use and Transportation Element, and in some cases, increased densities on sites
near transit stops. Mixed use developments are permitted in nearly all commercially zoned areas
(except the Hegenberger Corridor). Even in high density residential areas, ground floor commercial
is permitted. In several commercial zones, ground floor commercial activities are required and new
design standards for the appearance of ground floor commercial encourages pedestrian activity.
Oakland is at the forefront of the smart growth movement since it is virtually built-out, and infill
development represents the majority of development potential. The City assists developers of infill
lots to devise creative solutions to challenging sites. Vertical buildings with structured and
underground parking are encouraged by design review at the staff and Planning Commission level.
Variances are supported for reduced parking and compact parking spaces to achieve density.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                     45
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Furthermore, Oakland’s General Plan contains policies that encourage dense housing along the City’s
major thoroughfares, in the downtown and certain areas of Oakland’s waterfront, especially the Jack
London Square area. These areas are easily accessible to transit, jobs, shopping and services. The
City has made development of large mixed-use transit oriented developments a high priority through
efforts by the Planning, Public Works, City Administrator (Project Implementation) and Housing
Departments. These efforts have resulted in Transit Village plans for the areas surrounding the
Fruitvale, West Oakland, MacArthur, and Coliseum BART stations. Multi-family construction at
MacArthur BART began in 2011, specifically Phase 1, the new BART parking lot and infrastructure
improvements completed in 2014; Phase 2 is the Bridge Housing development began in 2014; the
Lake Merritt BART Station Specific Plan continued the public planning process in 2014. City of
Oakland-funded new affordable housing developments are required to achieve a minimum of 50
points on the GreenPoints checklist. Additional points are allocated to developments with a
commitment to achieving higher green building standards.
 Goal 8: Increase Public Access to Information Through Technology
Technical advances have enabled both City staff and the public easy access to planning related
information. The City’s website has become an efficient tool to inform the public about current and
past planning projects. Meeting notices, agendas, reports and minutes for Planning Commission,
subcommittees, and City Council meetings are available online. Over 50,000 records have been
scanned from the Bureau of Planning; and over 200,000 records in the Bureau of Building. In 2011,
this information is available only to City staff; during the 2015-2023 Housing Element cycle, it is
intended to be made available to the public. The City redesigned the Bureau of Planning website in
2010, for clarity and better accessibility for the disabled. Planning Commission agenda staff reports
are now more convenient to view. The City’s public interactive GIS system was updated to provide
developers and the public access to detailed information about parcels and neighborhood
characteristics. In 2012, the City's GIS team updated the Alameda County Parcel database twice.
Starting in fall of 2013 the GIS Unit configured the county parcel database to auto update parcel
geometry monthly and owner info weekly. A revised, web-based interactive GIS program was
launched in 2012. In addition, a GIS system with additional capabilities (such as parcel permit
information) is expected to be available for the public on the in 2015, with the launch of the Accela
software system.
Some of the basic building permit application forms are currently available online. In 2014, the City
replaced its outdated Permit Tracking System with Accela software. In an attempt to improve the
customer relationship management, the City continues to develop and test the technology to make
payments and service requests online.
 B. REVIEW OF THE EXISTING HOUSING ELEMENT
Table 2-3summarizes, and quantifies when possible, the City’s accomplishments under the 2007-2014
Housing Element. The 2007-2014 Housing Element contained eight policy goals with specific policy
statements and designated actions identified to carry out those policy goals. The evaluation presented
in this table shows each goal, policy, and action and summarizes the progress of implementation for
that goal, the effectiveness of that goal, an analysis of the appropriateness of the goals, objectives,
policies and programs, and an indication of whether the City intends to continue implementing those
goals, policies and actions in the next Housing Element cycle.
Implementation programs contained in the 2007-2014 Housing Element provided affordable housing
unit development goals individually for each funding program. In reality, local, state, and federal
funds were combined to develop, preserve, and rehabilitate Oakland’s assisted housing units between
46                                                                 EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
 2007-2014. Wherever possible, the table below quantifies the number of households and/or units
 assisted.
 Multi-Family, Market Rate housing 2007-2014
 As requested in a California HCD letter dated December 21, 2010, City staff evaluated all the market-
 rate (“above moderate income”) multifamily developments built between 2007-2013. The analysis
 showed that of the 691 market rate multi-family units built in Oakland during the planning period,
 188 units were built in Residential zones, and 503 units were built in non-residential zones. There
 were also 710 single family homes built in Oakland during the planning period, for a total of 1,401
 residential units. The following Table 2-2 shows a yearly tally of new market-rate housing in
 Oakland, and the number of units built inside and outside of Residential zones. Note that in Oakland,
 all Commercial zones permit multi-family housing outright, and so it is a matter of terminology than
 regulation to differentiate between “residential” and “commercial” zones.
                                                         Table 2-2
                     Market Rate Housing Developments (2007-2013)
                                                                                                              Total Number
         Housing Type                                               Year                                          of Units
                                         2007      2008     2009     2010      2011      2012      2013
 Multi-Family Units                         341      153        16       22         0         61       98                691
 Single Family/Two-Family Units             209      100       100      152        50         44       55                710
    TOTAL                                   550      253       116      174        50       105       153              1,401
 Number of Multi-Family Units in Residential Zoning Districts                                                            188
 Number of Multi-Family Units in Non-Residential Zoning Districts                                                        503
            Number of Multi-Family Units in Commercial Zoning Districts                                                  409
            Number of Multi-Family Units in Industrial Zoning Districts                                                    94
Source: City of Oakland, Department of Housing and Community Development and Department of Planning & Building, 2014
 Also, as requested in the California HCD letter dated December 21, 2010, City staff evaluated the
 percentage of the housing built on identified opportunity sites during the planning period. Of the 188
 opportunity sites, during the planning period of 2007-2014, 16 sites (eight percent of the total) had
 applications for future development; twelve of these applications were for residential development,
 and one 6 was built and occupied by the end of December 31, 2013.
 6
   “The Bond” condominiums—105 units at 311 2nd Street.
 EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                           47

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                            Table 2-3
                                  Assessment of 2007-14 Housing Element Implementation
                                                                                                                     -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                              Objective                                                      -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                    -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Goal 1: Provide Adequate Sites Suitable for Housing for All Income Groups
 Policy 1.1 Downtown and Major Corridors        1.1.1 Site Identification             Implementation: Completed as part of 2007-2014 Housing Element adoption; available on City's
 Housing Program                                                                      Housing Element website.
                                                                                      Effectiveness: Planning staff believes that identifying opportunity sites to developers of
                                                                                      affordable and market rate housing is an effective tool to aid in future housing production.
                                                                                      Appropriateness: City staff will continue to post on the City website the list and maps of
                                                                                      opportunity sites for the Housing Element period of 2015-2023.
                                                1.1.2 Assistance with Site Assembly   Implementation: The Owner Participation Agreement with MacArthur Transit Community
                                                                                      Partners for the MacArthur Transit Village (“OPA”) is now considered a recognized obligation
                                                                                      of the Oakland Redevelopment Successor Agency. Now that the State Legislature has dissolved
                                                                                      Redevelopment (effective February 1, 2012), the City’s ability to provide this kind of assistance
                                                                                      in the future will be severely limited.
                                                                                      Effectiveness: The Macarthur OPA commits the City and former Successor Agency to assist
                                                                                      with the site assembly and infrastructure. Most of the site assembly is complete, although
                                                                                      relocation and other activities continue. The replacement parking garage is nearly complete. The
                                                                                      infrastructure is under construction as is the first phase of housing, a 90 unit 100% affordable
                                                                                      housing development. The overall Macarthur project will include a development of
                                                                                      approximately 624 residential rental and ownership units (516 market rate units and 108 below-
                                                                                      market rated units). Site assembly on behalf of development teams will be curtailed, if not
                                                                                      eliminated, as a supportive development tool offered by the City for the foreseeable future, due to
                                                                                      the loss of Redevelopment.
                                                                                      Appropriateness: Site assembly is no longer an action of the City in the 2015-2023 Housing
                                                                                      Element.
48                                                                                                                       EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                       -- Progress in Implementation
    Name of Program                 Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                     -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                 1.1.3 Expedited Review in the Downtown Implementation: Senior Planning and Zoning staff continue to review permit applications for
                                                                        large, multi-family projects in the downtown, several of which are undergoing Environmental
                                                                        Impact Reports.
                                                                        Effectiveness: Very few new multi-family units were built during the 2007-2014 Housing
                                                                        Element period, due to the downturn in the economy; however, as of June, 2014, there are at least
                                                                        five multi-family projects proposed for downtown Oakland, with 1,400 units, in pre-development
                                                                        discussions with the Planning division, which will be tracked for the 2015-2023 Housing
                                                                        Element.
                                                                        Appropriateness: Staff determines this is an effective procedure for new multi-family housing in
                                                                        downtown Oakland.
                                 1.1.4 Sale of Agency-Owned Property in Implementation: The State Legislature dissolved Redevelopment effective February 1, 2012.
                                 the Downtown                           Among the parcels of land that are still currently owned by the City of Oakland specifically
                                                                        dedicated to housing development is the Wood Street Affordable Housing Parcel located in West
                                                                        Oakland. This development is estimated to have new construction of between 140 and 170
                                                                        affordable housing units. The RFP seeking a developer for this land is currently on hold due to
                                                                        housing market conditions.
                                                                        Effectiveness: Because of the economic situation, especially in the housing market, there have
                                                                        been no sales of Agency-owned property for development. More recently, the dissolution of
                                                                        redevelopment has tied up all of the Agency-owned land since 2011. But as part of the
                                                                        dissolution of Redevelopment the Oakland Redevelopment Successor Agency has now approved
                                                                        a Long Range Property Management Plan to dispose of former Redevelopment Agency property.
                                                                        This plan identified 25 sites for future development that are being transferred to the City to
                                                                        implement projects, including six sites in the downtown that may accommodate multi-family
                                                                        housing.
                                                                        Appropriateness: This action was in line with the Housing Element's goal of encouraging more
                                                                        residential construction in downtown Oakland.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                       49
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                               -- Progress in Implementation
   Name of Program           Objective                                                      -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                              -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                          1.1.5 Homeless and Supportive Shelters Implementation: Planning staff convened stakeholders, including Shelter operators and City of
                                                                 Oakland housing staff, to present a proposal in 2014 which would permit as of right the
                                                                 placement of emergency homeless shelters in several neighborhoods throughout the City. New
                                                                 zoning was adopted in July, 2014, for eight areas throughout the City.
                                                                 Effectiveness: Emergency homeless shelters are permitted by right in eight locations throughout
                                                                 the City, addressing the need to shelter the approximately 1,400 homeless households.
                                                                 Appropriateness: The new regulations would permits emergency homeless shelters in eight
                                                                 locations throughout the City. Locations have been identified in commercial, industrial and
                                                                 residential zones.
                          1.1.6 Streamline Environmental Review  Implementation: (1) Staff continued to update the City’s Standard Conditions of Approval which
                                                                 are requirements applied to development projects that have the effect of reducing potential
                                                                 environmental impacts, thereby streamlining environmental review. A comprehensive update is
                                                                 expected to be completed in 2014. (2) Staff participated with the State Office of Planning and
                                                                 Research to development more modern methodologies for evaluating potential transportation
                                                                 impacts during the CEQA process. Staff submitted written comments and attended workshops,
                                                                 for a streamlined approach to the review of transportation impacts. (3) By 2014, Staff had
                                                                 substantially completed, the Specific Plans for Lake Merritt, West Oakland, and Broadway-
                                                                 Valdez, which provide EIR analysis and CEQA coverage for future development in those
                                                                 neighborhoods.
                                                                 Effectiveness: The City is continually evaluating its standards, procedures and permit processes
                                                                 to allow development of multi-family, market rate and affordable housing, within the restrictions
                                                                 of CEQA.
                                                                 Appropriateness: City staff considers streamlined environmental review, within the restrictions
                                                                 of CEQA, to be an appropriate ongoing project for staff.
50                                                                                                 EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                        -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program               Objective                                                        -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                       -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 1.2 Availability of Land 1.2.1 Update the Planning Code and Map   Implementation: In April 2011, the City enacted new residential and commercial zones,
                                                                          replacing previous zoning adopted in 1965.
                                                                          Effectiveness: These new zones implement the General Plan Land Use and Transportation
                                                                          Element designations, and encourage mixed use housing on the commercial corridors of the City.
                                                                          Appropriateness: The Citywide Zoning Update was the appropriate action for the City to take, to
                                                                          bring its Planning Code into conformance with the policies and goals of the Oakland General
                                                                          Plan.
                                 1.2.2 Interim Development Guidelines     Implementation: Interim Development Guidelines (known as the "Guidelines for General Plan
                                                                          Conformity") were adopted in the late 1990's, and renewed periodically. They are predominantly
                                                                          superseded, now that the Citywide Zoning Update is complete.
                                                                          Effectiveness: The Guidelines provided direction in those instances where the Zoning Code and
                                                                          the General Plan were in conflict (e.g. residential density), and were effective for this purpose.
                                                                          Appropriateness: The Guidelines are no longer needed, with the adoption of the new residential
                                                                          and commercial zones, and with the adoption of the Central Estuary Plan.
                                 1.2.3 Land Inventory (Opportunity Sites) Implementation: The site inventory of opportunity sites (Appendix C, Table C-9 of the 2007-
                                                                          2014 Housing Element), both the table and the files in GIS, have been posted to the City's
                                                                          Housing Element website.
                                                                          Effectiveness: Planning staff believes that identifying opportunity sites to developers of
                                                                          affordable and market rate housing is an effective tool to aid in future housing production.
                                                                          Appropriateness: City staff will continue to post on the City website the list and maps of
                                                                          opportunity sites for the Housing Element period of 2015-2023.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                          51
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                          -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                    Objective                                                     -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                        -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 1.3 Appropriate Locations and 1.3.1 Increase Residential Densities Implementation: Residential densities were increased downtown as part of the Central Business
 Densities for Housing                                                     District zoning update completed in 2009. Additionally, residential densities increased in some
                                                                           areas, as part of the citywide zoning update (effective in April, 2011).
                                                                           Effectiveness: Some pre-application developments in downtown Oakland are for tower
                                                                           construction, with 300+ units, within walking distance to BART stations, which supports
                                                                           Oakland's transit-oriented housing development goals.
                                                                           Appropriateness: Staff considers higher- density housing appropriate in downtown Oakland, and
                                                                           the zoning regulations which encourage it continues to be City policy.
                                      1.3.2 Mixed Use Development          Implementation: Mixed-use development was encouraged on the commercial corridors of
                                                                           Oakland, such as San Pablo Avenue, Telegraph Ave., Macarthur Blvd., International Blvd.,
                                                                           among others, during the adoption of the April 2011 Zoning Code update.
                                                                           Effectiveness: There were 400 market rate units built in the commercial zones of the City in the
                                                                           2007-2014 planning period (See Table 2-2).
                                                                           Appropriateness: Oakland's commercial transportation corridors have always had a mixed-use
                                                                           character, typically residential with ground floor commercial activities, and the City will has no
                                                                           plan to amend the mixed-use zones (CN-1, CN-2, CC-1, CC-2, UR-4 and UR-5), adopted in
                                                                           2011.
                                      1.3.3 High Density Residential       Implementation: The Citywide Zoning update (effective in April, 2011) revised development
                                      Development Standards                standards for multi-family buildings. Further, staff, with assistance from a technical advisory
                                                                           group, prepared new design guidelines for multifamily buildings, which were adopted by the
                                                                           Planning Commission in July 2013 ("Design Guidelines for Corridors and Commercial areas").
                                                                           Staff began work with stakeholders on revising the City's off-street parking standards in 2011-
                                                                           2012, and work will continue on that review in 2015.
                                                                           Effectiveness: The combination of new zoning regulations and new design guidelines give clear
                                                                           intentions for how new multi-family development should look in the City in the years to come.
                                                                           Appropriateness: It is appropriate for the City of Oakland to have regulations and standards for
                                                                           higher-density housing.
52                                                                                                            EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                           -- Progress in Implementation
    Name of Program                 Objective                                                          -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                         -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                 1.3.4 Transit Oriented Development         Implementation: The S-15 "transit oriented development" zone is mapped on the parking lots at
                                                                            several BART stations: 1) multi-family construction at MacArthur BART began in in 2012
                                                                            ("Macarthur Station") -- Phase 1 was the new BART parking lot and infrastructure improvements
                                                                            and Phase 2 is the Bridge Housing affordable development under construction in 2014; 2)
                                                                            through the West Oakland Specific Plan, S-15 regulations were revised to create a new "S-15-W"
                                                                            zone that will allow for higher density and height at the parking lots at West Oakland BART than
                                                                            would have been otherwise allowed; 3) the Coliseum Area Specific Plan is underway in 2014
                                                                            which is evaluating whether changes to the S-15 zone around the Coliseum BART are necessary.
                                                                            Effectiveness: Through the Specific Plan process for West Oakland and Coliseum area, the S-15
                                                                            zone is being reconsidered for the year 2014 and beyond, so that the zone is an effective tool to
                                                                            incentivize the construction of high density housing near transit.
                                                                            Appropriateness: This review of the S-15 zone is appropriate, given the large amount of land in
                                                                            Oakland currently devoted to surface parking around BART stations, which could, as is being
                                                                            done at Macarthur BART, be utilized for high-density development.
                                 1.3.5 Promote new housing opportunities in Implementation: The Central Estuary Area Plan was adopted in 2013. The plan includes
                                 the Estuary Area                           approximately 400 residential units. The Brooklyn Basin development (formerly known as "Oak
                                                                            to Ninth") is in the pre-construction stage as of 2013 for a total of 3,100 units approved.
                                                                            Effectiveness: The units planned in the Central Estuary Area Plan plus the units approved for the
                                                                            Brooklyn Basin project will add significant new housing units to the City's supply.
                                                                            Appropriateness: The intensive planning efforts conducted for each of the projects, plus the
                                                                            environmental clearance processed (which included mitigation measures for significant
                                                                            environmental impacts) have laid the foundation for appropriate reuse and infill development of
                                                                            Oakland's valuable waterfront.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                             53
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                       -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program               Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                       -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 1.4 Secondary Units      1.4.1 Secondary Unit -Parking Solutions Implementation: Staff began a comprehensive review of the off-street parking regulations in the
                                                                         Oakland Planning Code, starting in 2011, which included the current provision of one additional
                                                                         parking space for secondary units. That review will continue in 2014. Separately, the new
                                                                         zoning proposed for the West Oakland Specific Plan does give flexibility in the location of the
                                                                         additional parking space for Secondary units--there would be no square foot limitation on when
                                                                         tandem parking is permitted (currently it is limited to Secondary units of 500 square feet or less).
                                                                         Note: as of July 7, 2014 the new zoning for West Oakland has not yet been adopted.
                                                                         Effectiveness: Staff continues to monitor the parking regulations for secondary units. When the
                                                                         citywide Parking study is revived, secondary unit parking regulations will be studied.
                                                                         Appropriateness: As the current one-parking space per secondary unit regulation in the Oakland
                                                                         Planning Code may limit the construction of secondary units on constrained sites (such as in the
                                                                         Oakland Hills), it is appropriate for staff to review the current regulations.
 Policy 1.5 Manufactured Housing 1.5.1 Mobile Homes and Factory Built    Implementation: Manufactured housing is permitted in the City of Oakland, in residentially
                                 Housing                                 zoned areas, as long as the unit is built to California Building Code standards.
                                                                         Effectiveness: It is not known how many manufactured homes were permitted and built in
                                                                         Oakland during the years 2007-2014.
                                                                         Appropriateness: When manufactured homes meet California Building Code, it is appropriate to
                                                                         allow their construction in any zone where single-family residences are permitted.
 Policy 1.6 Adaptive Reuse       1.6.1 Live/Work Conversions             Implementation: The Oakland Planning Code permits the conversion, with a Conditional Use
                                                                         Permit, of formerly industrial and commercial buildings, into joint living and working quarters
                                                                         (known as "live/work" units). In zoning districts which permit outright residential development,
                                                                         existing buildings are permitted to be converted live/work units.
                                                                         Effectiveness: Live/work conversions continue to be permitted in Oakland.
                                                                         Appropriateness: Given Oakland's extensive stock of formerly industrial and commercial
                                                                         buildings, live/work conversions are appropriate, and continue as a goal in the 2015-2023
                                                                         Housing Element.
54                                                                                                          EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                    -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                            Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                   -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 1.7 Regional Housing Needs            1.7.1 Accommodate 14,629 New Housing   Implementation: In addition to housing developments which are under construction, approved,
                                              Units                                  or in pre-approval, the Housing Element identified nearly 200 different sites with the capacity
                                                                                     and the zoning regulations to allow more units than the Regional Housing Needs Allocation for
                                                                                     Oakland.
                                                                                     Effectiveness: Most of the opportunity sites in the 2007-2014 planning period were not built
                                                                                     upon, and return as opportunity sites in the 2015-2023 Housing Element.
                                                                                     Appropriateness: Oakland will continue to meet its RHNA obligations to provide sites for the
                                                                                     development of market-rate, and affordable housing units in 2015-2023.
 Goal 2: Promote the Development of Adequate Housing for Low- and Moderate-Income Households
 Policy 2.1 Affordable Housing Development    2.1.1 New Construction and Substantial Implementation: Housing Development Services circulated a NOFA each year from 2007-2014
 Programs                                     Rehab Housing Development Program      for both affordable housing new construction and rehabilitation/preservation of existing
                                                                                     affordable housing. During that time period the City of Oakland awarded $84,624,251 for new
                                                                                     construction and $45,838,781 for rehabilitation/preservation projects. Of the new construction,
                                                                                     $12,152,614 (approximately 14%) was dedicated to new affordable (regulated) ownership
                                                                                     housing development (of this funding $8,050,000 was the site acquisition of the Wood Street
                                                                                     Mixed Use parcel).
                                                                                     Effectiveness: The NOFA was circulated annually as planned and achieved what it set out to do
                                                                                     as stated in the Housing Element's policy guidance.
                                                                                     Appropriateness: City staff has determined that this program is effective and will continue to
                                                                                     circulate annual NOFAs as funding is available.
                                              2.1.2 Housing Predevelopment Loan and  Implementation: Housing Development Services' provided $489,209 in pre-development loan
                                              Grant Program                          and grant funding from 2007-2014.
                                                                                     Effectiveness: The allocation of these pre-development funds resulted in project assessment and
                                                                                     feasibility studies for 10 projects. About half of those projects proceeded from concept to a
                                                                                     viable affordable housing project. This program achieved its goals as planned and as stated in
                                                                                     the Housing Element's policy guidance.
                                                                                     Appropriateness: City staff has determined that this program is effective and will continue to
                                                                                     fund pre-development loans and grants on an ad-hoc basis and as funding is available.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                    55
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                          -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                   Objective                                                      -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                          -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 2.2 Affordable Homeownership 2.2.1 First Time Homebuyer Programs    Implementation: Housing Development Services' first time homebuyer program provided
 Opportunities                                                              approximately 372 loans totaling $22,459,765 from 2007-2014.
                                                                            Effectiveness: The allocation of these first time homebuyer loans was in alignment with this
                                                                            program's goals as planned and as stated in the Housing Element's policy guidance.
                                                                            Appropriateness: City staff has determined that this program is effective and will continue to
                                                                            fund first time homebuyer loans as funds are available.
                                     2.2.2 Section 8 Homeownership          Implementation: OHA has a homeownership program to assist residents in becoming first-time
                                                                            homeowners. The Authority provides Section 8 home ownership vouchers to Section 8 and
                                                                            public housing clients and coordinates with the city of Oakland and other organizations to
                                                                            leverage resources. The program is active and has 42 pre-qualified participants. Since 2007, 80
                                                                            participants have purchased homes through the OHA Homeownership Program.
                                                                            Effectiveness: Since March 2004, the Homeownership Program has assisted a total of 91
                                                                            households. While the market has presented some challenges, OHA assisted an average of 11
                                                                            households per year in purchasing a home.
                                                                            Appropriateness: OHA will continue this homeownership program to the extent that it meets the
                                                                            agency's Moving to Work program policy goals.
                                     2.2.3 Scattered-Site Single-Family     Implementation: The City has worked with the Oakland Community Land Trust (OCLT) to
                                     Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program implement the Neighborhood Stabilization Program to rehabilitate foreclosed properties. By the
                                     (Neighborhood Stabilization Program)   middle of 2014, the status of OCLT activities was there were 17 acquired foreclosed homes. One
                                                                            of the homes was demolished due to the condition of the house; 16 homes have been completely
                                                                            rehabilitated. Of those homes, 3 are for sale and 13 of them have been sold.
                                                                            Effectiveness: DHCD staff believe that this program is effective in promoting homeownership
                                                                            opportunities for very low-income homebuyers.
                                                                            Appropriateness: DHCD will continue to support the efforts of the OCLT as resources are
                                                                            available and if programming is feasible.
56                                                                                                            EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                      -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                       Objective                                              -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                     -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 2.3 Density Bonus Program        2.3.1 Density Bonus Ordinance Implementation: The City's Density Bonus Ordinance was brought up to state code with the
                                                                       passage of Ordinance 13224 adopted by the Oakland City Council in April, 2014.
                                                                       Effectiveness: Since the adoption of the ordinance, City staff have received several applications
                                                                       for projects wishing to utilize the new density bonus program, therefore, staff feels the revised
                                                                       rules are effective at incentivizing affordable housing.
                                                                       Appropriateness: Allowing exceptions to the density and development standards is a good
                                                                       mechanism for producing new affordable housing.
 Policy 2.4 Comprehensive Housing Policy 2.4.1 Inclusionary Zoning     Implementation: In California, Inclusionary Zoning for rental housing was invalidated in 2009
                                                                       by the California Court of Appeal for the Second Appellate District because it directly conflicted
                                                                       with a provision of the state's Costa-Hawkins Rental Housing Act of 1996 which specifically
                                                                       gave all landlords the right to set the "initial rental rate" for new housing units. In October 2013,
                                                                       California Governor Jerry Brown vetoed legislation that would reauthorize municipalities to
                                                                       adopt or continue implementing ordinances with inclusionary rental housing requirements for
                                                                       low income households. The legislation, AB 1229, would have overturned a 2009 appellate
                                                                       court ruling known as the Palmer Decision, which held that state rent control law prohibited
                                                                       cities and counties from using inclusionary zoning practices.
                                                                       Effectiveness: Given the limitations due to State court rulings, the City has not been able to
                                                                       implement an Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance.
                                                                       Appropriateness: The City will not have Inclusionary Zoning as a policy goal in the next
                                                                       Housing Element 2015-23 planning period. In 2014, the City will hire a consultant to prepare a
                                                                       "nexus study," which may consider a policy of "market rate set-aside of ownership units" in
                                                                       Oakland.
                                         2.4.2 Revision of Condominium Implementation: Housing advocates and owner representatives continue to debate various
                                         Conversion Ordinance          proposals for updates to the current condominium conversion ordinance.
                                                                       Effectiveness: Although there has been much discussion about a revision to this ordinance, no
                                                                       proposals for updates were brought to the City Council for a vote during the 2007-14 Housing
                                                                       Element planning period.
                                                                       Appropriateness: City staff will continue to keep this policy as a goal under the preservation of
                                                                       affordable rental properties.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                         57
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                           -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                 Objective                                                         -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                         -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                   2.4.3 Revision of Other Existing Housing Implementation: Due to the dissolution of the City's Redevelopment agency and the resultant
                                   Programs                                 elimination of Low/Mod Housing funds, staff had to cut back on many of the programs targeted
                                                                            for modifications with this policy goal: first time homebuyer programs, residential owner-
                                                                            occupied rehabilitation programs, and resources for affordable housing and homeless housing
                                                                            programs. There were significant changes to the Rent Adjustment Program. Those changes are
                                                                            covered in policy goal 5.3.
                                                                            Effectiveness: Although there is great need for these programs, there was no funding available to
                                                                            implement any increases or changes to these programs.
                                                                            Appropriateness: City staff will not continue to keep this policy as a goal as it is no longer
                                                                            feasible due to lack of funding and therefore will not be carried into the next Housing Element
                                                                            2015-23 planning period.
 Policy 2.5 Permanently Affordable 2.5.1 Community Land Trust Program       Implementation: The City has worked with the Oakland Community Land Trust (OCLT) to
 Homeownership                                                              implement the Neighborhood Stabilization Program to rehabilitate foreclosed properties. By the
                                                                            middle of 2014, the status of OCLT activities was: 17 acquired foreclosed homes; one of the
                                                                            homes was demolished due to the condition of the house; 16 homes have been completely
                                                                            rehabilitated. Of those homes, 3 are for sale and 13 of them have been sold.
                                                                            Effectiveness: DHCD staff believe that this program is effective in promoting homeownership
                                                                            opportunities for very low-income homebuyers.
                                                                            Appropriateness: DHCD will continue to support the efforts of the OCLT as resources are
                                                                            available and if programming is feasible.
                                   2.5.2 Resale Controls                    Implementation: There were 8 new affordable ownership developments constructed in the City
                                                                            of Oakland during the 2007-14 Housing Element implementation period.
                                                                            Effectiveness: City staff believe that this is an effective tool to house families and maintain
                                                                            affordability for units subsidized by the City of Oakland.
                                                                            Appropriateness: City staff will continue to consider regulated affordable homeownership
                                                                            developments in the annual NOFA.
58                                                                                                             EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                   -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                         Objective                                                         -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                  -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 2.6 Seniors and Other Persons with 2.6.1 Housing Development Program        Implementation: Housing Development Services circulated a NOFA each year from 2007-2013
 Special Needs                                                                      for both affordable housing new construction and rehabilitation/preservation of existing
                                                                                    affordable housing. During that time period the City of Oakland awarded $9,809,637 for new
                                                                                    construction of housing for Senior and Special Needs populations and $11,155,750 for
                                                                                    rehabilitation/preservation projects for Senior and Special Needs populations.
                                                                                    Effectiveness: The NOFA was circulated annually as planned and achieved what it set out to do
                                                                                    as stated in the Housing Element's policy guidance.
                                                                                    Appropriateness: City staff has determined that this program is effective and will continue to
                                                                                    circulate annual NOFAs as funding is available.
                                           2.6.2 Housing for Persons with AIDS/HIV  Implementation: The Department of Human Services set a goal to provide services to 2,500
                                                                                    persons living with a diagnosis of HIV/AIDS. To date 2,333 persons living with a diagnosis of
                                                                                    HIV/AIDS have received services through the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS
                                                                                    (HOPWA) program. Through acquisition, rehabilitation and development, a total of 271
                                                                                    HOPWA units are currently available to people living with HIV/AIDS.
                                                                                    Effectiveness: Department of Human Services Staff believe that this program is effective given
                                                                                    its accomplishments during this planning period.
                                                                                    Appropriateness: The Department will continue to serve this population through HOPWA
                                                                                    funding.
                                           2.6.3 Accessible Units in New Federally- Implementation: Housing Development Services circulated a NOFA each year from 2007-2014
                                           Assisted Housing                         for both affordable housing new construction and rehabilitation/preservation of existing
                                                                                    affordable housing. Many of the units funded by the City's NOFA include accessible units
                                                                                    though they are not currently tracked by DHCD.
                                                                                    Effectiveness: City staff acknowledges that importance of tracking this data though it was not
                                                                                    done during this Housing Element's planning period. The NOFA was circulated annually as
                                                                                    planned and achieved what it set out to do as stated in the Housing Element's policy guidance.
                                                                                    Appropriateness: City staff has determined that it wants to continue with this policy action and
                                                                                    will institute systems to track accessible units in the next Housing Element planning period.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                   59
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                       Objective                                                        -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 2.7 Large Families               2.7.1 Housing Development Program -      Implementation: Housing Development Services circulated a NOFA each year from 2007-2014
                                         Large Families                           for both affordable housing new construction and rehabilitation/preservation of existing
                                                                                  affordable housing. During that time period the City of Oakland-funded new developments
                                                                                  included 49 large units.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: The NOFA was circulated annually as planned and achieved what it set out to do
                                                                                  as stated in the Housing Element's policy guidance.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: City staff has determined that this program is effective and will continue to
                                                                                  circulate annual NOFAs as funding is available.
 Policy 2.8 Expand Local Funding Sources 2.8.1 Consider Increase in Redevelopment Implementation: Due to the dissolution of the City's Redevelopment agency and the resultant
                                         Housing Set-Aside                        elimination of Low/Mod Housing funds, there is no opportunity to increase the Low/Mod
                                                                                  housing fund set-aside.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: Although there is great need for an increase in Low/Mod housing funds, given the
                                                                                  elimination of this program there was no funding available to implement any increase in set-
                                                                                  aside.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: City staff will not continue to keep this policy as a goal as it is no longer
                                                                                  feasible due to lack of funding and therefore will not be carried into the next Housing Element
                                                                                  2015-2023 planning period.
                                         2.8.2 Jobs/Housing Impact Fee            Implementation: During the 2007-14 Housing Element Planning period $1,085,509 in
                                                                                  jobs/housing impact fee funds had been collected in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund for use
                                                                                  toward affordable housing development. These funds were all allocated for affordable housing
                                                                                  developments in FY 2013-14 NOFA awards.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: City staff believe that this impact fee is important in its efforts to link affordable
                                                                                  housing development with the development of commercial development and resultant housing
                                                                                  demand.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: This policy program will remain a policy goal in the Housing Element 2015-
                                                                                  2023 planning period.
60                                                                                                                  EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                   -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                           Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                   -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 2.9: Rental Assistance               2.9.1 Expansion of Section 8 Vouchers   Implementation: OHA expanded its Section 8 voucher program significantly during this period
                                                                                     by 3,223 households by taking advantage of available vouchers as a result of disposition,
                                                                                     conversions, and other program opportunities. Currently, OHA is authorized for 12,805 voucher
                                                                                     households to be served through the traditional Housing Choice Voucher program and through
                                                                                     Project-Based Section 8.
                                                                                     Effectiveness: OHA achieved the goal of expanding the pool of Section 8 vouchers by growing
                                                                                     its program nearly 25% since the last Housing Element. OHA also was awarded 265 Veteran's
                                                                                     Affairs Supportive Housing Vouchers, which expands the Section 8 program to chronically
                                                                                     homeless veterans.
                                                                                     Appropriateness: As federal funding permits, OHA will continue to expand its voucher pool and
                                                                                     use its Making Transitions Work authorities to provide housing assistance to as many households
                                                                                     as possible.
 Policy 2.10: PATH Strategy for the Homeless 2.10.1 Homeless Outreach Programs       Implementation: Through the Oakland PATH Strategy, over 4,000 homeless and those at risk of
                                                                                     homelessness received access to permanent housing, temporary shelter, hotel vouchers, and
                                                                                     support services. The transitional housing inventory has increased to include 540 beds for
                                                                                     singles and 595 beds for families for a total of 1,135 beds.
                                                                                     Effectiveness: Department of Human Services staff believe that this program is effective given
                                                                                     its accomplishments during this planning period.
                                                                                     Appropriateness: The PATH Strategy will continue to operate to serve the homeless population
                                                                                     in Oakland.
                                             2.10.2 Support Programs to Help Renters Implementation: Through the Homeless Prevention and Rapid Rehousing Program (HPRP),
                                             and Homeowners From Becoming            approximately 1,884 people were served. Over 850 renters were prevented from becoming
                                             Homeless                                homeless through rental assistance and housing stabilization & relocation services and 1,675
                                                                                     clients utilized case management, outreach, housing locators, legal, and credit repair services
                                                                                     under HPRP.
                                                                                     Effectiveness: Department of Human Services Staff believes that this program is effective given
                                                                                     its accomplishments during this planning period.
                                                                                     Appropriateness: The three year program ended in 2012. DHS staff will continue to provide this
                                                                                     service as resources are available.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                   61
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                 -- Progress in Implementation
   Name of Program           Objective                                                        -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                          2.10.3 Shelter Programs                 Implementation: There has been a shift in focus in recent years from shelters to rapid placement
                                                                  in long term housing. The City continues to support shelters but does so with the goal to quickly
                                                                  exit participants into housing through collaborative efforts, such as The Oakland Permanent
                                                                  Access to Housing (PATH) Rehousing Initiative (OPRI).
                                                                  Effectiveness: Department of Human Services Staff believe that this program is effective given
                                                                  its accomplishments during this planning period.
                                                                  Appropriateness: The City continues to operate the Winter Shelter Program from November to
                                                                  April for homeless individuals. The shelter is filled to capacity most nights and has
                                                                  accommodated over 3,000 people during the cold season. DHS staff will continue to provide this
                                                                  service as resources are available.
                          2.10.4 Transitional Housing Programs    Implementation: The City continues to partner with transitional housing agencies who serve
                                                                  families and youth. Since 2007, contract agencies have served over 2,330 youth and families.
                                                                  Effectiveness: Department of Human Services Staff believe that this program is effective given
                                                                  its accomplishments during this planning period.
                                                                  Appropriateness: Department of Human Services will continue to support transitional housing
                                                                  programs while working to help families and individuals gain access to permanent housing. This
                                                                  program will continue as resources are available.
                          2.10.5 Development of Permanent Housing Implementation: Housing Development Services circulated a NOFA each year from 2007-2014
                          for Extremely Low Income                for both affordable housing new construction and rehabilitation/preservation of existing
                                                                  affordable housing. During that time period the City of Oakland-funded new construction there
                                                                  were 237 extremely low-income units.
                                                                  Effectiveness: The NOFA was circulated annually as planned and achieved what it set out to do
                                                                  as stated in the Housing Element's policy guidance.
                                                                  Appropriateness: City staff has determined that this program is effective and will continue to
                                                                  circulate annual NOFAs as funding is available.
62                                                                                                   EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                              -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                  Objective                                                           -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                             -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                    2.10.6 Coordinate Actions and Policies for Implementation: The City of Oakland's Department of Human Services (DHS) and Department
                                    the Extremely Low Income                   of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) continues to be involved with Alameda
                                                                               County-wide collaboration on seeking ways to provide housing affordable to extremely low
                                                                               income households. Additionally, it is an ongoing goal of the City to increase income
                                                                               opportunities and prevent homelessness. Collectively DHS and DHCD maintained memberships
                                                                               and/or supported the following agencies: National Alliance to End Homelessness; Housing
                                                                               California; Corporation for Supportive Housing; EveryOneHome and other federal and state
                                                                               initiatives to end homelessness.
                                                                               Effectiveness: DHS and DHCD Staff believe that this policy goal is effective to publicly state
                                                                               the City's involvement and support of regional efforts.
                                                                               Appropriateness: DHS and DHCD will continue to support collaboration among City
                                                                               Departments and other regional, state and federal efforts.
                                    2.10.7 Advocate Policies for the Extremely Implementation: The City of Oakland's Department of Human Services continues to be an active
                                    Low Income and the Homeless                participant in the goal to end homelessness. In collaboration with the EveryOne Home Plan and
                                                                               County-Wide Agencies, the City advocates and helps to develop polices to assist individuals
                                                                               experiencing homelessness in the City.
                                                                               Effectiveness: DHS Staff believe that this policy goal is effective to publicly state the City's
                                                                               involvement and support of Citywide efforts.
                                                                               Appropriateness: DHS will continue to support collaboration among City Departments and with
                                                                               other City agencies including the Oakland Housing Authority.
 Policy 2.11: Promote an Equitable  2.11.1 Provide Incentives for Location of  Implementation: Housing Development Services circulated a NOFA each year from 2007-2014
 Distribution of Affordable Housing City-Assisted Developments in Areas of     for both affordable housing new construction and rehabilitation/preservation of existing
 Throughout the Community           Low Concentration of Poverty               affordable housing. During that time period the City of Oakland-funded new construction of
                                                                               housing include 271 units that were located in areas with a low concentration of poverty.
                                                                               Effectiveness: The NOFA was circulated annually as planned and achieved what it set out to do
                                                                               as stated in the Housing Element's policy guidance.
                                                                               Appropriateness: City staff has determined that this program is effective and will continue to
                                                                               circulate annual NOFAs as funding is available.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                              63
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                    -- Progress in Implementation
   Name of Program           Objective                                                           -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                   -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                          2.11.2 Reduce Concentrations of Poverty in Implementation: OHA has reduced the number of public housing units in its portfolio to 1,605
                          Large Public Housing Developments          units. During the 2007-2014 period, Tassafaronga, a former 87-unit public housing site, was
                                                                     replaced with project-based Section 8 and Tax Credit units. There are no public housing units at
                                                                     the site. Phase 5 of Lion Creek Crossings, the final phase, is under construction with 128 units of
                                                                     Senior units, no public housing. All public housing units at Lion Creek Crossings have been
                                                                     rebuilt.
                                                                     Effectiveness: Tassafaronga is completed and has 150 units. Lion Creek Crossings has 4 of 5
                                                                     phases completed resulting in 439 units, 157 of which are public housing. These formerly public
                                                                     housing sites now are mixed-income.
                                                                     Appropriateness: There is no new HOPE VI financing available for reconstruction of public
                                                                     housing with the goal of reducing the concentration of poverty in large public housing
                                                                     developments. Given the lack of federal funding to redevelop public housing sites, OHA will
                                                                     focus on operating and maintaining high quality public housing at the remaining large
                                                                     developments in its portfolio.
                          2.11.3 Continue to Use Section 8 Vouchers  Implementation: OHA strengthened outreach efforts to people in all areas of the city by
                          to Assist Very Low Income Families         facilitating quarterly property owner workshops and by partnering with Eden I&R, Inc., which
                          Obtain Housing In a Wider Range of         has a broad reach in connecting landlords and program participants to resources. The Authority
                          Neighborhoods                              also uses Go Section 8 in order to provide clients with information regarding rental listings
                                                                     throughout the city of Oakland in efforts to assist tenants with locating housing, especially in
                                                                     areas with lower concentrations of poverty.
                                                                     Effectiveness: OHA employs a variety of methods to encourage families to obtain housing in all
                                                                     areas of Oakland. Mapping data is not available at this time.
                                                                     Appropriateness: OHA will continue to research methods of expanding housing choice for
                                                                     families in Oakland.
64                                                                                                      EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                              -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                          Objective                                                   -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                              -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 2.12: Affordable Housing Preference 2.12.1 Oakland Resident and Worker   Implementation: The implementing regulations for the Oakland Resident and Worker Preference
 for Oakland Residents and Workers          Housing Preference Policy Resolution Policy for Affordable Housing were approved by the City Administrator in early 2010. City-
                                                                                 funded developers are provided both the Policy and the Certification in the City’s marketing and
                                                                                 management planning documents that are attached as exhibits to the regulatory agreement. As a
                                                                                 part of the final review/approval of a developer’s marketing and management plans, property
                                                                                 management are required to comply with this policy to the extent that other funding sources for
                                                                                 the housing project permit such a policy.
                                                                                 Effectiveness: Department of Housing and Community Development, Housing Development
                                                                                 Services, Project Management staff enforce this policy during initial lease-up of units.
                                                                                 Appropriateness: City staff believe that this is an appropriate policy and will continue its
                                                                                 enforcement.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                65

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                            -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                              Objective                                                             -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                          -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Goal 3: Remove Constraints to the Availability and Affordability of Housing for All Income Groups
 Policy 3.1: Expedite and Simplify Permit       3.1.1 Allow Multifamily Housing             Implementation: Multi-family housing continues to be permitted in Oakland; with the adoption
 Processes                                                                                  of the Citywide Zoning Update in April 2011, the areas of the City where multifamily housing
                                                                                            can be built, expanded.
                                                                                            Effectiveness: Oakland's Planning Code has permitted multi-family housing, particularly on
                                                                                            certain commercial streets, for decades. The zoning is effective: there have been numerous
                                                                                            multi-family developments built in Oakland.
                                                                                            Appropriateness: Multi-family housing development is a long-standing policy of the City of
                                                                                            Oakland, and that is an appropriate policy to enact the Oakland General Plan's policy of
                                                                                            concentrating new multi-family housing on the commercial streets and corridors.
                                                3.1.2 Special Needs Housing                 Implementation: In 2013, staff prepared a Reasonable Accommodations ordinance (to permit
                                                                                            flexibility in the application of development standards for people with disabilities) that was
                                                                                            adopted in July, 2014. Additionally, staff prepared an ordinance to clarify that the City regulates
                                                                                            transitional and supportive housing (with fewer than six occupants) in the same manner as
                                                                                            permanent residential uses. Further, an ordinance was adopted in July, 2014 identifying in eight
                                                                                            locations for emergency shelters to be built as of right, along with objective development
                                                                                            standards, that are anticipated to be adopted in July, 2014.
                                                                                            Effectiveness: The Reasonable Accommodations policy and procedure will formalize the
                                                                                            process for persons with disabilities to seek exceptions to the zoning rules to promote equal
                                                                                            access to housing. The zoning text amendments to the definitions for transitional and supportive
                                                                                            housing will facilitate clarity during the development review process for these types of activities.
                                                                                            Finally, permitting emergency shelters by right will assist with providing housing opportunities
                                                                                            for Oakland's homeless population.
                                                                                            Appropriateness: The Reasonable Accommodations policy, modified definitions for transitional
                                                                                            and supportive housing and changes to the zoning rules to permit emergency shelters by-right
                                                                                            will assist with providing housing opportunities for all Oakland residents.
66                                                                                                                              EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                       CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                -- Progress in Implementation
    Name of Program                 Objective                                                -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                              -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                 3.1.3 Discretionary Permits     Implementation: In the years 2007-2014, the City's Planning division continued to use standard
                                                                 checklists for design review of all new housing (and other discretionary permit processes). In
                                                                 2014, at the time of this writing, the Oakland City Council was considering text amendments to
                                                                 the Oakland Planning Code which would clarify that supportive and transitional housing for less
                                                                 than six residents is considered a residential use, and not subject to a conditional use permit.
                                                                 Effectiveness: Planning staff routinely uses the design review and other checklists when
                                                                 approving projects, and will continue to do so. These checklists are given to the public in
                                                                 advance of a project application, so they are also a tool for informing applicants about the
                                                                 standards and expectations of the City Planning division. If the City Council adopts the proposed
                                                                 ordinance to clarify that transitional and supportive housing (for six people or fewer) is a
                                                                 residential use, then applicants for transitional and supportive housing would not be required to
                                                                 obtain a conditional use permit, if their facility houses less than six people.
                                                                 Appropriateness: To ensure a consistent set of design principles which apply to new residential
                                                                 development citywide, it is appropriate to have standard checklists for staff to review projects. It
                                                                 is appropriate to amend the Oakland Planning Code to specifically clarify that the provisions of
                                                                 SB2 with regards to transitional and supportive housing apply to the Oakland Planning Code.
                                 3.1.4 “One-Stop” Permit Process Implementation: The City provided the coordinated review of residential development
                                                                 applications across permitting departments, such as Planning and Building Services.
                                                                 Effectiveness: The production of new multi-family housing decreased during the years 2007-
                                                                 2014, as compared to the previous Housing Element; this reduced production meant coordination
                                                                 between the permitting departments could be maintained.
                                                                 Appropriateness: It is appropriate for Planning and Building staff to coordinate permitting on
                                                                 multi-family developments, and the City will continue to do so in the 2015-2023 Housing
                                                                 Element period.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                  67

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                     -- Progress in Implementation
   Name of Program           Objective                                                            -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                   -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                          3.1.5 Assign Priority to Affordable Housing Implementation: This program continues to be implemented. Permit applications for affordable
                                                                      housing developments, as with other multi-family projects, are "deemed complete" within 30
                                                                      days of submittal.
                                                                      Effectiveness: Planning staff coordinates with the City's Housing staff on design review and land
                                                                      use permitting details for affordable housing projects.
                                                                      Appropriateness: Planning staff is appropriately assigning priority to affordable housing
                                                                      projects, when they are submitted for entitlements.
                          3.1.6 Expedite Environmental Review         Implementation: (1) Staff continued to update the City’s Standard Conditions of Approval which
                                                                      are requirements applied to development projects that have the effect of reducing potential
                                                                      environmental impacts, thereby streamlining environmental review. A comprehensive update is
                                                                      expected to be completed in 2014. (2) Staff participated with the State Office of Planning and
                                                                      Research to development more modern methodologies for evaluating potential transportation
                                                                      impacts during the CEQA process. Staff submitted written comments and attended workshops,
                                                                      for a streamlined approach to the review of transportation impacts. (3) By 2014, Staff had
                                                                      substantially completed, the Specific Plans for Lake Merritt, West Oakland, and Broadway-
                                                                      Valdez, which provide EIR analysis and CEQA coverage for future development in those
                                                                      neighborhoods.
                                                                      Effectiveness: The City is continually evaluating its standards, procedures and permit processes
                                                                      to allow development of multi-family, market rate and affordable housing, within the restrictions
                                                                      of CEQA.
                                                                      Appropriateness: City staff considers streamlined environmental review, within the restrictions
                                                                      of CEQA, to be an appropriate ongoing project for staff.
68                                                                                                       EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                     Objective                                                         -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                               -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                       3.1.7 Secondary Units                     Implementation: The City expedites the creation of legal, secondary units ("in-law apartments")
                                                                                 by relaxing parking standards for units which are 500 sf or less, and making the permitting
                                                                                 process easier (with over-the counter review).
                                                                                 Effectiveness: Some single-family houses are constrained by lot size or configuration and can't
                                                                                 meet the Planning code requirement of one additional parking space for secondary units. The
                                                                                 City is considering further relaxing this parking requirement from current code requirements in
                                                                                 the West Oakland Specific Plan. After a period of review (should that provision be adopted as a
                                                                                 Planning Code Amendment), the City will consider altering the parking provisions for secondary
                                                                                 units citywide.
                                                                                 Appropriateness: It is appropriate for staff to review planning and building regulations to
                                                                                 continue to permit and to legalize secondary units in Oakland.
 Policy 3.2: Flexible Zoning Standards 3.2.1 Alternative Building Code Standards Implementation: During the 2007-2014 Housing Element planning period, the City continued
                                                                                 the use of alternative accommodations and equivalent facilitation of the California Building
                                                                                 Codes to address the special housing needs of persons with disabilities and to facilitate the
                                                                                 rehabilitation of older dwelling units. Separately, Strategic Planning staff worked with
                                                                                 stakeholders to create a reasonable accommodations procedure for the Planning Code, which is
                                                                                 likely to be adopted in July, 2014.
                                                                                 Effectiveness: No analysis has been done to date to evaluate whether persons with disabilities
                                                                                 are successful in gaining alternative accommodations from provisions of the California Building
                                                                                 Code for accommodation.
                                                                                 Appropriateness: The City will continue to review processes and procedures to assist persons
                                                                                 with disabilities.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                69
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                -- Progress in Implementation
   Name of Program           Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                              -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                          3.2.2 Planned Unit Development Zoning Implementation: During the 2007-2014 Housing Element period, the City continued to review
                                                                applications for PUD developments (see Section 17.142.020 of the Oakland Planning Code),
                                                                which permits "large, integrated development adhering to a comprehensive plan and located on a
                                                                single tract of land of sixty thousand (60,000) square feet or more, or on two (2) or more tracts of
                                                                land equaling sixty thousand (60,000) square feet or more in total which may be separated only
                                                                by a street or other right-of-way." No changes were made to the lot size provision of the PUD
                                                                regulation, and no study of whether such a change would be effective was begun.
                                                                Effectiveness: PUD applications are rare and uncommon in Oakland, due to the changing
                                                                economy and relative lack of large parcel(s) which could take advantage of these PUD
                                                                regulations.
                                                                Appropriateness: It is appropriate for the Oakland Planning Code to have PUD provisions, to
                                                                allow for flexibility on the largest residential developments in the City. Whether those
                                                                regulations are in need of amendment or revision will have to be considered during the 2015-
                                                                2023 planning period.
                          3.2.3 Flexible Parking Standards      Implementation: In 2011, City staff began the parking regulations study, which continued in
                                                                2012 with stakeholder interviews and area-wide best practices review; by June, 2014, staff had
                                                                yet to finalize the study, and did not yet have recommendations for revising the parking
                                                                regulations of the 1965 Planning Code.
                                                                Effectiveness: The parking study is not complete, but will be given priority in the 2015 staff
                                                                workload for the Strategic Planning Division.
                                                                Appropriateness: Because Oakland's parking regulations have not been comprehensively
                                                                updated since 1965, it is appropriate for staff to review best-practices, hear from stakeholders,
                                                                and consider whether to make amendments to the Oakland Planning Code. This action will be
                                                                kept in the 2015 Housing Element.
70                                                                                                  EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                         -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                     Objective                                                   -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                        -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                       3.2.4 Flexible Open Space Standards Implementation: This revision was completed in the 2009 Central Business District zoning, an
                                                                           amendment to the Oakland Planning Code which created four new zones for downtown Oakland,
                                                                           which included changes to the open space regulations.
                                                                           Effectiveness: Because of the changing economy, few new multi-family residential buildings in
                                                                           downtown Oakland were entitled since 2009, and this provision (which allows more flexibility in
                                                                           where open space can be built) has not been evaluated by staff with developers applying for
                                                                           entitlements in downtown Oakland, to rate its effectiveness.
                                                                           Appropriateness: This action is not being included in the 2015 Housing Element, as it is
                                                                           considered accomplished, through the 2009 Central Business District zoning.
 Policy 3.3: Development Fees and Site 3.3.1 Project Review Process and    Implementation: Individual development applications are routinely reviewed by Planning staff
 Improvement Requirements              Development Agreements              for CEQA and other neighborhood impacts, and in addition to any project-specific conditions,
                                                                           the City's Standard Conditions of Approval are imposed on all projects.
                                                                           Effectiveness: In 2014, the City is reviewing the Standard Conditions of Approval, and might
                                                                           consider changes to those conditions after studying their effectiveness in reducing neighborhood
                                                                           and citywide impacts from new construction.
                                                                           Appropriateness: This action is still appropriate for the 2015-2023 Housing Element period.
                                       3.3.2 Development Fees              Implementation: During the 2007-2014 Housing Element planning period, no Housing Impact
                                                                           fees were studied (in a "nexus study"), or were adopted.
                                                                           Effectiveness: In June, 2013, the City Council authorized budget for a "nexus study" to be
                                                                           completed for Oakland, which would be the precursor for any possible impact fee (including a
                                                                           fee for affordable housing production). The Request for Proposals, seeking a developer for that
                                                                           study, was expected to be issued as of July, 2014.
                                                                           Appropriateness: City Council has directed staff to prepare a "nexus study" for impact fees on
                                                                           new development in Oakland, and staff will do so; this will be kept as an action for the 2015
                                                                           Housing Element.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                          71
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                         Objective                                                      -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 3.4 Intergovernmental Coordination 3.4.1 Multiple Agency Reviews          Implementation: When necessary, the City provided the coordinated review of residential
                                                                                  development applications across different governmental agencies. In several of the Specific
                                                                                  Plans, such as West Oakland, and Lake Merritt, numerous public agencies participated in the
                                                                                  planning processes, such as BART, East Bay Municipal Utility District, and AC Transit.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: The Planning and Zoning division has generally been effective coordinating
                                                                                  among different governmental agencies on complex new residential developments.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: It is appropriate for Planning and Building staff to coordinate permitting
                                                                                  among different governmental agencies on multi-family developments, and to include public
                                                                                  agencies in the Specific Planning processes, and the City will continue to do so in the 2015-2023
                                                                                  Housing Element period.
 Policy 3.5: Financing Costs               3.5.1 Access to Low-Cost Financing for Implementation: See affordable housing programs under Goal 2, Policy 2.1. Department of
                                           Development                            Housing and Community Development staff collect data on funds leveraged by the developments
                                                                                  that are supported by the City's annual NOFA but that data is incomplete and hard to analyze.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: This policy was relatively ineffective in that data was not collected to the extent
                                                                                  that was sufficient to understand DHCD's NOFA program's impact in leveraging other sources of
                                                                                  funding.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: DHCD staff will keep this policy in the next planning period and will work to
                                                                                  implement a strategy to collect this data in a more systematic way.
                                           3.5.2 Access to Low-Cost Financing For Implementation: See affordable housing programs under Goal 2, Policy 2.2. Department of
                                           Home Purchase                          Housing and Community Development staff have not been collecting data on funds leveraged by
                                                                                  the first-time homebuyer program lending.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: This policy was relatively ineffective in that data was not collected to the extent
                                                                                  that was sufficient to understand DHCD's first time homebuyer program's impact in leveraging
                                                                                  other sources of funding.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: DHCD staff will keep this policy in the next planning period and will work to
                                                                                  implement a strategy to collect this data in a more systematic way.
72                                                                                                                  EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                              -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                     Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                            -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 3.6: Environmental Constraints 3.6.1 Remediation of Soil Contamination Implementation: The City had offered the CalReUse loan fund for environmental assessment
                                                                               and the Brownfield loan fund for cleanup in 2012, but no new loans were made in 2013. The
                                                                               USEPA awarded Oakland brownfields assessment grants for the years 2009-2011. Work was
                                                                               completed in 2012 on three site assessments. No new EPA grant funds were awarded in 2013.
                                                                               Effectiveness: When funds are available, the City has staff which works with land owners and
                                                                               developers on site remediation and testing.
                                                                               Appropriateness: This policy will remain in the 2015-2023 Housing Element, should funds
                                                                               become available during the planning period, to further assist more land being remediated for
                                                                               housing.
 Policy 3.7: Community Outreach and    3.7.1 Community Outreach Program        Implementation: City of Oakland's Department of Housing and Community Development staff
 Education                                                                     regularly attend meetings hosted by housing advocacy organizations (East Bay Housing
                                                                               Organizations and EveryOneHome) in support of educating the public about DHCD program and
                                                                               policy efforts.
                                                                               Effectiveness: DHCD staff has a very good working relationship with these and other housing
                                                                               organizations.
                                                                               Appropriateness: DHCD staff will keep this policy in the next planning period and will continue
                                                                               to work fostering a collegial relationship with these partner organizations.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                            73
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                   -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                           Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                  -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Goal 4: Conserve and Improve Older Housing and Neighborhoods
 Policy 4.1: Housing Rehabilitation Loan     4.1.1 Rehabilitation Loan Programs for Implementation: The City's Department of Housing and Community Development continues to
 Programs                                    Owner-Occupied Housing                 implement owner-occupied rehabilitation loan programs for both single family units and 2 to 4
                                                                                    unit buildings. For the Housing Element Program planning period from calendar years 2007 to
                                                                                    date a total of 1,300 projects were completed. Rehabilitations include: major and minor
                                                                                    rehabilitation, energy retrofits, and seismic retrofits access improvements for the disabled.
                                                                                    Effectiveness: Staff of the Residential Lending Section of the Department of Housing and
                                                                                    Community Development believe that this program is effective given its accomplishments during
                                                                                    this planning period.
                                                                                    Appropriateness: DHCD will continue to support the residential rehabilitation loan program for
                                                                                    both owner-occupied (both for single family homes and 2-4 unit homes) as resources are
                                                                                    available.
                                             4.1.2 Rehabilitation Loans for Owner-  Implementation: The City's Department of Housing and Community Development continues to
                                             Occupied Buildings With 2 To 4 Units   implement owner-occupied rehabilitation loan programs for both single family units and 2 to 4
                                                                                    unit buildings. For the Housing Element Program planning period from calendar years 2007 to
                                                                                    date a total of 1,300 projects were completed. Rehabilitations include: major and minor
                                                                                    rehabilitation, energy retrofits, and seismic retrofits access improvements for the disabled.
                                                                                    Effectiveness: Staff of the Residential Lending Section of the Department of Housing and
                                                                                    Community Development believe that this program is effective given its accomplishments during
                                                                                    this planning period.
                                                                                    Appropriateness: DHCD will continue to support the residential rehabilitation loan program for
                                                                                    both owner-occupied (both for single family homes and 2-4 unit homes) as resources are
                                                                                    available.
74                                                                                                                      EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                     -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program               Objective                                                     -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                    -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                 4.1.3 Vacant Housing Acquisition and Implementation: The dissolution of the Redevelopment Agency forced the City to discontinue
                                 Rehabilitation Program (West Oakland the implementation of the Vacant Housing Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program for West
                                 Only)                                Oakland.
                                                                      Effectiveness: There were no housing rehabilitations completed by this program.
                                                                      Appropriateness: This program will not be present in the next Housing Element planning period
                                                                      for 2015-23.
 Policy 4.2: Blight Abatement    4.2.1 Anti-Blight Programs           Implementation: The number of complaints for blight throughout the City has been fairly
                                                                      consistent over the Housing Element 2007-14 program period. However, there has been a
                                                                      significant reduction in the number of properties that the Building Services Department has been
                                                                      able to clean over this period. This is due to significant reductions in staff and funding to the
                                                                      programs starting in 2010. The programs cannot be maintained without adequate staff and
                                                                      funding.
                                                                      Effectiveness: The program is effective with the proper resources.
                                                                      Appropriateness: The City's Building Services department will continue the programs and look
                                                                      for additional resources and the department is beginning to add more staff with help from the
                                                                      city’s general fund.
                                 4.2.2 Housing Code Enforcement       Implementation: The number of housing complaints throughout the City has been fairly
                                                                      consistent over the program period. The City's Building Services Department responds to every
                                                                      complaint but due to significant reductions in staff and funding its code enforcement efforts had
                                                                      to be modified. Building Services staff starts the complaint process with a Courtesy Notice
                                                                      which has reduced the number of inspections that are performed.
                                                                      Effectiveness: Given current methods of program execution, at the moment only the most
                                                                      egregious cases need enforcement efforts.
                                                                      Appropriateness: The Building Services Department will continue this program and continue to
                                                                      look for more effective and efficient methods of addressing housing violations in the city.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                       75

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                         -- Progress in Implementation
   Name of Program           Objective                                                -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                         -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                          4.2.3 Problem Properties Program Implementation: While the City's Building Services Department continues to conduct SMART
                                                           inspections under this program (Strategic Multi-Agency Response Team), there has been a
                                                           significant reduction in the number of properties that the department has been able to clean over
                                                           the program period. This is due to significant reductions in staff and funding that started in 2010.
                                                           The program cannot be maintained without adequate staff and funding. We will continue the
                                                           program and look for additional sources of funding. We are beginning to add more staff with
                                                           help from the city’s general fund.
                                                           Effectiveness: The program is effective with the proper resources.
                                                           Appropriateness: The City's Building Services department will continue the programs and look
                                                           for additional resources and the department is beginning to add more staff with help from the
                                                           city’s general fund.
76                                                                                           EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                   -- Progress in Implementation
    Name of Program                 Objective                                                   -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                  -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                 4.2.4 Vacant Building Registration Implementation Status: The Foreclosed and Vacant Building Registration Program for bank-
                                 Program                            owned properties (REOs) was implemented in 2010 and amended in 2012 to include properties
                                                                    with a recorded Notice of Default (NOD) and occupied properties that were either NOD or REO.
                                                                    An on-line registry was developed to administer the Program more efficiently. If a property is in
                                                                    default but determined to be vacant and abandoned by the owner, the lender is required to
                                                                    maintain the property. Since the amendment of this ordinance in September 2012, over 2,300
                                                                    properties have been registered. As of March 2014, there were 1,167 properties with active
                                                                    registrations, of which 188 were bank owned. In addition, a new ordinance was adopted and a
                                                                    new registry was implemented in March 2013 for non-owner occupied purchases of formerly
                                                                    defaulted properties. This ordinance requires an inspection to confirm building code compliance.
                                                                    There have been 42 investor registrations to date.
                                                                    Effectiveness: The Foreclosed and Vacant Building Registry enables building services to
                                                                    respond quickly and effectively to complaints regarding blight and property conditions and
                                                                    monitor monthly inspection reports completed by property managers. Despite the decrease in the
                                                                    number of foreclosures that end up in bank ownership, defaults persist. The inclusion of
                                                                    defaulted properties in the registry has become a critical part of the program's success. The non-
                                                                    owner occupied NOD/REO properties registration program helps to prevent building health and
                                                                    safety issues from persisting for new occupants of formerly distressed homes. Proactive spot
                                                                    inspections of 1,073 properties were completed in 2012, over 500 inspections in 2013, and 100
                                                                    inspections in the first quarter of 2014.
                                                                    Appropriateness: The goals set forth in the previous Housing Element were critical to the
                                                                    development of successful foreclosure mitigation strategies that were in great need and that have
                                                                    been successfully implemented. The goals have been met and expanded with regard to the
                                                                    properties in the City that have been directly affected by foreclosure. As a result of the new
                                                                    systems put into place, efforts to track all abandoned properties in the City are under discussion,
                                                                    as is restoring the receivership program to help facilitate abandoned properties back to productive
                                                                    use.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                    77
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                      -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                Objective                                                     -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                    -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                  4.2.5 Tax Default Foreclosure Sales  Implementation: Department of Planning, Building, and Neighborhood Preservation and
                                  Program                              DHCD’s Strategic Initiatives Section are continuing to work with the Alameda County Tax
                                                                       Collector to auction properties which have been tax-defaulted for 10 years or more. Details
                                                                       about disposition strategies are currently being finalized between the City of Oakland and
                                                                       Alameda County.
                                                                       Effectiveness: About 75 properties went to auction and 22 sold under this program during the
                                                                       Housing Element planning period 2007-14. The City is working to develop an affordable
                                                                       housing strategy on the remaining properties that did not sell in the auction. Efforts to settle
                                                                       long-standing questions on how to make this program work have proceeded so that Staff is
                                                                       confident that this program will progress in the next Housing Element planning period.
                                                                       Appropriateness: The City's Building Services department and DHCD's Strategic Initiatives
                                                                       section will continue implementing this program.
 Policy 4.3: Housing Preservation 4.3.1 Property Relocation Assistance Implementation Status: The City's Planning and Building Department require a good-faith effort
                                                                       to move any buildings displaced by new development. Three efforts to relocate individual older
                                                                       houses broadly classified as “historic” were in progress at the end of 2013. Work is entirely in
                                                                       the private sector as there are no City funds available to support these efforts financially. The
                                                                       main obstacles include finding available land, purchasing that land, and approving a complicated
                                                                       array of permits quickly.
                                                                       Effectiveness: In follow up to the 1999-2006 Housing Element, in 2009 a sub-committee of the
                                                                       Landmarks Preservation Advisory Board worked to develop property relocation procedures,
                                                                       design guidelines and an assistance program to implement the Policy ‘Property Relocation Rather
                                                                       Demolition.’ Efforts to adopt these new policies were put on-hold in 2011-12 and never re-
                                                                       started.
                                                                       Appropriateness: Building moves occur very rarely, unless there is a major dislocation such as
                                                                       the 980 freeway construction that sent houses to both Preservation Park (museum and office
                                                                       uses) and to Oak Center (residential) under Redevelopment’s auspices in the 1980s. This is an
                                                                       appropriate way to conserve housing stock, but will never affect a large number of units.
                                                                       Regardless, the City will continue to keep this policy as a program under the auspices of the
                                                                       Historic Preservation section in the Planning Department.
78                                                                                                        EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                        -- Progress in Implementation
    Name of Program                 Objective                                                        -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                       -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                 4.3.2 Housing Repairs for Seniors and   Implementation: The City CDBG contracts with a local organization to provide home repairs
                                 People with Disabilities                and safety modifications for seniors and disabled homeowners. During the Housing Element
                                                                         planning period from 2007-14, CDBG granted Rebuilding Together Oakland a total of $422,692
                                                                         that was used to conduct repairs on 176 housing units for low income seniors and persons with
                                                                         disabilities. The City of Oakland contracts with Alameda County to coordinate the Minor Home
                                                                         Repair Program (MHRP). The limit on repairs for the MHR program is $2499 per property. The
                                                                         City also has an Access Improvement Program that will assist in repairs to homes owned by
                                                                         persons with disabilities or renting to persons with disabilities. The Access Improvement
                                                                         Program (AIP) has an expenditure limit of $24,000 per property. Expenditures for the Minor
                                                                         Home Repair Program are only available for the years 2010-14 from the last Housing Element
                                                                         planning period. The Minor Home Repair Program loaned a total of $1,016,367 that was used to
                                                                         conduct repairs on 594 housing units for low income seniors and persons with disabilities.
                                                                         During the Housing Element planning period from 2007-14, the Access Improvement Program
                                                                         received 198 applications, grants were approved for 153 projects and 134 projects were
                                                                         completed for grants totaling $2,406,580.
                                                                         Effectiveness: CDBG and Residential Lending Sections of the Department of Housing and
                                                                         Community Development believe that this program is effective given its accomplishments during
                                                                         this planning period.
                                                                         Appropriateness: DHCD will continue to support the programs that provide housing repairs to
                                                                         seniors and people with disabilities as resources are available.
                                 4.3.3 Senior Counseling Programs - Home Implementation: During the 2007-14 Housing Element planning period the City's Department of
                                 Equity Conversion                       Housing and Community Development Department, CDBG Section contracted with a local
                                                                         organization to provide counseling to seniors considering Home Equity Conversions. During this
                                                                         time period the CDBG Section granted a total of $190,860 that provided in-depth counseling
                                                                         services to 259 senior citizens in addition to information and referral services and educational
                                                                         seminars on the subject. In 2013, the City's contract to provide counseling to seniors considering
                                                                         Home Equity Conversions lapsed and was not renewed.
                                                                         Effectiveness: City staff is evaluating the effectiveness of this program and may move to a fee
                                                                         for service contract.
                                                                         Appropriateness: DHCD has decided to remove this program as a policy goal in the next
                                                                         Housing Element planning period from 2015-2023.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                         79
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                  -- Progress in Implementation
   Name of Program           Objective                                                         -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                          4.3.4 Access Improvement Program         Implementation: The City's Department of Housing and Community Development continues to
                                                                   implement the Access Improvement Program which provides repairs for seniors and disabled
                                                                   persons. For the Housing Element Program planning period from calendar years 2007 to date
                                                                   198 applications were received, 153 grants were approved and 134 projects were completed.
                                                                   Effectiveness: Staff of the Residential Lending Section of the Department of Housing and
                                                                   Community Development believe that this program is effective given its accomplishments during
                                                                   this planning period.
                                                                   Appropriateness: DHCD will continue to support the Access Improvement Program as resources
                                                                   are available.
                          4.3.5 Acquisition and Rehabilitation of  Implementation: The City has worked with the Oakland Community Land Trust (OCLT) to
                          Foreclosed Properties (Neighborhood      implement the HUD Neighborhood Stabilization Program to rehabilitate foreclosed properties.
                          Stabilization Program)                   By the middle of 2014, the status of OCLT activities was: 17 acquired foreclosed homes; one of
                                                                   the homes was demolished due to the condition of the house; 16 homes have been completely
                                                                   rehabilitated. Of those homes, 3 are for sale and 13 of them have been sold.
                                                                   Effectiveness: DHCD staff believe that this program is effective in promoting homeownership
                                                                   opportunities for very low-income homebuyers.
                                                                   Appropriateness: DHCD will continue to support the efforts of the OCLT as resources are
                                                                   available and if programming is feasible.
                          4.3.6 Continuing Implementation of Mills Implementation: The year 2010 was the first year of a permanent Mills Act Program, following a
                          Act Contracts                            successful two year pilot program in the City of Oakland. As of 2013, the sixth year of the
                                                                   program, there are 25 residential properties with recorded Mills Act Contracts approved to
                                                                   receive a property tax reduction in exchange for a long-term contract to put the property's tax
                                                                   savings into the rehabilitation of the building. The property must be a Designated Historic
                                                                   Property; the designation process can occur concurrently with the Mills Act application.
                                                                   Effectiveness: This program exceeded its goal of 20 Mills Act contracts for the 2007-2014
                                                                   Housing Element Policy Period.
                                                                   Appropriateness: This program is an appropriate way to conserve housing stock though it will
                                                                   never affect a large number of units. Program participation requires a fairly high level of
                                                                   planning and building/contracting sophistication and long-term commitment.
80                                                                                                     EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                        -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                           Objective                                                            -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                        -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Goal 5: Preserve Affordable Rental Housing
 Policy 5.1: Preservation of At-Risk Housing 5.1.1 Monitoring and Preservation           Implementation: DHCD Staff maintain a database of all affordable housing units that are at-risk
                                                                                         of converting to market-rate housing. Staff work closely with California Housing Partnership
                                                                                         Corporation (CHPC) to vet data that they receive from HUD and the California Tax Credit
                                                                                         Allocation Committee. DHCD Staff provided CHPC with additional data on those units not
                                                                                         present in their HUD and CTCAC database and are trying to understand the vulnerability of any
                                                                                         high-risk properties (with regulatory agreements expiring in 2014).
                                                                                         Effectiveness: DHCD and CHPC staff work closely and have an effective partnership.
                                                                                         Appropriateness: DHCD will continue to monitor at-risk properties and this program will be
                                                                                         present in the next Housing Element planning period for 2015-2023.
                                             5.1.2 Contact With Owners of At-Risk        Implementation: DHCD staff have contacted the owners of various properties listed in Chapter
                                             Buildings                                   3, Table 3-54. There are a few properties where staff did not receive a response from the
                                                                                         property owner, therefore there are three properties that DHCD staff consider possibly at-risk of
                                                                                         being lost to the supply of affordable housing (with regulatory agreements expiring in 2014).
                                                                                         Effectiveness: DHCD staff believe that this program is important to maintain. It is not clear how
                                                                                         effective it is given the decreased resources to support the rehabilitation of the current affordable
                                                                                         housing stock.
                                                                                         Appropriateness: DHCD will include this program in the next Housing Element planning period
                                                                                         for 2015-2023.
                                             5.1.3 Financial Assistance for Preservation Implementation: Housing Development Services circulated a NOFA each year from 2007-2014
                                             Projects                                    for the rehabilitation/preservation of existing affordable housing. During that time period the
                                                                                         City of Oakland awarded $45,838,781 for rehabilitation/preservation projects.
                                                                                         Effectiveness: The NOFA was circulated annually as planned and achieved what it set out to do
                                                                                         as stated in the Housing Element's policy guidance.
                                                                                         Appropriateness: City staff has determined that this program is effective and will continue to
                                                                                         circulate annual NOFAs as funding is available.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                          81
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                   -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                         Objective                                                         -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                  -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                           5.1.4 Project Based Section 8 Assistance Implementation: Over a seven year period, OHA awarded 1,497 project-based vouchers, 1,093
                                                                                    of which are under contract.
                                                                                    Effectiveness: OHA effectively provided project based assistance to 37 projects.
                                                                                    Appropriateness: OHA will continue to invest MTW funds as available into its project-based
                                                                                    voucher properties and will continue the assistance as funding permits.
 Policy 5.2: Support for Assisted Projects 5.2.1 Advocacy for State and Federal     Implementation: The City's Department of Housing and Community Development staff responds
 with Capital Needs                        Financing                                to requests for analysis on State or Federal legislative activities related to affordable housing.
                                                                                    Effectiveness: Is not clear the impact of these efforts on the outcome of various legislations
                                                                                    related to affordable housing.
                                                                                    Appropriateness: DHCD staff will continue to advocate for State and Federal financing of
                                                                                    affordable housing. It is especially important to the City given the February 2012 dissolution of
                                                                                    Redevelopment and the related elimination of the Redevelopment tax-increment financing for
                                                                                    affordable housing.
                                           5.2.2 Funding for Capital Needs          Implementation: Housing Development Services circulated a NOFA each year from 2007-2014
                                                                                    for the rehabilitation/preservation of existing affordable housing. During that time period the
                                                                                    City of Oakland awarded $45,838,781 for rehabilitation/preservation projects.
                                                                                    Effectiveness: The NOFA was circulated annually as planned and achieved what it set out to do
                                                                                    as stated in the Housing Element's policy guidance.
                                                                                    Appropriateness: City staff has determined that this program is effective and will continue to
                                                                                    circulate annual NOFAs as funding is available.
82                                                                                                                     EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                           -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                   Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                           -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 5.3: Rent Adjustment Program 5.3.1 Rent Adjustment Ordinance         Implementation: The Rent Adjustment Program's goal is to stabilize rents in the City of Oakland.
                                                                             During the Housing Element planning period of 2007-14 the program enforced the provisions of
                                                                             the Rent Ordinance by receiving petitions from landlords and tenants, conducting administrative
                                                                             hearings and meditations, and bringing appeals before the Residential Rent and Relocation
                                                                             Board. The Rent Adjustment Program continues to effectively resolve disputes between
                                                                             residential renters and property owners that arise under the Ordinance.
                                                                             Effectiveness: The Rent Adjustment Program has a significant number of users of their services-
                                                                             -both renters and owners--and is considered an effective program.
                                                                             Appropriateness: This program will continue into the next Housing Element planning period
                                                                             2015-2023.
                                     5.3.2 Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance Implementation: The Rent Adjustment Program continued to enforce the Just Cause for Eviction
                                                                             Ordinance. The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect tenants against arbitrary, unreasonable, or
                                                                             retaliatory evictions.
                                                                             Effectiveness: The Rent Adjustment Program Just Cause for Eviction program has a significant
                                                                             number of users of their services and is considered an effective program.
                                                                             Appropriateness: This program will continue into the next Housing Element planning period
                                                                             2015-2023.
                                     5.3.3 Ellis Act Protections Ordinance   Implementation: The Rent Adjustment Program continued to enforce the Ellis Act Protections
                                                                             Ordinance. The purpose of this Ordinance is to enact procedures for withdrawal of units from
                                                                             the rental market as one of the allowable reasons for eviction.
                                                                             Effectiveness: The Rent Adjustment Program Ellis Act Protections Ordinance program is
                                                                             considered an effective program.
                                                                             Appropriateness: This program will continue into the next Housing Element planning period
                                                                             2015-2023.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                           83
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                     -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                           Objective                                                         -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                    -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 5.4: Preservation of Single Room     5.4.1 Project Based Section 8 Assistance Implementation: OHA does not operate a traditional SRO program. HUD approved an OHA
 Occupancy Hotels                                                                     request to create a project-based voucher program specific to SRO/residential hotel units. OHA
                                                                                      received approval to implement the “SRO-project-based voucher” program, but did not assist any
                                                                                      projects under this authorization.
                                                                                      Effectiveness: Due to funding challenges, OHA did not implement this policy goal so there are
                                                                                      no measurable results at this time.
                                                                                      Appropriateness: OHA continues to examine the use of this policy in various supportive housing
                                                                                      models.
                                             5.4.2 Residential Hotel                  Implementation: This regulation, in the Planning Code at 17.102.230, was not changed in the
                                             Conversion/Demolition Protections        planning period 2007-2014. The regulation requires a conditional use permit and tenant
                                                                                      assistance before conversions or demolitions of SRO units are permitted.
                                                                                      Effectiveness: It is not known if this regulation in the Planning Code reduced the number of
                                                                                      converted or demolished SRO units in Oakland.
                                                                                      Appropriateness: Staff considers this regulation appropriate, and it will continue to be an action
                                                                                      in the 2015-2023 Housing Element.
 Policy 5.5: Limitations on Conversion of    5.5.1 Residential Property Conversion    Implementation: This regulation, in the Planning Code at 17.102.230, was not changed in the
 Residential Property to Non-Residential Use Ordinance                                planning period 2007-2014. The regulation requires a conditional use permit and tenant
                                                                                      assistance before conversions of residential units into non-residential space is permitted. In
                                                                                      2007-2014, the City did not review this Planning Code procedure and permit history to determine
                                                                                      if revisions are needed to reduce the potential for conversion of residential uses.
                                                                                      Effectiveness: It is not known if this regulation in the Planning Code reduced the number of
                                                                                      converted residential units into non-residential space in Oakland.
                                                                                      Appropriateness: Staff considers this regulation appropriate, and it will continue to be an action
                                                                                      in the 2015-2023 Housing Element. Strategic Planning staff will add an analysis of this Planning
                                                                                      Code provision and the permitting history to the 2015 staff workload, to determine if the current
                                                                                      regulation remains effective.
84                                                                                                                       EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                  -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                         Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 5.6: Limitations on Conversion of  5.6.1 Condominium Conversion Ordinance  Implementation: Discussions of a revision to Oakland's Condominium Conversion Ordinance
 Rental Property to Condominiums                                                   has come up repeatedly during the 2007-2014 Housing Element planning period with no official
                                                                                   proposal introduced at the City Council.
                                                                                   Effectiveness: Although this policy has not had any progress in the last Housing Element
                                                                                   planning period, there are a number of interested parties that would like to see some negotiated
                                                                                   changes be implemented.
                                                                                   Appropriateness: This policy will be carried into the next Housing Element planning period.
                                                                                   Staff will seek to standardize the collection of data on any condominium conversions that happen
                                                                                   annually.
 Policy 5.7: Preserve and Improve Existing 5.7.1 Redevelopment of Large Public     Implementation: OHA has reduced the number of public housing units in its portfolio to 1,605
 Oakland Housing Authority-Owned Housing   Housing Developments                    units. Tassafaronga was a former 87-unit public housing site and was replaced with project-
                                                                                   based Section 8 and Tax Credit units. There are no public housing units at the site. Phase 5 of
                                                                                   Lion Creek Crossings, the final phase, is under construction with 128 units of Senior units, no
                                                                                   public housing. All public housing units at Lion Creek Crossing have been rebuilt.
                                                                                   Effectiveness: Tassafaronga is completed and has 150 units. Lion Creek Crossings has 4 of 5
                                                                                   phases completed resulting in 439 units, 157 of which are public housing. These formerly public
                                                                                   housing sites now are mixed-income.
                                                                                   Appropriateness: There is no new HOPE VI financing available for redevelopment of large sites.
                                                                                   OHA will explore other options, as needed, and will invest MTW funds as available to operate
                                                                                   and maintain high quality units.
                                           5.7.2 Disposition and Rehabilitation of Implementation: OHA completed disposition of 1,615 scattered site units and has an ongoing
                                           Scattered Site Public Housing           rehabilitation program for these units. In 2010, OHA submitted an application to HUD for
                                                                                   disposition of 383 units in five senior properties. HUD continues to review this application in
                                                                                   2014.
                                                                                   Effectiveness: OHA met the intent of this goal and through the rehab and preservation of the
                                                                                   units in the Oakland Affordable Housing Preservation Initiatives portfolio, extends their long-
                                                                                   term viability as an affordable housing resource.
                                                                                   Appropriateness: OHA will continue to invest MTW resources to rehabilitate properties.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                  85
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                     -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                         Objective                                                           -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                   -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Goal 6: Promote Equal Housing Opportunity
 Policy 6.1: Fair Housing Actions          6.1.1 Funding for Fair Housing             Implementation: Until June 2013, the City funded a grant that provided funding to five
                                           Organizations                              organizations providing tenant/landlord counseling and fair housing services. In July 2013, that
                                                                                      contract was renewed with four of those organizations.
                                                                                      Effectiveness: Details of the Fair Housing program implementation can be found in the City's
                                                                                      Annual Action plan that is adopted and submitted every May to the Federal Department of
                                                                                      Housing and Urban Development.
                                                                                      Appropriateness: The City will continue to fund Fair Housing services as required by Federal
                                                                                      regulations that dictate a portion of CDBG expenditures for the implementation of the Fair
                                                                                      Housing Act.
                                           6.1.2 Housing Search Assistance for People Implementation: During the Housing Element planning period from 2007-14, the City
                                           with Disabilities                          maintained a contract with a local organization to provide housing search assistance and
                                                                                      counseling for the disabled population. In 2013, the City's contract with this organization to
                                                                                      provide housing search assistance and counseling for the disabled population was not renewed.
                                                                                      Effectiveness: Although this contract was not renewed in 2013, it was not based on performance
                                                                                      of the contractor.
                                                                                      Appropriateness: Future funding of these services will be considered in the next 2-year CDBG
                                                                                      contract round starting July 2015.
                                           6.1.3 Affirmative Fair Marketing           Implementation: The City rewrote its Affirmative Fair Marketing Procedures guidelines in 2010.
                                                                                      City-funded Housing Projects are required to submit marketing plans for review for compliance
                                                                                      with the procedures.
                                                                                      Effectiveness: This policy is effective in that it underscores the City's compliance with Federal
                                                                                      regulations.
                                                                                      Appropriateness: The City will revise this document in parallel with the drafting of the 5 Year
                                                                                      Consolidated Plan to HUD in June 2015.
86                                                                                                                       EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                 -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                     Objective                                                           -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 6.2: Reasonable Accommodations 6.2.1 Incorporate Reasonable               Implementation: The City of Oakland’s ADA Programs Division continues to coordinate
                                       Accommodations                             compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Title II for State and Local
                                                                                  Government services (excluding employment). It does this by ensuring programmatic access to
                                                                                  City programs, activities and services and by facilitating physical access improvements for City-
                                                                                  owned buildings and facilities. The ADA office investigates and mediates complaints of
                                                                                  disability discrimination that fall within the City’s jurisdiction. ADA Programs facilitates access
                                                                                  for City customers by managing a centralized budget for Auxiliary Aids and Services, and by
                                                                                  providing annual training opportunities to City staff and vendors. The City's Design,
                                                                                  Engineering and Construction Division coordinates on-demand construction or reconstruction of
                                                                                  curb ramps, repairs of sidewalks, and installation of on-street disabled parking zones to provide
                                                                                  access to residences and other essential facilities for qualified individuals with disabilities. In
                                                                                  addition, ADA Programs staffs the Mayor’s Commission on Persons with Disabilities (MCPD)
                                                                                  and the joint Access Compliance Advisory Committee of the MCPD and Mayor’s Commission
                                                                                  on Aging.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: This program is considered effective.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: This program will be continued into the next Housing Element planning period
                                                                                  2015-23.
                                       6.2.2 Develop and Publicize Administrative Implementation: City Planning staff did not bring a Reasonable Accommodations ordinance to
                                       Procedures (for Reasonable                 City Council until 2014, after the planning period for the 2007-2014 Housing Element.
                                       Accommodations)
                                                                                  Effectiveness: The Reasonable Accommodations ordinance, (adopted in July 2014) was
                                                                                  developed with the assistance of the City’s ADA Programs staff and thoroughly vetted by
                                                                                  representatives from the Disability Rights of California organization, therefore, the ordinance is
                                                                                  anticipated to be effective in providing people with disabilities fair access to housing.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: On July 15, 2014, the City Council is expected to adopt a Reasonable
                                                                                  Accommodations ordinance, which, if adopted will become effective on August 15, 2014.
                                                                                  Strategic Planning staff is preparing the public education materials for the Reasonable
                                                                                  Accommodation application procedure, which will be available at the City's website, and at the
                                                                                  Planning and Zoning counter.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                   87

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                               -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                       Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                              -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 6.3: Promote Regional Efforts to 6.3.1 Regional Housing Needs Allocation Implementation: The City actively advocated for a more equitable distribution of affordable
 Expand Housing Choice                                                           housing through its participation in the Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS) process and its
                                                                                 participation on the Housing Methodology Committee that determined the allocation process for
                                                                                 the 2015-23 Housing Element cycle. The RHNA process was completed in 2012.
                                                                                 Effectiveness: City Staff was involved in the crafting of the final methodology and was satisfied
                                                                                 with the RHNA outcomes.
                                                                                 Appropriateness: Depending on resources and staffing availability, City Staff will participate in
                                                                                 future Regional Housing Needs Allocation process. This policy will remain active in the next
                                                                                 Housing Element planning period for 2015-23.
 Policy 6.4: Fair Lending                6.4.1 Community Credit Needs Assessment Implementation: In 2011 three community credit needs assessments were completed by David
                                                                                 Rosen and Associates: 1) "Foreclosure and Delinquency" that examined mortgage default and
                                                                                 foreclosure data and risks for the City of Oakland Community Development Districts; 2) "Small
                                                                                 Business Credit Demand Analysis" that estimated, by applying prevailing banking industry
                                                                                 measures and ratios as published for 2010 by The Risk Management Association (RMA,
                                                                                 formerly Robert Morris and Associates), the gross receipts tax base of Oakland as derived from
                                                                                 City business license tax data; 3) "Single-Family Purchase Loan Demand" that estimated the
                                                                                 aggregate community credit demand in any given year. This aggregate credit demand figure is
                                                                                 then used to determine the performance of individual banks operating in the City.
                                                                                 Effectiveness: Data collected and summarized in these reports informs City Staff and City
                                                                                 Council to better understand what the needs are of the City's 7 Community Development
                                                                                 Districts.
                                                                                 Appropriateness: City ordinance requires periodic community credit needs assessments so this
                                                                                 policy will remain in the next Housing Element planning period for 2015-2023.
88                                                                                                                  EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                        -- Progress in Implementation
    Name of Program                 Objective                                                        -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                      -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                 6.4.2 Community Reinvestment Activities Implementation: In June 2012, the City Council adopted a resolution certifying the banks that
                                 Linked to Banking                       met their Fair Share Goals and those banks that participated in the survey but did not meet those
                                                                         goals. Fair Share Goals is the proportional amount of loans made in the community relative to
                                                                         their annual deposits received from the community. These determinations of whether banks met
                                                                         Fair Share Lending standards were based on a Linked Banking Services Survey conducted in
                                                                         November 2011. In July 2012 the city adopted a resolution revising and updating the City's
                                                                         Linked Banking Ordinance by specifying changes to the annual survey.
                                                                         Effectiveness: Data collected and summarized by enforcement of the Linked Banking Ordinance
                                                                         informs City Staff and City Council to better understand the banking needs of the City's
                                                                         residents.
                                                                         Appropriateness: City ordinance requires periodic linked banking surveys so this policy will
                                                                         remain in the next Housing Element planning period for 2015-23.
                                 6.4.3 Predatory Lending Controls        Implementation: City Staff focused on addressing the foreclosure crisis through events, outreach,
                                                                         counseling and partnerships with community organizations. The City has used Federal CDBG
                                                                         resources to contract with an agency to provide workshops to homeowners facing possible
                                                                         foreclosure. Additionally, in October 2012 the City adopted a resolution supporting foreclosure
                                                                         prevention and mitigation activities. Those activities include 1) allocation of funds for a
                                                                         foreclosure prevention loan fund, 2) community services including door-to-door outreach, 3)
                                                                         homeownership legal advocacy, 4) homeowner counseling and loan modification advocacy, and
                                                                         5) tenant counseling and legal services. To address the post-foreclosure crisis lending market
                                                                         issues, the City is funding counseling and legal services to protect residents and potential
                                                                         homebuyers from predatory lending practices.
                                                                         Effectiveness: The Department of Housing and Community Development Strategic Initiatives
                                                                         Section has been effective in implementing above-noted predatory lending prevention strategies.
                                                                         Appropriateness: This program will be continued into the next Housing Element planning period
                                                                         2015-23.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                         89
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                    -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                           Objective                                                        -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                  -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Goal 7: Promote Sustainable Development and Sustainable Communities
 Policy 7.1: Sustainable Residential         7.1.1 Promote Green Building Design for Implementation: The City's continues to staff the Green Building Resource Center, and enforces
 Development Programs                        Private Development                     the Oakland Green Building Ordinance at the Planning and Zoning counter, through the Basic
                                                                                     Application for Design Review. The City's website continues to provide green building
                                                                                     information to developers and home owners: www2.oaklandnet.com/GreenBuilding/index.htm
                                                                                     Effectiveness: The City's planning and buildings staff enforce the Oakland Green Building
                                                                                     Ordinance. The City's adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan encourages the construction of
                                                                                     new and largely renovated buildings with energy efficient techniques and materials.
                                                                                     Appropriateness: The City is committed to promoting Green Building for private development,
                                                                                     and retains this action for the 2015 Housing Element.
                                             7.1.2 Remove Barriers to Green Building Implementation: A multi-year public review process led to the adoption, in October 2010, of the
                                             Design for Private Development          Oakland Green Building ordinance, which removes barriers to green building techniques and
                                                                                     requires new housing construction to follow Build it Green or LEED for Homes guidelines.
                                                                                     Effectiveness: The City's planning and buildings staff enforce the Oakland Green Building
                                                                                     Ordinance. The City's adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan encourages the construction of
                                                                                     new and largely renovated buildings with energy efficient techniques and materials.
                                                                                     Appropriateness: The City considers the adoption, and renewal of the Green Building Ordinance
                                                                                     to have successfully accomplished this action, and it is not continued in the 2015 Housing
                                                                                     Element.
90                                                                                                                      EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                       Objective                                                        -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                               -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                         7.1.3 Consider Requiring Green Building  Implementation: In October, 2010, Oakland adopted a wide-ranging Green Building ordinance
                                         Design for Private Development           for residential development. New multifamily construction and renovations over 1,000 square
                                                                                  feet must follow the standards and best practices from Build it Green, and LEED for Homes. See
                                                                                  website: http://www2.oaklandnet.com/GreenBuilding/index.htm
                                                                                  Effectiveness: The City's planning and buildings staff enforce the Oakland Green Building
                                                                                  Ordinance. The City's adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan encourages the construction of
                                                                                  new and largely renovated buildings with energy efficient techniques and materials.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: The City considers the adoption, and renewal of the Green Building Ordinance
                                                                                  to have successfully accomplished this action, and it is not continued in the 2015 Housing
                                                                                  Element.
                                         7.1.4 Require Green Building Design      Implementation: The City adopted its Green Building ordinance in October 2010 and it is
                                         requirements for City-funded Development regularly applied to multi-family affordable housing development. In the annual Notification of
                                                                                  Funding Availability for Affordable Housing, new development and rehabilitation projects must
                                                                                  meet a minimum threshold of attaining the minimum scores in each category set forth in their
                                                                                  respective Green Point Checklists. Projects scoring higher in the Green Point Checklist
                                                                                  evaluation are given preference in the NOFA scoring process.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: The City's planning and buildings staff enforce the Oakland Green Building
                                                                                  Ordinance. The City's adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan encourages the construction of
                                                                                  new and largely renovated buildings with energy efficient techniques and materials.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: This action will be continued in the 2015 Housing Element.
 Policy 7.2: Minimize Energy Consumption 7.2.1 Energy and Climate Action Plan     Implementation: The Oakland City Council adopted the Energy and Climate Action Plan
                                                                                  (ECAP) in December 2012, establishing Oakland Greenhouse Gas reduction plans and target. It
                                                                                  can be reviewed, with the implementation reports, at the City's website:
                                                                                  http://www2.oaklandnet.com/Government/o/PWA/s/SO/OAK025294.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: Oakland has made progress on many of the 100+ actions in the ECAP. See the
                                                                                  implementation report for more details.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: Because the ECAP has been adopted, this action will not be in the 2015
                                                                                  Housing Element.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                 91
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                 -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                      Objective                                                          -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                              -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                        7.2.2 Alternative Energy Production     Implementation: In October, 2010, Oakland adopted a wide-ranging Green Building ordinance
                                                                                for residential development. New multifamily construction and renovations over 1,000 square
                                                                                feet must follow the standards and best practices from Build it Green, and LEED for Homes,
                                                                                which includes alternative energy production. In addition, the City continues to permit
                                                                                installation of photovoltaic arrays on residential buildings (the "SE" permit through the Buildings
                                                                                division).
                                                                                Effectiveness: In the 2007-2014 Housing Element planning period, there have been 1,600
                                                                                permits for photovoltaic arrays in Oakland. It is not currently known what amount of alternative
                                                                                energy these solar panels generate (or offset from traditional electricity sources from the Grid).
                                                                                Appropriateness: The City will continue its recognized leadership in sustainability measures,
                                                                                such as alternative energy production, and this action will be continued in 2015-2023.
                                        7.2.3 Technical Assistance              Implementation: Technical assistance is available from City staff at the Green Building
                                                                                information center, as well as from StopWaste.org.
                                                                                Effectiveness: Staff at the Green Building assistance center help dozens of people every week in
                                                                                complying with the current codes and ordinances for Green Building techniques and measures.
                                                                                Appropriateness: The Department of Planning and Building considers this to be an important
                                                                                service for the public, and will continue to staff this position in the Green Building information
                                                                                center. The action will be continued in the 2015 Housing Element.
 Policy 7.3: Encourage Development that 7.3.1 Infill Planning Code Requirements Implementation: The Citywide Zoning update, adopted in 2011, revised property development
 reduces Carbon Emissions                                                       standards, particularly infill sites on or near the commercial corridors, with an aim to encourage
                                                                                infill development.
                                                                                Effectiveness: During the planning period, (2007-2014), the national economic downturn
                                                                                reduced the number of projects which were built. Without a sufficient number of projects to
                                                                                evaluate, it is difficult to measure the effectiveness of the Planning Code updates and the
                                                                                provision for mini-lot subdivisions in the Planning Code, in terms of increasing the ability to
                                                                                build on in-fill lots.
                                                                                Appropriateness: This action will be incorporated in the 2015 Housing Element into Action
                                                                                7.3.3: "Implement SB 375 provisions, direct new housing to be built in Priority Development
                                                                                Areas."
92                                                                                                                   EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                        -- Progress in Implementation
    Name of Program                 Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                     -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                 7.3.2 Transit Proximity                Implementation: The Citywide Zoning update, adopted in 2011, revised property development
                                                                        standards to conform to the Land Use and Transportation Element, and in some cases, increased
                                                                        densities on sites near transit stops.
                                                                        Effectiveness: "MacArthur Station," a 600-unit development at the parking lots at MacArthur
                                                                        BART station, started construction in 2012. The first phase is "Mural", a 90- unit affordable
                                                                        housing development by Bridge housing, expected to open in Spring, 2015.
                                                                        Appropriateness: This policy is fundamental to the Oakland General Plan and to "Plan Bay
                                                                        Area" regional planning efforts, and, in the 2015 Housing Element, the policy will be edited to
                                                                        include the Priority Development Areas.
                                 7.3.3 Mixed Use Development Incentives Implementation: The Citywide Zoning update, adopted in 2011, permitted mixed use
                                                                        development in nearly all commercially zoned areas (except the Hegenberger Corridor). Even in
                                                                        high density residential areas, ground floor commercial is permitted. In several commercial
                                                                        zones, ground floor commercial activities are required and new design standards for the
                                                                        appearance of ground floor commercial encourages pedestrian activity.
                                                                        Effectiveness: The effectiveness of this action is not yet known, as few new housing
                                                                        developments in downtown Oakland were constructed in the 2007-2014 planning period.
                                                                        Appropriateness: In 2014, the City will conduct a "nexus study" to evaluate development impact
                                                                        fees and incentives. This action is continued in the 2015 Housing Element.
                                 7.3.4 Transit-Oriented Development     Implementation: City staff worked with ABAG and MTC, developing the region's Sustainable
                                                                        Communities Strategy, required by SB 375, which resulted in "Plan Bay Area" -- a coordinated
                                                                        plan for accommodating the region's housing needs, while reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
                                                                        Effectiveness: The City's Specific Plans underway in the 2007-2014 planning period (Lake
                                                                        Merritt BART, West Oakland, and Coliseum Area Specific Plan) are all located in close
                                                                        proximity to BART stations, and all seek to encourage higher density housing around these
                                                                        stations. Each plan has proposals for new zoning, unique to the plan area, that could amend or
                                                                        replace the existing S-15 zoning (mapped at West Oakland and Coliseum BART stations).
                                                                        Appropriateness: This policy is continued in the 2015 Housing Element.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                      93
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                 -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                          Objective                                                      -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                            7.3.5 Implement SB 375 provisions when Implementation: City staff worked with ABAG and MTC, developing the region's Sustainable
                                            adopted                                Communities Strategy, required by SB 375, which resulted in "Plan Bay Area" -- a coordinated
                                                                                   plan for accommodating the region's housing need while reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
                                                                                   Effectiveness: "Plan Bay Area" was adopted in July, 2013.
                                                                                   Appropriateness: The City will continue to encourage new housing development in Priority
                                                                                   Development Area (PDA's) as identified in "Plan Bay Area." This action will be continued into
                                                                                   the 2015 Housing Element.
 Policy 7.4: Minimize Environmental Impacts 7.4.1 Compact Building Design          Implementation: The new Central Business District zoning regulations include compact
 from New Housing                                                                  development requirements including tower siting regulations and the provision that parking must
                                                                                   be structured (no surface parking allowed).
                                                                                   Effectiveness: The effectiveness of this action is not yet known, as few new housing
                                                                                   developments in downtown Oakland were constructed in the 2007-2014 planning period.
                                                                                   Appropriateness: The policy is still appropriate for the types of new development envisioned by
                                                                                   the City's Planning Code and the new Specific Plans, so it is included in the 2015 Housing
                                                                                   Element.
                                            7.4.2 Water Conservation               Implementation: The Oakland Green Building Ordinance has provisions to reduce water
                                                                                   consumption, through the application of the Green Point Rated and LEED for Homes checklists.
                                                                                   Both systems award points for water efficient landscaping, fixtures, and plumbing systems.
                                                                                   Effectiveness: The effectiveness of this action has not been calculated.
                                                                                   Appropriateness: The policy is still appropriate for the types of new development envisioned by
                                                                                   the City's Planning Code and the new Specific Plans, so it is included in the 2015 Housing
                                                                                   Element.
94                                                                                                                   EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                       -- Progress in Implementation
    Name of Program                 Objective                                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                      -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                 7.4.3 Waste Reduction                   Implementation: The City requires Construction and Debris recycling through the building
                                                                         permit process, and household waste recycling. In addition, the Oakland Green Building
                                                                         ordinance checklists give points for waste reduction efforts.
                                                                         Effectiveness: The effectiveness of this action has not been calculated.
                                                                         Appropriateness: The policy is still appropriate for the types of new development envisioned by
                                                                         the City's Planning Code and the new Specific Plans, so it is included in the 2015 Housing
                                                                         Element.
                                 7.4.4 Foster Healthy Indoor Air Quality Implementation: The Oakland Green Building Ordinance has provisions to improve indoor air
                                                                         quality, through the application of the Green Point Rated and LEED for Homes checklists. Both
                                                                         systems award points for low-VOC materials and reduction of formaldehyde in interior finishes.
                                                                         Effectiveness: The effectiveness of this action has not been calculated.
                                                                         Appropriateness: The policy is still appropriate for the types of new development envisioned by
                                                                         the City's Planning Code and the new Specific Plans, so it is included in the 2015 Housing
                                                                         Element.
                                 7.4.5 Recycled content of Building      Implementation: The Oakland Green Building Ordinance has provisions for the use of building
                                 Materials                               materials with recycled content in the construction of new multi-family housing, through the
                                                                         application of the Green Point Rated and the LEED for Homes checklists.
                                                                         Effectiveness: The effectiveness of this action has not been calculated.
                                                                         Appropriateness: The policy is still appropriate for the types of new development envisioned by
                                                                         the City's Planning Code and the new Specific Plans, so it is included in the 2015 Housing
                                                                         Element.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                        95
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                 -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                        Objective                                                        -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                          7.4.6 Re-Use of Building Materials      Implementation: The Oakland Green Building Ordinance has provisions for the reuse of building
                                                                                  materials in the construction of new multi-family housing, through the application of the Green
                                                                                  Point Rated and the LEED for Homes checklists.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: The effectiveness of this action has not been calculated.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: The policy is still appropriate for the types of new development envisioned by
                                                                                  the City's Planning Code and the new Specific Plans, so it is included in the 2015 Housing
                                                                                  Element.
 Policy 7.5: Promote Household Health and 7.5.1 Health Impact Assessments and     Implementation: The principles, if not the form, of health impact assessments are part of the
 Wellness by Conducting Health Impact     Specific Planning Processes             City's 2012 specific planning efforts, in the Central Estuary Area Plan, where buffers for new
 Assessments                                                                      residential uses and existing industrial uses were created and new safe bike and pedestrian ways
                                                                                  are proposed; and in Lake Merritt Station Area Plan where a separately funded Health Risk
                                                                                  Assessment informed future iterations of the Plan. Previously, in 2011, the International
                                                                                  Boulevard Transit Oriented Development Plan included a chapter about public health of the
                                                                                  community.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: It is not known how effective this measure has been in improving the health of the
                                                                                  residents of these areas.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: This action is not continued in the 2015-2023 Housing Element.
                                          7.5.2 Health Impact Assessments and the Implementation: In 2011, staff incorporated principles from Health Impact Assessments, related
                                          City’s Standard Conditions of Approval  to air quality, into an update of the City's Standard Conditions of Approval, mitigating health
                                                                                  impacts from either existing uses on new development or impacts from new development.
                                                                                  Effectiveness: It is not known how effective this measure has been on the health of residents in
                                                                                  these areas with new development.
                                                                                  Appropriateness: This action is not continued in the 2015-2023 Housing Element.
96                                                                                                                    EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS

                                                                                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                        -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                               Objective                                                        -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                                       -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                                                 7.5.3 Health Impact Assessments and the Implementation: The Citywide zoning update was completed in 2011, and did not include Health
                                                 Zoning Update                           Impact Assessments. Beginning in March, 2014, a series of meetings began between the City,
                                                                                         Alameda County and non-profit organizations representing East Bay Building Healthy
                                                                                         Communities, to develop "healthy development guidelines." This work is ongoing through 2015.
                                                                                         Effectiveness: This measure was not adopted in the 2007-2014 planning period, and its
                                                                                         effectiveness is not known.
                                                                                         Appropriateness: This action is not continued in the 2015-2023 Housing Element.
 Goal 8: Increase Public Access to Information through Technology
 Policy 8.1: Electronic Document                 8.1.1 Document Access                   Implementation: Over 50,000 records have been scanned from the Planning and Zoning division;
 Management System                                                                       and over 200,000 records in Building Services. In 2011, this information is available only to
                                                                                         City staff; at some point after 2014, it is intended to be made available to the public.
                                                                                         Effectiveness: The Department of Planning and Building is transitioning from using the software
                                                                                         program Stellant as its document storage and retrieval system to the program Accela, which is the
                                                                                         permit tracking and issuing program used by the Department.
                                                                                         Appropriateness: Public records should be easily accessed by the public.
                                                 8.1.2 Permit Processes and Code         Implementation: Some basic building and planning permit application forms are currently
                                                 Enforcement                             available online. Staff tested and developed the Accela software system during 2013, which
                                                                                         went live to Planning and Building staff in January 2014. Accela, an internet-based software
                                                                                         program, replaces a main-frame based DOS software program in use by the City to track permits
                                                                                         for 25 years.
                                                                                         Effectiveness: Accela software is intended to better coordinate planning, building and code
                                                                                         enforcement staff.
                                                                                         Appropriateness: Use of Accela is an appropriate current technology for the City of Oakland's
                                                                                         Planning and Building division.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                          97
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                               -- Progress in Implementation
   Name of Program           Objective                                                      -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                               -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                          8.1.3 E-Government Services            Implementation: Some basic building and planning permit application forms are currently
                                                                 available online. Staff tested and developed the Accela software system during 2013, which
                                                                 went live to Planning and Building staff in January 2014. Accela, an internet-based software
                                                                 program, replaces a main-frame based DOS software program in use by the City to track permits
                                                                 for 25 years.
                                                                 Effectiveness: Accela software is intended to better coordinate planning, building and code
                                                                 enforcement staff. It will be more effective when, at some point after 2014, it is available to the
                                                                 public, for viewing with an internet connection.
                                                                 Appropriateness: Use of Accela is an appropriate current technology for the City of Oakland's
                                                                 Planning and Building division.
                          8.1.4 Customer Relationship Management Implementation: Some basic building and planning permit application forms are currently
                          System                                 available online. Staff tested and developed the Accela software system during 2013, which
                                                                 went live to Planning and Building staff in January 2014. Accela, an internet-based software
                                                                 program, replaces a main-frame based DOS software program in use by the City to track permits
                                                                 for 25 years.
                                                                 Effectiveness: Accela software is intended to better coordinate planning, building and code
                                                                 enforcement staff. It will be more effective when, at some point after 2014, it is available to the
                                                                 public, for viewing with an internet connection.
                                                                 Appropriateness: Use of Accela is an appropriate current technology for the City of Oakland's
                                                                 Planning and Building division.
98                                                                                                 EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                                -- Progress in Implementation
      Name of Program                         Objective                                                      -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                                                               -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
 Policy 8.2: On-Line Access to Information 8.2.1 Public Notices and Documents    Implementation: In 2010, the City redesigned the Planning and Building Division website (along
                                                                                 with the rest of the City's public website), to improve clarity and make it more easily accessible
                                                                                 for people with disabilities. New and additional information, such as public notices and
                                                                                 documents, continue to be added and updated regularly. Further, for larger planning efforts such
                                                                                 as Specific Plans, staff use Gov Delivery email list serves to broadcast information to interested
                                                                                 parties. The City also launched "Engage Oakland.com", a civic dialogue website, and opened a
                                                                                 Housing policy discussion for the 2015 Housing Element.
                                                                                 Effectiveness: The City is committed to use its website, Gov Delivery, and online tools such as
                                                                                 Engage Oakland, to effectively disseminate information to the public.
                                                                                 Appropriateness: Staff considers the use of internet-based notifications, such as the City's
                                                                                 website, and social media tools like Engage Oakland and Twitter.com accounts to be appropriate
                                                                                 means to reach the public.
                                           8.2.2 Housing & Community Development Implementation: In 2010, the City redesigned the Department of Housing and Community
                                           Web Site                              Development website (along with the rest of the public website), to improve clarity and make it
                                                                                 more easily accessibility for people with disabilities. New and additional information for the
                                                                                 public continues to be added and updated regularly.
                                                                                 Effectiveness: The City redesign of its public website was effective in that it made access by
                                                                                 City staff to edits and updates easier.
                                                                                 Appropriateness: The structural updates to the City's website (including DHCD's website) are
                                                                                 complete. Given this accomplishment, this policy is no longer necessary.
 Policy 8.3: Geographic Information System 8.3.1 Update GIS Parcel Layer         Implementation: City GIS staff update the GIS Parcel layer from the Alameda County Tax
                                                                                 Assessor's office twice a year.
                                                                                 Effectiveness: Staff's regular updates of this Parcel layer ensure that the City, and the public, are
                                                                                 able to view the most current data, when using GIS programs on the website, and internally.
                                                                                 Appropriateness: City staff will continue to update the Oakland GIS with new parcel data from
                                                                                 the Alameda County Tax Assessor's office on a regular basis. It is not needed as a Housing
                                                                                 Element policy for 2015-2023, as it will be accomplished as routine work, by staff.
EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS                                                                                                                                 99
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                -- Progress in Implementation
    Name of Program          Objective                                       -- Effectiveness of Policy/Program
                                                              -- Appropriateness of Goals/Objectives/Policy/Program
                          8.3.2 Web-Based GIS    Implementation: A revised, web-based interactive GIS program launched on the City's website
                                                 in 2012 (http://mapgis.oaklandnet.com/planmap/index.aspx). In addition, a GIS system with
                                                 additional capabilities (such as parcel permit information) is expected to be available for the
                                                 public on the City's website in 2015, through the Accela software system.
                                                 Effectiveness: Planning and zoning information accessible to the public, through an interactive
                                                 mapping and data website, is a basic function of the Planning and Zoning division. Making
                                                 information available in this way also reduces the number of phone calls and inquires the City
                                                 receives from the public about zoning and planning at specific locations.
                                                 Appropriateness: The Planning and Zoning division commits to making zoning, general plan,
                                                 and other pertinent information available to the public through interactive internet-based tools,
                                                 such as Accela. This will not be needed as a Housing Element policy for 2015-2023, as it will be
                                                 accomplished as routine work, by staff.
                                              --
100                                                                                 EVALUATION OF 2007-2014 PROGRAMS
                                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
  3. EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
This chapter of the Housing Element analyzes population and housing characteristics, identifies
special housing needs among certain population groups, evaluates housing conditions, and provides
other important information to support the goals, policies, and programs to meet the needs of current
and future Oakland residents.
This chapter of the Housing Element has been revised according to California Housing and
Community Development Department’s Housing Element Streamlined Update Guidance. The
guidance for this update specifies a ”Requisite Analysis for changes to only certain housing needs,
thus not all language, tables and figures have been changed from the prior published Housing
Element. The primary source of data for the updated analysis is derived from the 2010 Census.
Exceptions to this are noted in the text or table references. 7
Chapter 3 is divided into 11 sections, as follows:
          A. Population and Household Characteristics – provides general information on population
                and household characteristics, such as ethnicity, age, household composition, income,
                and household size.
          B. Housing Characteristics – describes general housing characteristics such as the number of
                housing units by type, tenure, and vacancy.
          C. Age and Condition of Housing Stock – describes the age and condition of the City’s
                housing stock and provides an estimate of the number and percentage of dwelling units in
                need of rehabilitation.
          D. Housing Cost – compares rental housing costs and housing prices in Oakland with
                surrounding communities and analyzes the affordability of housing in Oakland in relation
                to local incomes.
          E. Foreclosures – summarizes the impacts on City of Oakland residents as a result of the
                housing market bubble and resulting economic crisis.
7
  The current American Community Survey (ACS) Census product is only used in some tables as required by California
state Department of Housing and Community Development. The 2010 Census and the American Community Survey (ACS)
continue to be evaluated by City of Oakland staff. Comparing these data to other sources used by the City (e.g.: 2000
Census, California State Department of Finance, and USPS 90-day Vacancy data), there is clear evidence that there are
problems with the ACS sampling. Specifically, the ACS data in question is an under count of the population and over count
of the vacancy rate. City staff are considering an appeal to the US Census bureau for a re-evaluation of these figures.
Specifically, there are discrepancies with the 2010 Census showing a population decrease of 8,842 from 2000 Census
population count yet an increase of 12,202 housing units. The population decrease could be explained partially by those
Oakland households who lost their homes due to foreclosure though all foreclosed homes between 2006-2009 would have
needed to be vacant simultaneously with the Census count to explain the magnitude of population loss reported. (See
section on Foreclosures for detail on ownership units lost during the height of the crisis.) The housing unit increase is
supported by building completions data as reported to the State of California Department of Finance during the same time
period. Additionally, according to the 2010 Census the vacancy rate more than doubled to 9.38% over what was reported in
the 2000 Census. This could explain the discrepancy between the population and housing unit count differences but again it
is not supported by other similar data. The USPS 90-day Vacancy Data shows a vacancy rate of 2% reported March 31,
2010 -- much lower than the 2010 Census. It is conceivable but unlikely that the Census 2010 vacancy rate is attributable to
the foreclosure crisis. If that were the case, again, all homeownership units lost due to foreclosure from 2006-2009 would
need to have been vacant at the time the 2010 Census was taken in addition to other types of vacancies (e.g. 2000 Census
vacancy rate) in order to reach the magnitude of the vacancy rate reported in 2010.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                      101

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
         F. Households Overpaying for Housing – describes the number and percentage of
             households paying more than 30 and 50 percent of their incomes for housing by
             household type and income level.
         G. Overcrowding – analyzes the number and percentage of households by tenure with more
             than one person per room.
         H. Special Housing Needs – describes the characteristics and housing needs of particular
             sub-groups of the City’s population (seniors, large families, female-headed households,
             farm workers, persons with disabilities, and persons in need of emergency shelter)
             identified in state law as groups with special housing needs.
         I.  Assisted Rental Housing – describes the characteristics of publicly assisted private rental
             housing and public housing in Oakland.
         J. Analysis of Assisted, At-Risk Housing Projects – identifies privately owned, subsidized
             rental housing developments that may be at risk of converting to market rate rental
             housing, creating a loss of affordable rental housing in Oakland.
         K. Population and Employment Trends – summarizes population and employment trends in
             Oakland as they relate to future housing needs and demand.
A.       POPULATION AND HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
Population
The City of Oakland had a population of 390,724 in 2010 and was, according to the U.S. Census
Bureau, the eighth largest city in California. The City was home to 153,791 households.
Approximately 8,138 Oakland residents lived in group quarters such as college dormitories, nursing
homes, correctional facilities, and other shelter facilities not constituting individual dwelling units.
The last three decades have brought significant changes to Oakland. Before 1980, Oakland had
experienced three decades of population decline due to changes in the local economy, migration to
suburban communities, and other factors. Since 1990, Oakland has experienced growing interest as a
place to live and work. In recent decades the San Francisco Bay Area has been the focal point of
significant economic development and investment in the technology sector. In the early 2000s this
resulted in significant constraints on housing in areas located near Silicon Valley (San Mateo County
and San Francisco City and County). The bursting of the housing bubble and resulting foreclosure
crisis and economic slowdown after 2008 saw a decline in housing demand and costs both in rental
and ownership units in Oakland. Resurgence in the technology sector in recent years has resulted in
another period of high housing demand that has spilled over to other regional cities including
Oakland. One indicator of the regional nature of housing demand is the “Google Bus” phenomenon.
Information technology companies provide free luxury coach bus shuttles from area cities to their
corporate campuses in Silicon Valley. Those busses now have pick-up locations at four Oakland
locations (including three BART stations). Murmurs of the regional impact of housing demand on
the City of Oakland are starting to become visible in the demand and costs of rental and ownership
housing in the City. See the section on Housing Cost, Housing Prices for Owner-Occupied Housing
for detail on region median home sales prices as an illustration of how significantly less expensive
East Bay housing prices are and how that might be influencing regional housing choice and the
increase in demand for housing in Oakland.
102                                                                EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
The housing policy implications of Oakland’s historic and projected population growth are discussed
in subsequent sections of this chapter.
Ethnicity
Since at least the 1940s, Oakland has had a significantly higher percentage of non-White and
Hispanic residents than other cities of similar size. However, the most significant change in
Oakland’s population since 2000 has been a decrease in the number and the proportion of residents
who identified themselves as non-Hispanic Black/African-American. The City’s non-Hispanic
Black/African American population declined by 23.9 percent between 2000 and 2010. In
comparison, the population who identified themselves as non-Hispanic White increased, as did the
non-Hispanic Asian/Pacific Islander, and Hispanic/Latino populations. The non-Hispanic White
population increased by 7.8 percent, non-Hispanic Asian/Pacific Islander population increased by 7.8
percent, and the Hispanic/Latino population increased by 13.3 percent. Despite these significant
demographic changes, Oakland’s population continues to be very diverse as evidenced by the 2010
census: 25.9 percent non-Hispanic White, 27.3 percent non-Hispanic Black/African American, 16.7
percent non-Hispanic Asian, and 25.4 percent Hispanic. This change in the composition of the City’s
population may have implications for future housing needs (as discussed below in the section on
household characteristics), because the family composition, living preferences and patterns, and
economic decisions of these new arrivals to Oakland may be different than those of previous residents
of the City.
The decline in the non-Hispanic Black/African American population since 1990 may have three
causes: some Black/African American families may have moved to suburban locations by choice to
purchase less costly homes, while others may have moved from Oakland due to rapidly rising housing
costs during recent decades. A third reason might be attributable to the foreclosure crisis with its
epicenter in Oakland neighborhoods that have historically been the location of a large proportion of
the City’s Black/African American population.
Oakland’s population mix over the past 50 years has been influenced by economic and suburban
development trends. The loss of many relatively well-paying “blue collar” and military jobs,
combined with rapid suburbanization in the Bay Area between 1950 and 1980, left Oakland with a
higher percentage of lower-income and minority residents. Since the 1980s, increasing numbers of
immigrants from Asia, the Pacific Islands, and Latin American/Hispanic countries have found homes
in Oakland. According to the 2000 Census, nearly 12 percent of Oakland residents were foreign born
and came to the United States between 1990 and 2000. Nearly 90 percent of these new residents
came from either Asia or Latin America.
Table 3-1 compares population changes in Oakland, Alameda County, and the State of California in
1990, 2000 and 2010 and compares the composition of Oakland’s population with the countywide
and statewide populations.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                    103

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                       Table 3-1
                                  Population by Race, City, County, and State (1990, 2000 and 2010)
Race/                 Oakland                       Oakland         Oakland           Alameda County           State
Ethnicity             1990                          2000            2010
Race                  Number           Percent      Number  Percent Number    Percent 1990     2000   2010     1990     2000   2010
Non-Hispanic/Latino
White (Not
Hispanic/             105,927          28%          93,953  24%     101,308   26%     53%      41%    34%      57%     46%     40%
Latino)
Black or
African               160,640          43%          140,139 35%     106,637   27%     17%      15%    12%      7%      6%      6%
American
Native
                      1,695            <1%          1,471   <1%     1,214     <1%     <1%      <1%    <1%      <1%      1%     <1%
American
Asian/Pacific
                      53,818           14%          62,259  16%     67,208    17%     14%      21%    27%      9%      11%     13%
Islander
Other Race            895              <1%          1,229   <1%     1,213     <1%     7%       <1%    <1%      <1%      <1%    <1%
Two or More
                      N/A              N/A          12,966  3%      14,076    4%      N/A      4%     4%       N/A     3%      3%
Races1
Hispanic/Latino (any race)
Hispanic or                                                                                                                    38%
                      49,267           14%          87,467  22%     99,068    25%     14%      19%    23%      26%     32%
Latino
Total                 372,242          100%         399,484 100%    390,724   100%    --       --     --       --      --
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990, 2000 and 2010.
1
  This is a 2000 Census category only.
Note: Percentages may not add to 100 due to rounding.
104                                                                                                  EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Geographic Concentrations of Race and Ethnicity
Despite a great deal of diversity at the City level, neighborhoods are still segregated by race and
ethnicity. While Whites constitute 35 percent of the population and Black, Asians and Hispanics each
constitute less than 30 percent, there are numerous areas of the City where more than 50% of the
residents belong to a single racial/ethnic group. In addition, each racial/ethnic group has distinct
patterns of concentration where the percentage in a neighborhood is either 1.5 times the citywide
average, or less than half the citywide average, as illustrated on the following pages.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                    105
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                     Figure 3-1
                          Areas of Racial/Ethnic Majorities
106                                                         EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                Figure 3-2
                          Areas of High and Low Concentration of Black Population
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                   107
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                          Figure 3-3
                    Areas of High and Low Concentration of White Population
108                                                                   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                               Figure 3-4
                        Areas of High and Low Concentration of Hispanic Population
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                  109
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                          Figure 3-5
                    Areas of High and Low Concentration of Asian Population
110                                                                   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Age Distribution
Although Oakland experienced a significant change in the racial and ethnic mix of its population
between 2000 and 2010, there were only small changes in the age distribution. There was a 4 percent
decrease in the percentage of children between the ages of 5 to 19 years, leading to a 3 year increase
in the median age from 33 years in 2000 to 36 years in 2010. Additionally, Oakland experienced an
increase in the percent of the population in their mid-50s to mid-60s. Even with the slight change in
the proportion of some age groups, the age groups from 5 years to 54 years of age experienced
decreases in population between 2000 and 2010.
If the population changes over the past decade continue during the next 10 to 20 years, the City may
be home to a significantly large number of older adults and retirees who are looking for housing
suited to their changing lifestyles and physical needs. Table 3-2 compares the age composition of
Oakland’s population in 1990, 2000 and 2010 with that of Alameda County and the State of
California.
                                                         Table 3-2
                            Age Distribution (1990, 2000 and 2010)
                                                               Alameda  Alameda
                    Oakland          Oakland          Oakland  County   County  California    California
Age                 1990             2000             2010     2000     2010    2000          2010
Under 5 years       8%               7%               7%       7%       6%      7%            7%
5 to 19 years       20%              21%              17%      21%      19%     23%           21%
20 to 34 years      26%              25%              24%      24%      22%     22%           22%
35 to 54 years      27%              30%              29%      31%      30%     29%           28%
55 to 64 years      9%               7%               12%      8%       11%     8%            11%
65 and over         10%              11%              11%      10%      11%     11%           11%
Median age            32               33               36       35       37      33            35
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990, 2000 and 2010
Note: Percentages may not add to 100 due to rounding.
Household Size and Composition
Oakland has a high percentage of single adults and other non-family households (unrelated
individuals living together). Nearly one-third of Oakland households consist of single persons, and
about 30 percent consist of two people. More than a third (36 percent) of Oakland households have
more than three people (mostly family households). The high percentage of smaller households in
Oakland may be due, in part, to the relatively low proportion of housing units with more than two
bedrooms compared to the surrounding suburban areas. According to the 2000 Census, nearly 70
percent of Oakland’s housing stock has two or fewer bedrooms, compared to 54 percent countywide.
The 2010 Census reported an increase in the number of households in the City. Of those households,
54 percent were family households (households with related individuals). This percentage was
substantially below countywide figures. Even though the number of households has grown, there has
been a decline in the average household and family size. The average household size has declined
from 2.6 in 2000 to 2.49 in 2010. Similarly, the average family size also decreased, from 3.38 to
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                    111

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
3.27. These trends are directly related to the decline in proportion of population groups with larger
household sizes and the increase in the proportion of population groups with smaller household sizes.
These changes in household size might be a reflection of the nationwide trend away from traditional
family structures. The number of family households have scaled down from 86,347 in 2000 to 83,718
in 2010. Similarly, there has been a 10% decline in the number of family households with children
between 2000 and 2010. White and Black households, which declined as a percentage of all
households, have smaller average household sizes (2.21 and 2.25 in 2010 respectively) compared to
Hispanic and Asian-origin households (3.76 and 2.66 in 2010 respectively).
Of Oakland’s family households with children, about 10% are single-parent households. The number
of single-parent female-headed households declined from 14,932 in 2000 to 12,173 in 2010. In
comparison, the number of single-parent male-headed households increased from 3,298 in 2000 to
3,627 in 2010. Although the number of single-parent households is small relative to the City’s total
population, it still represents about 4% of the City’s population and will increase the need for housing
accessible to childcare and other supportive services geared to support single parents.
Overcrowding increased between 1990 and 2000 (see Section G). Even though household and family
size are trending downward, large households (3+ persons per household) are still significant (37% of
total household population) and suggest that Oakland should plan for more housing to address the
shortage of both affordable housing for large families (who need homes with three or more bedrooms)
and the overall shortage of affordable housing that may cause smaller households to share homes.
Table 3-3, Table 3-4, and Table 3-5compare household size and composition by household type and
provide information on household characteristics.
About two percent of the City’s population did not live in households in 2010. The “group quarters”
population increased from 7,175 in the 2000 Census to 8,138 in the 2010 Census—a 13% increase.
This demographic is broken-down into two general categories: institutional and non-institutional
populations. Interestingly, the institutional population decreased from 2,894 in 2000 to 2,463 in
2010. These residents include inmates of correctional facilities, nursing home residents, and persons
in other health care facilities that have no usual home elsewhere. Significantly, the non-institutional
population increased by 33% from 4,281 in 2000 to 5,675 in 2010. These residents include college
students in dormitories and persons in other non-institutional group quarters. Of this non-institutional
group quarters population, 4,310 persons (a majority--53% of the total group quarters population)
were in “other non-institutional facilities,” that reflects an increase of 15% over 2000. Other non-
institutional facilities include: emergency transitional shelters or persons experiencing homelessness,
group homes intended for adults, residential treatment centers for adults, religious group quarters, and
job corps housing centers. Unfortunately, the Census does not further breakdown the populations per
these facility types to understand the housing needs of these very distinct populations. Further
analysis of special needs housing (including housing needs for persons with disabilities and the
homeless population) is included in Section H.
112                                                                 EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                      Table 3-3
                          Number of Persons per Household (2010)
                     Owner                               Renter                       Total
                     Households               Percent    Households       Percent     Households
1 Person             16,540                   26%        35,563           39%         52,103
2 Persons            21,046                   33%        24,517           27%         45,563
3 Persons            10,235                   16%        12,137           13%         22,372
4 Persons            8,045                    13%        8,388            9%          16,433
5 Persons            3,531                    6%         4,925            5%          8,456
6 Persons            1,641                    3%         2,426            3%          4,067
7 + Persons          2,104                    3%         2,693            3%          4,797
Total                63,142                   41%        90,649           59%         153,791
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2010
Note: Percentages may not add to 100 due to rounding.
                                                      Table 3-4
                           Average Household Size by Race (2010)
Population Group (Race)                                             Average Household Size
Pacific Islander                                                    4.56
Other (One Race)                                                    4.30
Hispanic or Latino                                                  3.76
Native American                                                     3.03
Asian Origin                                                        2.66
Two or More Races                                                   2.60
Black                                                               2.25
White (not Hispanic/Latino)                                         2.21
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2010
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                113
      CITY OF O AKL AND
      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                  Table 3-5
                                Changes in Household Type (1990 – 2010)
Household by Type                                        1990            Percent        2000              Percent 2010    Percent
Total Households                                         144,521         100%           150,790           100%    153,791 100%
Average Household Size                                   2.52            --             2.60              --      2.49    --
Household Population
Family Households (families)                             83,823          58%            86,347            57%     83,718  54%
          Married-Couple Family                          49,906          35%            51,332            34%     50,797  33%
                     With Children                       N/A             N/A            24,838            16%     22,818  15%
          Female Householder,                                                                                     24,122  16%
                                                         26,723          18%            26,707            18%
          no spouse present
                     With Children                       18,815          13%            14,932            10%     12,173  8%
          Male Householder, no spouse
                                                         6,691           5%             8,040             5%      8,799   6%
          present
                     With Children                       2,571           2%             3,298             2%      3,627   2%
          Average Family Size                            3.28            --             3.38              --      3.27    --
Non-family Households                                    60,698          42%            64,443            43%     70,073  46%
Households with one or more non-relatives                21,456          15%            25,945            17%     38,940  25%
Households with no non-relatives                         123,065         85%            124,845           83%     114,851 75%
Group Quarters (Non Household Population)
Total Group Quarters                                     7,175           <2%            27,735            <2%     8,138   2%
Institutionalized persons                                2,894           <1%            13,214            <1%     2,463   1%
Other persons in group quarters                          4,281           1%             14,521            1%      5,675   1%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990, 2000 and 2010
Note: Percentages represent percentage of all households. Percentages may not add to 100 due to rounding.
      Income
      Between 1990 and 2000, Oakland’s median household income increased from $27,095 to $40,055, an
      increase of nearly 48 percent. The median income for families increased from $31,755 to $44,384
      (approximately 40 percent), while median income for non-family households increased from $20,713
      to $34,075 (approximately 70 percent). Table 3-6 shows the distribution of income for families and
      for households from the American Community Survey 5 year Sample from 2007-2011. These
      estimates show continued significant increases in median income over the year 2000 for both
      households and families.
      114                                                                                  EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Table 3-6
                              Household and Family Income (2011)
                                Total              Margin               Total       Margin
Income Range                    Households         of Error     Percent Families    of Error      Percent
Total                           154,537            +/-1,547     100%    81,882      +/-1,177      100%
  Less than $10,000             12,259             +/-799       8%      5,164       +/-551        6%
  $10,000 to $14,999            11,744             +/-668       8%      4,114       +/-390        5%
  $15,000 to $24,999            18,313             +/-962       12%     9,454       +/-678        12%
  $25,000 to $34,999            15,109             +/-889       10%     8,169       +/-599        10%
  $35,000 to $49,999            18,187             +/-817       12%     9,018       +/-634        11%
  $50,000 to $74,999            24,713             +/-997       16%     12,086      +/-721        15%
  $75,000 to $99,999            16,347             +/-809       11%     8,887       +/-624        11%
  $100,000 to $149,999          18,740             +/-859       12%     11,576      +/-683        14%
  $150,000 to $199,999          8,499              +/-562       6%      5,521       +/-450        7%
  $200,000 or more              10,626             +/-695       7%      7,893       +/-561        10%
Median Income (dollars)         $51,144            +/-845         --    $58,237     +/-1,815      --
Mean Income (dollars)           $76,867            +/-1,322      --     $90,362     +/-2,164      --
 Source: American Community Survey 5-Year Sample 2007-2011
   Between 2000 and 2011 a divergent trend occurred with respect to incomes in Oakland relative to
   incomes for the entire county. The median income for all households in Oakland as a percentage of
   the countywide median income continued to remain about the same as was reported in the last
   Housing Element (72 percent). The median income of families experienced a small decline as a
   percentage of the countywide median family income. Median income of non-family households
   (singles and unrelated individuals sharing housing) has increased dramatically. This change in
   income can be attributed to the in-migration of more affluent singles and non-family households.
   Lower-Income Households
   Much of the focus of the Housing Element is on the needs of households by income level. Incomes
   are defined as a percentage of the median income for the Oakland metropolitan statistical area
   (MSA), comprising Alameda and Contra Costa counties. Five categories are typically used to
   compare incomes. These categories are “extremely low-income,” “very low-income,” “low-income,”
   “moderate-income,” and “above-moderate-income.” Table 3-7 summarizes the definitions of these
   income groups. Table 3-8 shows the dollar thresholds for these income levels by household size
   according to HUD’s 2013 income guidelines. These guidelines are used by most agencies for
   defining who is “low-” or “moderate-” income for participation in various government programs.
   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                 115

     CITY OF O AKL AND
     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                              Table 3-7
                        Definitions Used for Comparing Income Levels
     Income Definitions
     Extremely Low-Income            30 percent or less of the Oakland MSA median income
     Very Low-Income                 31 to 50 percent of the Oakland MSA Median Income
     Low-Income                      51 to 80 percent of the Oakland MSA Median Income
     Moderate-Income                 81 to 120 percent of the Oakland MSA Median Income
     Above-Moderate-Income           More than 120 percent of the Oakland MSA Median Income
                                                              Table 3-8
                                  2013 Income Limits, Oakland PMSA8
MSA                                                               INCOME LIMITS
Oakland                                                           Household Size
Median
Family
Income
Fiscal             1             2                 3              4              5            6            7       8
Year
2013
$89,200
Extremely
    Low      $18,750       $21,400         $24,100           $26,750        $28,900      $31,050     $33,200  $35,350
  Income
Very Low
             $31,250       $35,700         $40,150           $44,600        $48,200      $51,750     $55,350  $58,900
  Income
    Low
             $45,100       $51,550         $58,000           $64,400        $69,600      $74,750     $79,900  $85,050
  Income
  Median
             $62,500       $71,400         $80,300           $89,200        $96,400     $103,500    $110,700 $117,800
  Income
 Moderate
             $74,950       $85,650         $96,350          $107,050       $115,600     $124,150    $132,750 $141,300
  Income
Source: HUD, http://www.huduser.org/datasets/il/il2013/2013summary.odn?inputname=METRO41860MM5775*Oakland-
Fremont%2C+CA+HUD+Metro+FMR+Area&selection_type=hmfa&year=2013
     Table 3-9 compares the proportion of the City’s population at each income level in 2010 based on the
     Oakland PMSA median income (HUD 2006-2010 estimate).
     8
       Oakland MSA = Alameda and Contra Costa counties.
     116                                                                           EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                              HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                       Table 3-9
                 Percent of Oakland Households by Income (2010)
Income Category                                                Percent of Households
Extremely Low Income                                           23%
Very Low                                                       14%
Low                                                            15%
Moderate
                                                               48%
Above Moderate
Source: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development: CHAS Data Book, based on 2006-2010 5-Year Average Data.
Over half of the City’s households are extremely low-, very low- and low-income, virtually
unchanged from 1990 and 2000. This is significantly above the countywide average of approximately
40 percent. According to Table 3-9, HUD’s 2006-2010 5-year Average from the CHAS Data Book
for the City of Oakland, the extremely-low income population is approximately 23%. The lack of
significant change in income distribution is consistent with the previous discussion regarding the
income gap between residents in Oakland and countywide. The lack of change also means that socio-
economic and housing trends in Oakland in the late 1990s and 2000s did not greatly influence the
income distribution of City residents by the year 2010.
If this income trend continues, the City will experience a growing demand for assisted rental housing
and first-time homebuyer assistance among low- and moderate-income family households, while non-
family households may be better able to pay market costs for housing.
The larger percentage of lower-income households in Oakland is also reflected by the percent of
households with public assistance incomes. Households receiving public assistance generally have
extremely low-incomes. According to American Community 5-year Survey 2011, about 5.3 percent
of all households in Oakland received public assistance, compared to 3.6 percent of households
countywide. Although the percent of households with public assistance incomes declined by more
than half between 2000 and 2011, the percentage of the Oakland population with such incomes is still
significantly higher than the countywide percentage.
Although the number of families on public assistance in Oakland declined between 2000 and 2011,
there is an increase in the poverty rate among families with children. Despite the movement of many
families off welfare, the movement of these families into low-paying jobs did not raise their incomes
above the poverty level (see discussion below on poverty rates).
Geographic Concentrations of Low Income Population
As is the case for race and ethnicity, Oakland has clear geographic patterns of concentration by
income. As seen in the maps on the following pages, in most of the neighborhoods in the flatland
areas of the City, at least 51 percent of the population qualifies as “low and moderate income” under
guidelines established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. These federal
definitions correspond to the terms “low” and “very-low” income as used in the Housing Element.
Within those areas, there are neighborhoods with percentages that are more than 1.5 times the
citywide average, while in the hill areas, most neighborhoods have concentrations less than half the
citywide average.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                 117

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                              Figure 3-6
                  Areas With a Majority of Very-Low and Low Income Persons (2010)
118                                                                     EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                             Figure 3-7
               Areas of High and Low Concentration of Very-Low and Low Income Persons
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                119
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Income and Family Status
The trend of income and family status in the 1990 and 2000 Census and the 2011 ACS indicates that
the gap between household, family and non-family household incomes in Oakland and those
countywide is about the same as reported in the last Housing Element. Oakland’s family income as a
percentage of County income narrowed considerably from 1990 to 2000 and stayed about the same in
2011. Family households did not fare as well, however. The median family income in Oakland
decreased between 1990 and 2000. In 2011, Oakland families still only earned just 67 percent of
families countywide. Oakland non-family incomes in 2011 were about 91% of Alameda County non-
family incomes.
One explanation for this divergent trend is that Oakland has experienced an influx of relatively more
affluent single- and two-person non-family households since the 1990s. The City also experienced an
increase in the number of families who migrated to the United States between 1990 and 2000 and
who tend to have lower incomes than the population as a whole.
Unless the income trend for family households improves, Oakland will face a growing demand for
affordable family housing for those earning less than the median income, particularly those with
incomes less than half the median income.
Table 3-10 and Table 3-11 compare median household, family, and non-family incomes and the gap
between incomes in Oakland and those countywide in 1990 and 2000, and 2011 (respectively).
                                                   Table 3-10
               Median Incomes in Oakland and Alameda County
                                              (1990 and 2000)
                                                                           Oakland Income
                              Oakland                   Alameda County     as a Percent of
                                                                           County Incomes
                              1990         2000         1990    2000       1990      2000
               Median
               Household      $27,095      $40,055      $37,544 $55,946    72%       72%
               Income
               Median
               Family         $31,755      $44,384      $45,073 $65,857    71%       67%
               Income
               Median
               Non-
                              $20,713      $34,075      $24,984 $37,290    83%       92%
               Family
               Income
               Source: U. S Census Bureau 1990 and 2000
120                                                                   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                         Table 3-11
          Median Incomes in Oakland and Alameda County (2011)
                                                                                          Oakland Income
                                    Oakland                   Alameda County              as a Percent of
                                                                                          County Incomes
                                                Margin                  Margin
                                    2011                      2011                        2011
                                                of Error                of Error
           Median
           Household                $51,144     +/-845        $70,821   +/-789            72%
           Income
           Median Family
                                    $58,237     +/-1,815      $87,012   +/-1,086          67%
           Income
           Median Non-
                                    $41,454     +/-1,215      $45,756   +/-930            91%
           Family Income
           Source: American Community 5-Year Survey 2007-2011
           Note: Margin of Error for American Community Survey 2007-2011 data represents the degree of uncertainty
           for an estimate arising from sampling variability.
Income and Tenure
As indicated in Table 3-12-a, renters were more likely than homeowners to have low incomes.
Nearly one-third (32 percent) of renters in Oakland had extremely low-incomes in 2000 (30 percent
or less of median income), and about half earned 50 percent or less of median income. In contrast,
about ten percent of homeowners had extremely low-incomes in 2000, and about 20 percent earned
50 percent or less of median income. Both of these trends continued in 2010 (see Table 3-12-b).
Similar to 2000 Census data, in 2010 homeowners had earned more than twice the median income of
renters.
Households earning 50 percent or less of median income, especially those earning 30 percent or less
are most likely to require rental assistance. The large percentage of renters with extremely low and
very low incomes suggests a growing need for rental assistance because these households are unlikely
to achieve homeownership or benefit from homeownership assistance programs. Incomes for these
households are unlikely to keep pace with rising rents as evidenced in Section D, Housing Cost.
There are also a significant number of owner households with extremely low-, very low- and low-
incomes (nearly 30% of the ownership population). Households earning less than 50 percent of
median income are especially vulnerable to financial problems that can make it difficult to meet
housing expenses and properly maintain their homes. Many of these households (particularly those
who have not paid off their home loans) may need assistance in paying energy bills, and refinancing
to reduce interest costs, and home maintenance and repairs.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                  121
         CITY OF O AKL AND
         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                               Table 3-12-a
                                          Income by Tenure (1990 and 2000)
                          Renters                                                       Owners
                          1990                             2000                         1990                        2000
Income Level
                                           % of all                         % of all                  % of all               % of all
                          Number                           Number                       Number                      Number
                                           renters                          renters                   owners                 owners
Extremely Low             26,325           32%             27,539           32%         6,314         10%           6,234    10%
Very Low                  15,114           18%             15,858           18%         6,497         11%           5,759    9%
Low                       13,378           16%             14,578           17%         7,640         12%           7,499    12%
Moderate/
                          28,260           34%             28,878           33%         41,241        67%           41,484   68%
Above Moderate
Total                     83,074           100%            86,583           100%        61,692        100%          60,976   100%
Sources: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development: 1990 and 2000 CHAS Data Books, derived from 1990 and 2000 Census.
Note: Percentages may not sum to 100% due to rounding
                                                               Table 3-12-b
                                                   Income by Tenure (2010)
                                                          Renter                        Owner
                                Income Level                              % of all                    % of all
                                                          Number                        Number
                                                                          renters                     owners
                                Extremely Low             30,250          34%           5,615         9%
                                Very Low                  15,245          17%           6,540         10%
                                Low                       15,355          17%           8,110         12%
                                Moderate/
                                                          28,370          32%           45,380        69%
                                Above Moderate
                                Total                     89,220          100%          65,645        100%
                                 Sources: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development CHAS Data based on
                                 American Community Survey 2006-2010 5 year Average Data
                                 Note: Percentages may not sum to 100% due to rounding
         Income and Race/Ethnicity
         There are also significant differences in income by race and ethnicity in Oakland. Households of
         White origin, who saw significant population gains between 2000 and 2011, had the highest incomes
         in the City. Households of Asian or Hispanic or Latino origin saw modest population gains, however
         these households have significantly lower incomes. In the time period between 1990 and 2000, the
         migration of these population groups to the City could explain much of the growing disparity in
         family income between Oakland and the rest of Alameda County, because a larger percentage of
         these residents tend to live in family households than the population as a whole. Black/African
         American households, though their proportion of the population has declined, have among the lowest
         incomes in the City.
         122                                                                            EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Table 3-13 compares median income levels by race and ethnicity in 2011, and Table 3-14 compares
income categories by race and ethnicity in 2000. Family status and culture could be important
indicators of whether these residents will have different housing preferences and needs compared to
other population groups. The City may need to consider the characteristics of low-income Black,
Asian and Hispanic or Latino households in its planning for affordable housing and implementation
of housing programs.
                                                    Table 3-13
              Median Household Income by Race/Ethnicity (2011)
Race/Ethnicity                                              Median Income                     Margin of Error
White (not Hispanic/Latino)                                                                   +/- 2,961
                                                            $81,884
Black/African American                                                                        +/- 1,488
                                                            $34,928
Native American                                                                               +/- 18,755
                                                            $34,702
Asian Origin                                                                                  +/- 3,248
                                                            $43,834
Pacific Islander                                                                              +/- 10,392
                                                            $44,020
Other Race                                                                                    +/- 2,406
                                                            $41,482
Two or More Races                                                                             +/- 5,138
                                                            $51,167
Hispanic or Latino                                                                            +/- 2,159
                                                            $45,233
Median Household Income                                     $51,144                           +/- 845
Source: American Community 5-Year Survey 2007-2011. Median Household Income in the Past 12 months (In 2011 Inflation Adjusted
Dollars)
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                           123
      CITY OF O AKL AND
      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table 3-14
                              Income Distribution by Race/Ethnicity (2000)
                                                                  Number and Percent of Households
                                                                                                     Native             Pacific
Income Category                  All              White             Black            Asian                                       Hispanic
                                                                                                     American           Islander
                                 55,390           10,405            26,255           9,125             249                173    8,855
Very Low (<50% AMI)
                                     37%               21%              47%              47%             45%               43%      43%
                                 22,077           5,735             9,150            2,650              55                 69    4,305
Low (50-80% AMI)
                                     15%               12%              16%              14%             10%               17%      21%
Moderate and Above               70,362           32,870            20,185           7,675             253                164    7,564
Moderate (>80% AMI)                  47%               67%              36%              39%             45%               40%      36%
                                 150,748          49,010            55,590           19,450            557                406    20,724
Total
                                    100%            100%               100%             100%           100%               100%     100%
      Sources: U. S. Census Bureau, 2000
      Note: Totals for racial/ethnic groups to do not sum to the total for all households because “Other” race is not included.
      Poverty Rate
      The poverty rate is another relative measure of financial well-being. The poverty level is a federally
      defined measure of the minimum income needed for subsistence living. The poverty level is an
      important indicator of severe financial distress, and the rate of poverty in a community (proportion of
      the population with poverty level incomes or less) provides important information about individuals
      and families who have the greatest financial need. The dollar threshold for poverty is adjusted by the
      federal government for household size and composition, but not by region, and tends to understate the
      true extent of poverty in high cost areas such as the San Francisco Bay area.
      According to the 2000 Census, approximately 19.4 percent of the City’s population was below the
      poverty level, compared to 11 percent countywide. Despite an improving economy between the mid-
      1990s and 2000, poverty in Oakland remained a significant problem and actually rose slightly.
      Families with children in Oakland had high poverty rates and were twice as likely to live in poverty
      as those countywide. Female-headed households with children had the highest poverty rates, twice or
      more the poverty rate than among the general population. Female-headed households with children
      were 50 percent more likely than female-headed households countywide to live in poverty. Single
      mothers with children under five were more at risk of poverty than any other population group—43
      percent of these households live in poverty in Oakland.
      In contrast, seniors had significantly lower poverty rates, although seniors in Oakland were more
      likely to live in poverty than seniors living elsewhere in the county.
      The persistently high poverty rate in Oakland, particularly among families and single parents,
      suggests that Oakland will continue to experience a high demand for subsidized rental housing and
      financial assistance for home repairs and utility payments among homeowners who live in poverty.
      Low-cost family housing will continue to be an urgent need in Oakland. Access to childcare and
      supportive services for families, particularly single parents, will also be a high priority need.
      124                                                                                      EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                              HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Table 3-15 compares poverty rates for the City of Oakland and Alameda County according to the
2000 Census. Table 3-16 provides Federal Poverty Thresholds for 2014.
                                          Table 3-15
                                    Poverty Rates (2000)
                                                                                   Alameda
                                                                  Oakland          County
Total Population                                                   19%               11%
All Adults                                                         17%               10%
65 and Over                                                        13%               8%
Related Children                                                   28%               14%
All Families                                                       16%               8%
Families with Children                                             23%               11%
Households with Female Householders                                30%               20%
Female Headed Families with Children                               37%               26%
Source: U. S. Census Bureau, 2000
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                             125
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                       Table 3-16
                               Federal Poverty Thresholds (2014)
                             Persons in Family/Household                           Income
                             One Person                                            $11,670
                             Two Persons                                           $15,730
                             Three Persons                                         $19,790
                             Four Persons                                          $23,850
                             Five Persons                                          $27,910
                             Six Persons                                           $31,970
                             Seven Persons                                         $36,030
                             Eight Persons                                         $40,090
                              For families/households with more than 8 persons, add $4,060 for
                              each additional person.
B.         HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS
Housing Composition
Oakland experienced a net gain of over 13,113 housing units between 2000 and 2013, according to
the California Department of Finance (DOF). Most of the increase in the housing stock between 2000
and 2013 was through the construction of multi-family housing. Over 10,100 multi-family housing
units were constructed between 2000 and 2013. About 30% 9 of the multifamily housing constructed
since 2000 has been publicly assisted rental housing for lower-income households although there has
been significant market rate development in that same time period.
The overall mix of housing did not change considerably between 2000 and 2013, according to the
California Department of Finance. In 2013, approximately 47 percent of the City’s housing stock
consisted of single-family homes, 33 percent was in multifamily dwellings in structures of five or
more units, and 19 percent was in multifamily dwellings in structures of two to four units.
The increase in multifamily housing construction can be attributable to the City’s “10K” plan 10 and
other housing initiatives. Both rental and condominium development along with some townhome
units have dominated the number of units constructed in the 2000’s. Single family detached units
account for a relatively small percentage of new units. City records on housing units constructed or
under construction since 1999, pending projects, and housing opportunity sites suggests that the
majority of homes constructed during the next decade will continue to be multifamily structures (such
as townhomes, condominiums, apartments, and lofts).
9
   City of Oakland data shows that there have been approximately 3,032 new affordable multi-unit housing developments
constructed from 2000 to 2013.
10
   Per Wikipedia: “The 10K Plan was an urban planning doctrine for Downtown Oakland to attract 10,000 new residents to
the city's downtown and Jack London Square areas…Former Oakland Mayor Jerry Brown continued his predecessor Elihu
Harris' public policy of supporting downtown housing development in the area defined as the Central Business District in
Oakland's 1998 General Plan. Since Brown worked toward the stated goal of bringing an additional 10,000 residents to
Downtown Oakland, his plan was known as "10K." … The 10k plan has touched the historic Old Oakland district, the
Chinatown district, the Uptown district, and Downtown.”
126                                                                               EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                           CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
  Table 3-17 shows the changes in the housing stock for the City of Oakland between 1990 and 2013,
  and the California Department of Finance’s estimate of dwelling units as of 2013.
                                                           Table 3-17
               Housing Estimates, City of Oakland (1990 through 2013)
                                                                   1990 to 2000                                        2000 to 2013
                       1990                    2000                                                 2013
                                                                       Change                                             Change
Type          Number Percent Number Percent Number Percent Number Percent Number Percent
Single
Family
Detached         68,702       44%        71,424          45%         2,722           4%       74,084         43%        2,660         4%
Attached           5,736        4%         6,645          4%           909         16%          6,884          4%         239         4%
Multiple
2 to 4           29,388       19%        28,972          18%          -416          -1%       32,625         19%        3,653        13%
5 Plus           48,847       32%        50,008          32%         1,161           2%       56,470         33%        6,462        13%
Mobile
Homes                186      <1%            364        <1%            178         96%            555       <1%           191        52%
Other              1,878        1%             92       <1%         -1,786        -95%             n/a         n/a         n/a         n/a
Occupied        144,521       93%       150,787          96%         6,266           4%     154,614          91%        3,827         3%
Total           154,737      100%       157,505        100%          2,768           2%     170,618        100%        13,113         8%
 Sources: California Department of Finance, City/County Population and Housing Estimates (E-5 Report); 2000 Census and 2011-13 with
 2010 Census Benchmark.
 Note: The 2000 Census count of occupied housing units varies by three dwelling units from the household count in Table—they come from
 different census reports.
  Housing Occupancy
  Vacancy
  As noted in the footnote at the beginning of this chapter, in the Census 2010 for Oakland, the vacancy
  rate more than doubled to 9.38% over what was reported in the 2000 Census. Also noted in this
  footnote, the 2010 Census showed a population decrease of 8,842 from 2000 Census population count
  yet an increase of 12,202 housing units. The vacancy rate could explain the discrepancy between the
  population and housing unit count differences but it is not supported by other similar data. The USPS
  90-day Vacancy Data shows a vacancy rate of 2% reported March 31, 2010 -- much lower than the
  2010 Census. It is conceivable but unlikely that the Census 2010 vacancy rate is attributable to the
  foreclosure crisis. If that were the case, all homeownership units lost due to foreclosure from 2006-
  2009 would need to have been vacant at the time the 2010 Census was taken in addition to other types
  of vacancies (e.g.: 2000 Census vacancy rate) in order to reach the magnitude of the vacancy rate
  reported in 2010.
  Table 3-18 compares occupancy and vacancy rates in Oakland and Alameda County for 1990, 2000
  and 2010. Additionally, in an attempt to understand the discrepancy in vacancy rates from 2000 to
  2010, maps of vacancy rate by Census tract and by tenure were made to understand where Census
  data shows hot spots of high vacancies. See Figure 3-8 and Figure 3-9.
  EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                 127

     CITY OF O AKL AND
     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                        Table 3-18
                                                      Housing Occupancy (1990, 2000 and 2010)
                                                          Oakland                                           Alameda County
                                  1990        Percent   2000    Percent 2010     Percent 1990      Percent 2000     Percent  2010    Percent
Total housing units                  154,737       100% 157,508    100%  169,710    100%  504,109     100% 540,183     100%  582,549      100%
             Occupied units          144,521      93.3% 150,790   95.7%  153,791   90.6%  479,518    95.1% 523,366    96.9%  545,138     93.6%
             Vacant units              10,216      6.7%   6,718    4.3%   15,919    9.4%   24,591     4.9%  16,817     3.1%   37,411       6.4%
Vacant – seasonal,
migrant, recreational,                    159      0.1%     474    0.3%      633    0.4%       592    0.1%   2,084     0.4%    2,292       0.4%
occasional use
Rented or Sold,
                                        1,142      0.7%     769    0.5%      795    0.5%    2,532     0.5%   2,227     0.4%    2,316       0.4%
Awaiting Occupancy
Other Vacant1                           2,389      3.1%    N/A     --      4,090    2.4%    4,752     0.9%     N/A     --      9,862       1.7%
Net Vacant Units                        6,526      4.5%   5,475    3.5%   10,401    6.1%   16,715     3.3%  12,506     2.3%   22,941       3.9%
Effective Vacancy Rate
              Owners                               1.6%            2.0%             3.0%              1.1%             1.1%                1.8%
                                       --                 --                --              --                --                --
              Renters                              6.7%            3.0%             8.5%              3,8%             2.6%                6.4%
Source: U. S. Census Bureau, 1990 and 2000
1
  This is a 1990 Census category only.
     128                                                                                                   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                          HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                               Figure 3-8
                              Homeowner Vacancy Rate (By 2010 Census Tracts)
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                 129
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                          Figure 3-9
                          Rental Vacancy Rate (By 2010 Census Tracts)
130                                                                   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Tenure
A majority of Oakland households are renters, about 57 percent in 1990, 59 percent in 2000, and 59%
in 2010. Oakland’s homeownership rate stayed the same between 2000 and 2010. Only non-
Hispanic White households had a majority of homeowners in 2010, and then only a small majority
(52 percent in 1990, 56 percent in 2000, and 50 percent in 2010). Other racial and ethnic groups had
homeownership rates between 28 percent for Native Americans (representing a large decline from
2000 data) to 41 percent for Asian/Pacific Islanders. Table 3-19 compares tenure by race in 1990,
2000, and 2010.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                 131

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                          Table 3-19
                                          Tenure by Race and Hispanic Origin (1990, 2000 and 2010)
                                                    Owners                                   Renters                            Percent Owners              Percent Renters
     Race                               1990            2000          2010       1990          2000           2010         1990          2000   2010     1990    2000     2010
     Non-Hispanic or Latino
     White                                27,391        25,613        30,690     25,754        23,411         30,418          52%          56%    50%      48%     42%      50%
     Black                                21,760        20,214        16,093     39,763        35,985         31,049          35%          36%    34%      65%     64%      66%
     Native American                           196          269          277         485           596            714         29%          50%    28%      71%     50%      72%
     Asian/Pacific Islander                6,435         8,168        10,139       9,418       11,821         14,712          50%          41%    41%      50%     59%      59%
            1
     Other                                      95       5,577         5,943         153       11,515         13,756          38%          33%    30%      62%     67%      70%
     Hispanic or Latino
     Hispanic or Latino                    4,345         6,898         8,268       8,729       13,816         17,069          37%          41%    33%      63%     59%      67%
     Total                                60,222        62,489        63,142     84,368        88,301         90,649          43%          41%    41%      57%     59%      59%
Source: U. S. Census Bureau, 1990, 2000 and 2010.
1
  Other category includes two or more races, reported only for the 2000 Census.
Note: Total number of households may not equal totals in other tables because tenure by race and ethnicity is not based on a 100 percent count.
132                                                                                                                                             EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Homeownership is closely related to incomes. According to the American Community Survey, in
2011 (and detailed in Table 3-13), White households had the highest median income, nearly $82,000
(with a margin of error under $3,000). The next highest median income was for the population of
persons who self-identified as two or more races who had an income of just over $51,000 (with a
margin of error of just over $5,000). African Americans had close to the lowest median income of
just under $35,000 (with a margin of error of under $1,500). The difference between the highest
median income and the range of income for other Race/Ethnicity groups (not accounting for the
margin of error) is between nearly $31,000 and $47,000 (Black, Hispanic, Asian households and
households of other races or more than one race). Given this disparity of household incomes, there is
still relatively high ownership for households of Black, Asian/Pacific Islander, and Hispanic origin.
This might indicate a particular need to provide continued support of low-income ownership
households in the form of loans to improve aging housing stock anti-predatory lending efforts.
The fallout of the foreclosure crisis can also be illustrated in Table 3-19 though thankfully it is not as
dramatic as expected. Homeownership rates have decreased across all Race/Ethnicity categories with
the exception of those of Asian/Pacific Islander origin whose homeownership rate stayed the same as
in 2000.
Much of the growth in Oakland’s population from 2000 to 2010 consisted of populations who cannot
afford to purchase homes. Among other reasons for the high proportion of renters may be the losses
due to the foreclosure crisis—cumulatively from 2006-2012 there were 10,863 units lost to
foreclosure (see Table 3-35 for details).
The trend in housing tenure has several possible policy implications for the City:
      1. The City can continue to facilitate the construction of rental housing for those who cannot,
          and probably would not be able to, purchase homes (even with financial assistance), very
          low-income households most at-risk from rising rental rents, and households that do not seek
          homeownership but can afford market rents. Increasing the rental housing stock will ease
          difficulties associated with the rising rental rates and availability.
      2. The City can seek to increase homeownership by facilitating and providing assistance to
          projects that provide low- and moderate-income homeownership opportunities.
      3. The City can continue to improve, and facilitate private investment in, the existing housing
          stock to better meet the needs of Oakland’s changing population.
     4. The City could create programs that would permit renters to purchase homes that they rent.
In contrast to the last Housing Element and, again, another example of the repercussions of the
foreclosure crisis, the homeownership rate in Oakland decreased in all but one age category for
homeowners when compared to 2000 Census data. Only homeowners from ages 60-64 had the
highest increase in rate of ownership at 61% in 2010. As it was anticipated in 2000, in 2010 for those
75 years and older ownership rate decreased by 7%. Many older seniors either have declining
incomes, forcing them to sell their homes, or choose to live in non-owned housing that better meets
their changing lifestyle, physical, and supportive services needs.
Since about half of the homeowners in the City are over the age of 55 years, this may suggest an
increasing need for financial assistance to lower-income seniors to make modifications for greater
accessibility and mobility within and around the home, energy efficiency, and other home repairs and
improvements that will allow seniors to live longer, independent lives in their present locations. For
older adults wishing to move to housing specifically designed for seniors, programs that provide more
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                       133

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
housing choices for this age group may be indicated. If seniors are “trapped” in their homes due to
financial or other circumstances, turnover in the housing market will be affected. By providing
seniors with more housing options, the City can facilitate homeownership for younger households
who wish to purchase homes.
Table 3-20 compares homeownership rates by age.
                                                         Table 3-20
                    Homeownership Rates by Age, Oakland (2010)
Age                                    Owners                       Renters                Ownership Rate                  Rental Rate
15 to 24                                      413                        5,570                              2%                   <16%
25 to 34                                    4,979                      24,496                           <15%                      <3%
35 to 44                                  12,364                       20,139                             <5%                     <4%
45 to 54                                  13,844                       15,859                           <14%                       0%
55 to 59                                    7,568                        6,799                            24%                     58%
60 to 64                                    7,531                        5,433                            61%                     61%
65 to 74                                    8,608                        6,235                            10%                     14%
75 and over                                 7,835                        6,118                            <7%                     <7%
Total                                     63,142                       90,649                             41%                     59%
Source: U. S. Census Bureau, 2010
Note: Total number of households may not equal totals in other tables because tenure by age is not based on a 100 percent count.
C.        AGE AND CONDITION OF HOUSING STOCK
Is Housing Improving or Deteriorating in Oakland?
The age and condition of the housing stock provide additional measures of housing adequacy and
availability. Based on the 2000 Census data, the last time the decennial Census measured the age of
the housing stock, more than one-third of Oakland’s housing was built prior to 1940. Older homes
are generally less energy-efficient and, unless upgraded, will have older electrical, plumbing, and
heating systems that are likely to suffer from deferred maintenance or deterioration. In addition, these
older homes present other challenges to health and safety, from lead-based paint and asbestos to
structural and seismic deficiencies.
In 2014, the City hired BAE Urban Economics, Inc. to conduct at Housing Conditions survey for the
2015-2023 Housing Element. The survey instrument is included in Appendix A. The survey looked
at approximately 1,700 residential structures in Oakland, representing about 18,000 housing units,
and the findings are reported in the “Sample Survey of Housing Conditions” section, below.
Some of the indicators of substandard housing, such as an aging housing stock and the number of
dwelling units lacking complete facilities, indicate that the City’s housing stock may have
deteriorated since 1990. Other indicators, such as the rehabilitation of earthquake-damaged
residential hotels and the increase in private investment in many residential neighborhoods, suggest
that housing conditions in Oakland may be improving. Long-term trends from the 1960s indicate that
housing conditions may have improved, if for no other reason than thousands of older, often
substandard dwelling units were removed during the 1960s and 1970s to make way for public works
134                                                                                   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
and redevelopment projects followed by the recent developments of new housing in the downtown
area and investments in housing improvements by non-profit affordable housing providers and the
Oakland Housing Authority.
According to the 2000 Census, approximately 2,200 dwelling units had no heating systems, over
1,600 dwelling units lacked complete plumbing, and nearly 2,100 dwelling units lacked complete
kitchen facilities. Each of these measures showed a higher incidence than in 1990 11. It should be
noted that a significant percentage of these housing units are in single-room occupancy buildings that
do not have private bath and kitchen facilities for individual dwelling units.
The National Center for Healthy Housing, in its 2009 analysis of the American Housing Survey of
Health-related Housing Problems, found that out of 45 metropolitan areas studied, the Oakland
Metropolitan Area ranked 33rd for basic housing and in last place at 45th for healthy housing.
Deficiencies found to be most unhealthy included open cracks or holes in walls, broken
plaster/peeling paint, water leaks from inside and outside, roofing, siding and window problems.
Health hazards, such as presence of asbestos, lead-based paint, or asthma triggers can also be an
indicator of housing condition. The City estimates up to two-thirds of the housing units in Oakland
could contain lead-based paint. The large percentage of homes constructed before the 1960s
increases the probability of lead-based paint and lead hazards in these homes since this type of paint
was commonly used up to that time.
Oakland has the highest rate of asthma in Alameda County, which itself has the third highest rate of
asthma in the state. Oakland children require hospitalization for severe asthma attacks at a rate four
times higher than the state average. Asthma causes school absences, raises health care costs for
treatment and emergency room visits, leads to work absences and limits children’s activities and
impacts their quality of life. According to the Federal Healthy Homes Work Group publication
Advancing Healthy Housing: A Strategy for Action, an estimated 39% of children under six with
asthma nationwide are impacted by exposure to indoor air hazards in their homes. Poor housing
conditions including mold and moisture, pest infestations, and poor ventilation are asthma triggers
and contribute to high rates of emergency room visits and hospitalizations of children and adults with
asthma, an indicator of housing conditions in Oakland.
The City of Oakland’s Housing Rehabilitation programs address substandard housing conditions
including lead-based paint and other health and safety issues as well as providing accessibility
improvements, primarily for low-income homeowners. The Alameda County Community
Development Agency’s Healthy Homes Department provides education, lead-safety skills training,
and on-site consultations for Oakland property owners and carries out lead poisoning prevention and
asthma trigger interventions for Oakland residents. The ACHHD has remediated lead hazards in 266
Oakland housing units since 2009 and works with the Oakland Housing Authority to educate owners
of housing units participating in the Section 8 program about lead-based paint, mold, and other
healthy housing issues to promote safe and healthy property maintenance.
Whether or not housing conditions in Oakland are improving overall, they remain a problem by any
of the measures discussed above. Housing conditions in the City’s oldest, poorest neighborhoods
with the highest proportion of renters and high foreclosure rates are likely to suffer the most from
substandard housing conditions. According to the City of Oakland’s Consolidated Plan (2010-2015),
over 89% of large low-income families (5 or more) in Oakland who rent have at least one housing
problem: cost burden, physical defects in the housing unit and/or overcrowding.
11
   According to the 1990 Census, approximately 1,300 dwelling units lacked heating, nearly 2,000 dwelling units lacked
complete plumbing, and nearly 1,300 dwelling units did not have complete kitchen facilities.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                  135

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Local government can help ensure that the local housing stock is maintained and improved in a safe
and healthy manner by providing financial and technical assistance to properties occupied by low
income households and by carrying out appropriate code enforcement programs. These programs can
also support the community by reducing neighborhood blight and preserving property values. Rental
units are more likely to have unhealthy housing conditions than the overall housing stock as shown by
five key indicators of unhealthy housing in the 2011 American Housing Survey (mold, musty smells,
moderate-to-severe physical problems, excess cold, and lack of a working carbon monoxide alarm).
Rental units make up approximately 59% of Oakland’s housing stock. For these reasons, it is likely
that the City will need to continue its active role in housing code enforcement and providing financial
assistance to property owners who cannot afford to maintain or repair their homes.
Age of the Housing Stock as an Indicator of Housing Condition
The age of Oakland’s housing stock suggests the potential for deterioration, although the age of
housing, by itself, is not a definitive measure of housing condition. Many communities have a
preponderance of housing more than 40 years old but little housing rehabilitation or replacement
need. The age of housing, when correlated with income and the proportion of rental housing, can
provide a reasonable measure of housing condition. Empirical evidence suggests that communities
with high proportions of housing more than 40 years old, lower-income households, and higher rates
of rental housing will usually have a higher proportion of housing in need of repair than similar
communities with higher incomes and a higher proportion of ownership housing.
Nearly two-thirds (65 percent) of the City’s housing was constructed before 1960 and is more than 40
years old. More than one-third (35 percent) of housing units were constructed before 1940 and are
over 60 years old. Table 3-21 summarizes the age of the housing stock in Oakland. Figure 3-10,
Figure 3-11, and Figure 3-12 illustrate housing stock age across the City of Oakland.
                                              Table 3-21
                                 Age of Housing Units (2000)
Year                                                      Number of Units        Percentage
   1939 or earlier                                                  55,339               35%
   1940 to 1959                                                     47,698               30%
   1960 to 1969                                                     22,092               14%
   1970 to 1979                                                     16,862               11%
   1980 to 1989                                                      7,713                 5%
   1990 to March 2000                                                7,801                 5%
   Total                                                           157,505              100%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2000
136                                                               EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                   Figure 3-10
                                  Age of Structure Built: Pre-1970 (2000 Census)
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                        137
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                            Figure 3-11
                          Age of Structure Built: 1970-1999 (2000 Census)
138                                                                      EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                   Figure 3-12
                                 Age of Structure Built: 1999-2000 (2000 Census)
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                        139
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
2014 Sample Survey of Housing Conditions
In 2014, the City conducted a housing conditions survey for the 2015-2023 Housing Element 12. The
survey instrument is included in Appendix A 13. The survey looked at approximately 1,700 randomly
selected residential structures in Oakland, representing about 18,000 housing units. The survey
evaluated a number of measures, such as structure type, windows, doors, roofing and siding. The
sample size of 1,700 structures were evenly distributed across nine planning areas throughout the
City. 14 At a 95 percent confidence level, this means that the results of this survey are accurate with a
margin of error of plus or minus seven residential units.
The 2014 Oakland Housing Conditions Survey was a survey of exterior housing conditions,
sometimes referred to as a “windshield survey.” This means that housing surveyors were only able to
evaluate the physical conditions of a residential structure and its immediate surroundings as visible
from the public right-of-way. This survey did not include any evaluation of interior housing
conditions or any other physical condition not detectable from the street. Based on the results of this
survey of exterior housing conditions, BAE estimates the following profile of housing conditions
among an estimated total of 170,825 housing units in Oakland:
     •     Over three quarters (78 percent) of Oakland’s housing units are estimated to be in
           sound condition. These estimated 134,000 units show no signs of exterior damage or
           deferred maintenance on the portions of the structures visible from the public right-of-way.
     •     One fifth (20 percent) of housing units in Oakland are estimated to be in need of minor
           rehabilitation or repair. These estimated 34,000 units are in need of minor repairs such as
           partial re-painting or minor repair or replacement of a window or door.
     •     Moderate to substantial rehabilitation or repair is needed for an estimated 2,600
           housing units in Oakland. These units (less than two percent of all units in Oakland) are in
           structures that show major damage such as missing siding, holes in the roof or a roof that is
           leaning, a tilted or cracked foundation, or missing windows or doors.
     •     A small number of units are completely dilapidated and in need of replacement or
           complete rehabilitation. In Oakland, an estimated 260 housing units show signs of
           excessive neglect and appear to require demolition or major rehabilitation to become
           habitable.
This survey method is valuable in that it can provide a snapshot evaluation of the basic structural and
exterior conditions of the City’s housing stock in a cost-effective and timely manner that respects the
privacy of residents. However, the “windshield” survey method is limited in that housing
deficiencies requiring close examination to detect are excluded from the survey results and generally
result in an under-estimation of the number of units in a given geography with structural deficiencies
that may merit repair or rehabilitation. This is particularly true in dense urban environments such as
12
   The City hired BAE Urban Economics, Inc. to conduct the survey.
13
   The full BAE report, analyzing the survey results, will be included in the final Housing Element, in Fall, 2014.
14
   The Port of Oakland and Oakland International Airport are excluded from the survey.
140                                                                             EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Oakland, where residential structures are typically close together and allow for very limited
evaluation from the public-right-of-way.
The results of this survey should be used in conjuncture with other sources of information regarding
the condition of the City’s housing stock that are readily available to the City. These sources include
the estimated age of the housing stock, foreclosure and vacancy records, data and results from past
rehabilitation programs, and code compliance and enforcement records.
Presence of Lead-Based Paint
The presence of lead-based paint in housing can also be an indicator of unsafe housing conditions,
particularly for households with children. Extrapolating from the 2008-2012 American Housing
Survey 5 year estimates, over 80%, or approximately 142,000 units of Oakland housing were built
before 1978, the year lead-based paint was banned from residential use. Lead-based paint becomes
more hazardous as the older layers break down and become deteriorated over time, including normal
wear and tear on friction surfaces. Unsafe painting and renovations on these homes can also create
lead dust hazards and specialized training and lead safe work practices are now required under
Federal and State law for most work disturbing lead-based paint. According to the Centers for
Disease Control (CDC) and California’s Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Branch, lead paint is
the primary cause of lead exposure for children who live in older homes. The California Legislature
has declared that “childhood lead exposure represents the most significant childhood environmental
problem in the state today” (California Health & Safety. Code, § 124125). Dwelling units
constructed before the 1960s are most likely to contain hazardous lead paint conditions.
Childhood lead poisoning is a significant public health problem in California. ACHHD reports that
lead poisoning is particularly prevalent in the San Antonio, Fruitvale, and East Oakland areas, which
have a confluence of low household incomes, low rents, concentrations of older housing (much in
deteriorated condition), and concentrations of families with children under the age of six. The
ACHHD reports that within Alameda County, both high risk areas and cases of lead poisoning are
more prevalent in Oakland than in other jurisdictions.
Table 3-22 summarizes the estimated number of housing units in Oakland with lead-based paint that
could potentially present a hazard.
It should be noted that care must be used in interpreting these numbers as these figures are based on
national averages that could vary by region. Also the presence of lead-based paint does not
automatically indicate that serious lead hazards exist. Serious lead hazards exist when conditions
such as chipping, peeling, cracking or paint-disturbing work or activities cause lead to be released
from the paint and result in lead exposure to persons in and around the affected housing unit.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                    141

 CITY OF O AKL AND
 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                       Table 3-22
                              Incidence of Lead-Based Paint (1990)
                               Renter-Occupied Units                                    Owner-Occupied Units
Year Built         Total             Low              Moderate               Total            Low       Moderate
Pre-1940           25,326            10,006           10,373                 29,290           1,635     2,186
(with lead)        (22,793)          (9,005)          (9,336)                (26,361)         (1,471)   (1,967)
1940 – 1959        25,399            9,166            11,741                 20,431           997       1,830
(with lead)        (20,319)          (7,333)          (9,393)                (16,345)         (798)     (1,464)
1960 - 1979        26,128            9,728            10,903                 8,129            177       256
(with lead)        (16,200)          (6,031)          (6,760)                (5,040)          (110)     (159)
 Sources: Oakland Consolidated Plan. Data from U.S. Department of HUD; U.S. Census Bureau, 1990
 D.        HOUSING COST
 The Bay Area is one of the most expensive housing markets in the country. In Oakland, rents and
 median sales prices rose slowly during much of the 1990s, price increases accelerated in the late
 1990s and continued to increase rapidly until 2007. From 2008 to approximately 2012, prices
 declined considerably as the housing bubble burst and the foreclosure crisis ensued. In 2013 housing
 costs (both market rents and home sales prices) have had significant increases with prices in some zip
 codes reaching heights close to those at the peak of the housing bubble.
 Comparing 1990 and 2000 Census data and American Community Survey (ACS) data on Median
 Home Values and Rents 15, the widening gap between housing costs and incomes is especially acute
 for family households, whose incomes lagged in the 1990s, 2000s and through 2010 and who
 represented a large share of Oakland’s population growth during that period. According to the ACS
 2011 5-year survey data, the widening gap between housing costs and incomes continued. Increases
 in overpayment and overcrowding in the 1990s and 2000s (though in 2010 the number of persons per
 household has decreased slightly) are further indicators of the problems faced by lower-income
 households, especially family households, and those with very low-incomes. Table 3-23 compares
 this data.
 The following sections evaluate both ownership and rental housing in light of the gap between
 housing costs and income. Looking both at recent sales prices and market rental rates, data indicate
 that the widening gap trend continues into the second decade of the millennium. The construction of
 subsidized rental housing also continues to be a challenge as the subsidy cost per unit assumption
 continues to climb resulting in more challenges to provide more deeply affordable units.
 15
    Comparing Census and American Community Survey is typically not recommended. This comparison was done per
 guidance from California Housing and Community Development Department, Housing Element Requisite Analysis.
 142                                                                            EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Development trends in Oakland (see Chapter 4, Land Inventory) suggest that market rate housing
constructed, under construction, or approved since 2007 contains, or will contain, some housing units
affordable to moderate-income small households and families. By contrast, units affordable to very
low- and low-income households are not mandated in market rate projects and require a significant
amount of financial assistance. If these trends in housing costs and incomes continue in Oakland, the
City may need strategies to:
     1. increase the supply of affordable housing for lower-income households, especially very low-
           income households and large families;
     2. address cost increases in rental housing and an increasing need for rental assistance;
     3. facilitate the continued construction of market-rate rental housing affordable to moderate-
           income households; and
     4. seek new sources of funding for affordable housing.
                                                      Table 3-23
                                  Median Value/Rent (1990 to 2011)
                                                          1990 to                                                         2000 to
                                           1990 to        2000            ACS           ACS              2000 to          2011
Value/Rent          1990        2000       2000           Percent         2011          Margin           2011             Percent
                                           Change         Change                        of Error         Change           Change
Median
                    177,440     235,500        58,060           33%        492,200      +/-7,585            256,700             109%
Home Value
Median
                         485         696          211           44%             961     +/-9                      265             38%
Gross Rent
Source: American Community 5-Year Survey 2007-2011 and U.S. Census 1990, 2000.
Note: Margin of Error for American Community Survey 2007-2011 data represents the degree of uncertainty for an estimate arising from
sampling variability.
Also note: Comparing Census and American Community Survey is typically not recommended. This comparison was done per guidance
from California Housing and Community Development Department, Housing Element Requisite Analysis.
Housing Prices for Owner-Occupied Housing
Oakland remains relatively affordable compared to other centrally located Bay Area communities.
Housing prices in most Oakland neighborhoods are significantly lower than the median Bay Area
housing price of $666,890 as reported by the California Association of Realtors in December
2013. 16 In Table 3-24 below, the median home sales price in 2013 shows that Oakland continues to
rank among the lowest in ownership cost compared to other Bay Area Cities. In recent years this
relative affordability has caused median home sales prices to grow at the highest rate among a sample
of Bay Area Cities. This illustrates that the regional demand for housing is impacting the City’s
housing values—to the advantage of low-income homeowners but also to the disadvantage of the
City’s low-and moderate-income population seeking to become home owners. Table 3-24 shows the
median home sales price changes for some Bay Area cities for 2000, 2008, and 2013.
16
   As per California Association of Realtors website: http://www.car.org/marketdata/data/countysalesactivity/
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                  143

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                   Table 3-24
            Selection of Bay Area Cities Median Home Sales Prices
                                          2000, 200817 and 2013
                        Median Home          Median Home            Median Home Sales         Percent Change in
                        Sales Price          Sales Price            Price                     Price between
                        2000                 2008                   2013                      2000 and 2013
Alameda                 $359,000             $625,000               $588,000                  64%
Albany                  $335,000             $500,000               $603,000                  80%
Berkeley                $420,000             $735,000               $730,000                  74%
Castro Valley           $356,500             $518,500               $534,500                  50%
Emeryville              $191,000             $307,500               $350,000                  83%
Fremont                 $382,000             $564,000               $605,000                  58%
Hayward                 $255,000             $360,000               $360,000                  41%
Oakland                 $211,500             $401,000               $390,000                  84%
Redwood City            $560,000             $800,000               $890,000                  59%
Richmond                $160,000             $245,000               $210,000                  31%
San Francisco           $485,000             $760,000               $830,000                  71%
San Jose                $400,000             $560,000               $570,000                  43%
San Leandro             $265,000             $391,000               $380,000                  43%
San Mateo               $517,000             $710,000               $735,000                  42%
Santa Clara             $425,000             $589,000               $635,000                  49%
Sunnyvale               $510,000             $716,250               $765,000                  50%
Source: DataQuick
According to DataQuick, median home sales price data obtained by the City show that in the past
thirteen years housing prices in Oakland increased on average 84%. Expanding the time range to
twenty five years from 1988 to 2013, there is a dramatic increase in median home prices—an average
increase of 207%. Figure 3-13 charts the Oakland median sales price trends over a 25 year period
(Note that prices are not adjusted to current year values which skews the real values over time. This
is done with the understanding that people do not do these adjustments when considering historical
data.).
17
   This is data is from the previous Housing Element and only covers January – July 2008—what was available at the time
that report was written.
144                                                                        EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                    Figure 3-13
                                    Oakland Median Home Sales Prices 1988 to 2013
                                           Oakland Median Sales Prices
                             $600,000
                             $500,000
                             $400,000
                             $300,000
                             $200,000
                             $100,000
                                   $0
           Source: DataQuick
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                        145
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Focusing on Oakland neighborhoods, the following Table 3-25 shows variations in house sales prices
by Oakland zip codes and price changes over time. The table illustrates the magnitude of price
variation between zip codes. For example, the 2013 median sales prices has a high of $840,000 in zip
code 94618 and a low of $153,000 in zip code 94621 (i.e. almost a fifth of the price). This table also
illustrates the progressive increase in median home sales prices over time with recent 13 year price
increases between 17 and 224%.
                                                        Table 3-25
                            Median Home Sales Prices by Zip Code
                              Oakland (Selected Years, 1990-2013)
                                                           %                           %              %
                                                           Change                      Change         Change
             Zip Code            1990          2000                         2013
                                                           1990 -                      1990 -         2000 -
                                                           2000                        2013           2013
             94601           $124,000       $160,000           29%       $240,000           94%           50%
             94602           $210,000       $325,000           55%       $560,000         167%            72%
             94603           $88,000        $142,250           62%       $172,250           96%           21%
             94605           $130,000       $194,000           49%       $300,000         131%            55%
             94606           $130,000       $170,000           31%       $309,000         138%            82%
             94607           $94,500        $160,000           69%       $320,000         239%          100%
             94609           $165,000       $280,000           70%       $559,000         239%          100%
             94610           $142,500       $266,500           87%       $580,000         307%          118%
             94611           $270,000       $465,000           72%       $730,000         170%            57%
             94612           $109,000       $139,000           28%       $450,000         313%          224%
             94618           $296,000       $520,000           76%       $840,000         184%            62%
             94619           $170,000       $260,000           53%       $425,100         150%            64%
             94621           $83,500        $130,500           56%       $153,000           83%           17%
             Average
             of Median
             Sales           $154,808       $247,096           57%       $433,719         178%           78%
             Prices per
             Zip Code
               Source: DataQuick
Overall, since 2000, home sales prices have increased for all neighborhoods in Oakland. From about
2008 to just recently, the financial crisis and resultant foreclosure crisis significantly impacted median
home sales prices in all neighborhoods. The collapse in home sales prices during that period was due
to the flood of housing inventory, the tightening of the credit market, and the further decline of
already struggling communities due to predatory lending practices (and resulting foreclosures) and
job loss. In an analysis obtained by the City of Oakland, the first quarter of 2008 had the lowest
home sales volume since 2000. By 2009 the home sales volume increased significantly but did not
result in an increase in median sales prices.18 In 2007 and 2008, in all but one zip code (94618),
median home sale prices experienced dramatic decreases. In five (out of thirteen) zip code areas; the
one-year decrease from 2007 to 2008 was greater than one third. Figure 3-13 illustrates these market
18
   City of Oakland Home Sales History (1/1/2000 to 3/31/2010), HdL Coren & Cone; Data Source: Alameda County DataQuick Property
Data
146                                                                            EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                          HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
price fluctuations using Oakland’s citywide median home sales price. According to DataQuick, as of
2013, median sales prices by zip code area ranged from $153,000 to $840,000. With the exception of
five (out of thirteen) zip code areas (94602, 94609, 94610, 94611, 94618) in Oakland with moderately
to significantly higher prices, the median cost of housing in Oakland is lower than most other East
Bay cities. The highest cost communities in the immediate region were Alameda, Albany, Berkeley,
Castro Valley, Fremont, Redwood City, San Francisco, San Jose, San Mateo, Santa Clara, and
Sunnyvale. The lowest cost communities were Emeryville, Hayward, Oakland, Richmond and San
Leandro. “Low cost” in the context of other East Bay cities means median home prices ranging from
$210,000 to $390,000. It is not clear if the lower-cost units are in standard condition. Additionally,
some low cost units are likely to be found in neighborhoods in at least two of these cities (Oakland
and Richmond) that have been greatly impacted by the concentration of foreclosed properties and in
some cases neglect and abandonment of foreclosed properties.
Ownership Affordability
Given Oakland’s relative affordability compared to other Bay Area cities, homeownership is difficult
for moderate-income households and all but impossible for lower-income households. Ownership
remains difficult as housing costs have increased to levels that are well beyond what annual salaries
for many of the jobs located in the East Bay region will support. A household can typically qualify to
purchase a home that is three times its annual gross income, depending on the down payment, the
level of other long-term obligations (such as a car loan), and interest rates. In practice, the interaction
of these factors allows some households to qualify for homes priced at more than three times their
annual income, while other households may be limited to purchasing homes less than three times their
annual income. For a quick, back-of-the-envelope calculation, a median income renter household
earning approximately $80,000 19 would be able to purchase a home valued at $240,000 to $266,500
under customary lending assumptions. According to DataQuick market sales data through 2013,
there are only three zip codes in Oakland where homes can be purchased in this price range (see
Table 3-25).
Another way to look at housing affordability is by occupations available in the immediate area.
According to the California State Department of Labor (DOL) statistics for the Oakland-Fremont-
Hayward metropolitan division, the average annual wage paid for the highest number of population
employed in this area is $43,231. Table 3-26 gives a breakdown of those DOL top five occupation
categories and their respective mean annual wage.
                                                   Table 3-26
 Top 5 Occupations of Population Employed & Mean Annual Wages
      Oakland-Fremont-Hayward Metro Division (First Quarter 2013)
                                                         March 2013-        2013 % of      March 2013
                                                         population         Total          Mean Annual
                                                         employed           Population     Wage
  Office and Administrative Support Occupations              159,950              16.5%           $43,231
  Sales and Related Occupations                               98,230              10.1%           $45,801
  Food Preparation and Serving Related
                                                              79,330                8.2%          $22,940
  Occupations
  Education, Training, and Library Occupations                62,120                6.4%          $61,125
  Management Occupations                                      61,270                6.3%         $128,829
Source: California Department of Labor Statistics.
19
   Per City of Oakland2013 Income Limits for of moderate income household of 3 persons.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                         147

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Next, Table 3-27 shows the Median Home Sales Prices for 2013 and the annual income required
paying the principle and interest on a loan for those home prices. Assumptions for this table are as
follows: 20% down payment, 4.75% interest rate for a 30 year fixed mortgage, one-third of income
toward principle and interest payments. This calculation does not factor payment of taxes and
insurance. Note that in many cases for low income homebuyers (according to 2013 HUD income
limits, the annual salaries of 3 of the top 5 occupations represents more than 2/3 of population of
persons employed in the area in Table 3-26 above) a 20% down payment would be very difficult to
save. For the largest population of those working in the Oakland-Fremont-Hayward region (Office
and Administrative Support Occupations), again, only three of the zip codes are affordable to those
workers.
                                                        Table 3-27
                             Median Home Sales Prices 2013 and
                Income Required for Mortgage Principal & Interest
                                          Median Home
                                                                    Monthly                    Yearly Income
              Zip Code                    Sales Price
                                                                    Payment                    Required
                                          (2013)
              94601                           $240,000                    $1,002                       $36,420
              94602                           $560,000                    $2,337                       $84,981
              94603                           $172,250                       $719                      $26,139
              94605                           $300,000                    $1,252                       $45,526
              94606                           $309,000                    $1,290                       $46,891
              94607                           $320,000                    $1,335                       $48,561
              94609                           $559,000                    $2,333                       $84,829
              94610                           $580,000                    $2,420                       $88,016
              94611                           $730,000                    $3,046                      $110,779
              94612                           $450,000                    $1,878                       $68,288
              94618                           $840,000                    $3,505                      $124,472
              94619                           $425,100                    $1,774                       $64,510
              94621                           $153,000                       $638                      $23,218
               Source: DataQuick
               Notes: Loan assumptions: 20% down payment, 4.75% interest rate for a 30 year fixed mortgage, one-
               third of income toward principle and interest payments. Other costs that should be considered when
               considering purchasing a home include property taxes and insurance.
Oakland’s relative affordability given other Bay Area Cities and its central location—especially its
proximity to downtown San Francisco connected by the regional commuter BART train—creates
demand pressures that are increasing housing costs. These housing cost increases have the potential
to impact rents and in general decrease housing affordability for low- and moderate-income
households. If home sales prices continue to increase, homeownership for low- and moderate-income
households will be all but impossible except under privately sponsored, state, or federal programs
targeted to this income group. Financial assistance for low- and moderate-income homeownership is
extremely limited under most targeted programs. As a result, expansion of the rental housing stock
for households earning less than the median income may be a necessity.
148                                                                                EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Rental Costs
Rental costs are usually evaluated based on two factors: rents paid by existing occupants of rental
units and advertised rents for vacant units. When the housing market is tight, rents increase rapidly.
Under these conditions, advertised rents for vacant units are often significantly higher than rents paid
by existing tenants. The difference between rents for occupied units versus vacant units is magnified
by the presence of rent control in Oakland. Property owners typically increase rents to market levels
when they become vacant, creating a large gap between rents for occupied and vacant units.
Rental costs are often evaluated based on the “gross rent” paid by tenants, which includes utility
payments, versus the contract rent for the dwelling units only. According to HUD, Comprehensive
Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data based on the American Community Service 5-year data
from 2006-2010 (ACS 5-year data for 2010), the percentage of renter households paying more than
30 percent of income for housing increased from what was reported in the last housing element
(approximately 40 percent) to 50% of renter households. Market rent increases seem to have had a
disproportionate effect on very low-income renter households (those earning less than 50 percent of
the countywide median income). Nearly 78 percent of these renter households paid more than 30
percent of their incomes for housing expenses according to the ACS 5-year data for 2010.
Following are findings from a 2012 Rent Survey conducted by City of Oakland. This section gives
an overview of advertised rents and rental trends in Oakland.
Advertised Rents
The City of Oakland has tracked rental housing cost information in the City since 1980 through an
annual rent survey. During the 1980’s and 1990’s, the City was able to get consistent data from
available print and rental housing advertising agencies. In 2008, given the demise of these local print
sources, the methodology of the annual rental survey changed. City staff began to collect data for the
annual rental survey every year on July 15th from listings of vacant apartment units advertised online
at Craigslist.org. This data is compiled by number of bedrooms and geographic area within Oakland.
The geographic areas include: Downtown, East Oakland, Oakland Hills/Mills, Lake Merritt/Grand,
North Oakland/Temescal, Piedmont/Montclair, Rockridge and West Oakland. The City’s survey
measures increases in rents on vacant units; tenants in place are not necessarily experiencing rent
increases of this magnitude, particularly because Oakland’s Residential Rent Adjustment Ordinance,
which limits rent increases to much lower rates (rent increases are set each year). There are
limitations to this data in that there is no way to filter out duplicate listings. This limitation could
potentially increase rental rate average estimates.
In 2012, Citywide median rent data remained relatively flat or experienced only slight changes over
2011; studios and three-bedroom units remained flat, one-bedroom units experienced a slight
increase, and two-bedroom units experienced a slight decrease. Notable with Citywide median rents
in all unit types is, with a few exceptions, most all have recovered to well above relatively high 2008
median rent levels.
2012 Citywide data on rents hide some variation among neighborhoods:
     •   For studios, the median rent had no change over 2011, but had more dramatic increases in
         some neighborhoods: Downtown with a 37% increase, Lake Merritt/Grand Avenue
         neighborhood with a 14% increase, and Piedmont/Montclair with a 19% increase. The
         remaining neighborhoods had insignificant decreases or single digit percentage increases with
         the exception of East Oakland that experienced a 15% decrease in median rents for studios.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                        149

 CITY OF O AKL AND
 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
      •   For one-bedroom units, the median rent increased by 4% citywide over 2011, and had
          dramatic increases in three neighborhoods: Downtown with a 36% increase, North
          Oakland/Temescal with a 19% increase, and Rockridge with a 15% increase. All other areas
          of the city had single digit percentage increases over 2011 rents except for the Hills/Mills
          neighborhood, which saw a 9% decrease in rents.
      •   For two-bedroom units, median rent had a slight decrease of 3% citywide. Although there
          was a slight decrease in median rents citywide, half of the surveyed neighborhoods had
          dramatic increases: Downtown with a 25% increase, East Oakland with a 12% increase, Lake
          Merritt/Grand Avenue with an 11% increase and Piedmont/Montclair with a 15% increase.
          Two of the surveyed neighborhoods had dramatic decreases in median rents that might
          explain the decrease in citywide median: Rockridge had an 11% decrease and West Oakland
          had a 15% decrease in median rents. This might be attributable to a market adjustment over
          2011’s dramatic increases in rents for both these same neighborhoods.
      •   For three-bedroom units, the median rent decreased 3% citywide. What is notable in this
          category of units is that the Rockridge neighborhood experienced a significant increase in
          median rents, an increase of 72%.
 Table 3-28 shows Estimated Citywide Median Advertised Rents in Oakland 2008- to 2012.
                                               Table 3-28
                    Estimated Citywide Median Advertised Rents
                                       Oakland 2008 to 2012
                    Studio                  1 Bedroom               2 Bedroom              3 Bedroom
            Median        1-year       Median       1-year      Median      1-year     Median     1-year
Year
              Rent       Change          Rent      Change         Rent     Change        Rent     Change
2008          $800           -          $1,150         -         $1,500        -        $1,968       -
2009          $825           3%         $1,030       -10%        $1,425       -5%       $1,750     -11%
2010          $795          -4%         $1,050         2%        $1,395       -2%       $1,725      -1%
2011          $850           7%         $1,025        -2%        $1,395        0%       $1,798       4%
2012          $850           0%         $1,095         7%        $1,350       -3%       $1,750      -3%
 After large increases in the number of studio, one-, two- and three-bedroom units listed from 2008 to
 2009, in 2010 the number of listings for available units declined and continued to decline in 2011 and
 2012. Notable is that in 2012 the count of listings for studios and one bedrooms fell well below the
 listing count of 2008—the year that the City started conducting the Craigslist analysis. These
 decreases in unit availability may explain continued increases in rents.
 150                                                               EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Table 3-29
                         Number of Listings for Rental Units, 2008-2012
                   Studio                One-Bdrm                Two-Bdrm                Three-Bdrm              Total 0-3 Bdrm
           # of          %          # of         %          # of         %          # of          %           # of        %
Year
           Listings Change Listings Change Listings Change Listings Change Listings Change
2008               121        -           381         -            350        -            154          -         1,006          -
2009               261     116%           742       95%            578      65%            249        62%         1,830        82%
2010               168     -36%           728       -2%            555      -4%            190       -24%         1,641       -10%
2011               165      -2%           466      -36%            421     -24%            198         4%         1,250       -24%
2012                89     -46%           244      -48%            372     -12%            159       -20%           864       -31%
     The citywide decrease in number of listings hides variation across neighborhoods. There was an
     increase in listings in only one neighborhood for all units (0-3 bedroom): East Oakland’s number of
     rental listings increased by 3% from 2011 to 2012. In all but one of the remaining neighborhoods
     there were significant double digit decreases in rental listings: Downtown (-34%), Lake Merritt/Grand
     Avenue (-54%), North Oakland/Temescal (-38%), Piedmont/Montclair (-42%), Rockridge (-58%),
     and West Oakland (-51%).
     As reported in Oakland’s last Housing Element, rent levels and increases during the 1990 and 2000s
     have varied among Oakland’s neighborhoods. North Oakland, Montclair, areas above MacArthur
     Boulevard, and Lake Merritt experienced the largest increases in median rents. Areas below
     MacArthur have the lowest rents. According to Craigslist data, the same locational trends occur in
     rents with the exception of the Downtown neighborhood. Since 2004, Downtown Oakland median
     advertised rents have experienced a dramatic increase compared to other neighborhoods.
     The annual rental survey was not completed in 2013. Recent anecdotal evidence indicates that
     market rents have increased in Oakland according to an article in the San Francisco Chronicle 20 and
     based on data from RealFacts (a company that aggregates market rental data nationally). It is
     reported that the average rental rates for Oakland increased 10.3% from 2012 to 2013 to an average of
     $2,124 (the type of unit was not noted in the article though it is assumed that it is an average of all
     types of units). RealFacts.com data is limited to a very specific market area that may not tell the story
     for what is happening in the entire City. Regardless, it is an indicator of an alarming trend of
     increased rental costs 21.
     Because household income increases have not kept pace with advertised rent increases, rental
     affordability continues to be a major problem for many of Oakland’s renters.
     20
        Said, Carolyn, “Rents Soaring Across Region,” San Francisco Chronicle, October 25, 2013.
     21
         RealFacts data is based on 19 market rate buildings with 50 or more units located in the following zip codes: 94606,
     94607, 94609, 94610, and 94612.
     EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                   151

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Gross Rents
According to the 2000 Census, the median gross rent 22 in Oakland for all rental occupied rental units
was $696, compared to $852 countywide (see Table 3-30). The Census bureau measures rents as
reported by existing occupants of all rental units (including subsidized rental units) (Table 3-30 and
Table 3-31), in contrast to advertised rents for rental units shown in Table 3-28. Existing residents
typically pay lower rents, on average, than new occupants of rental units, particularly because of rent
control. According to the ACS 5-year data for 2011 median gross rent for Oakland increased to
$1,042, compared to $1,228 countywide. Comparing 2000 (Table 3-30) and 2011 (Table 3-31) gross
rents data, there are distinct changes of percentage of units by gross rent range—data skews to the
higher gross rents in the most recent data, again, indicating the general increase in gross rents being
paid by Oakland renter residents.
                                                        Table 3-30
                     Gross Rents for Occupied Housing Units (2000)
                                                      Percent of Units                   Percent of Units
          Gross Rent                                  Oakland                            Alameda County
          Less than $200                                             5%                                 3%
          $200 - $299                                                5%                                 3%
          $300 - $499                                              13%                                  8%
          $500 - $749                                              35%                                25%
          $750 - $999                                              24%                                26%
          $1,000 - $1,499                                          13%                                25%
          $1,500 or more                                             5%                                 9%
          No Cash Rent                                               2%                                 2%
          Median Rent                                              $696                               $852
           Source: U. S. Census Bureau, 2000
Note: Percentages may not equal 100 due to rounding.
22
   “Gross Rent”, as defined by U.S. Census Bureau, is the amount of the contract rent plus the estimated average monthly
cost of utilities (electricity, gas, and water and sewer) and fuels (oil, coal, kerosene, wood, etc.) if these are paid for by the
renter (or paid for the renter by someone else). Gross rent is intended to eliminate differentials which result from varying
practices with respect to the inclusion of utilities and fuels as part of the rental payment.
152                                                                                EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                      Table 3-31
                   Gross Rents for Occupied Housing Units (2011)
                                                   Percent of Units                  Percent of Units
          Gross Rent                               Oakland                           Alameda County
          Less than $200                                          1%                                     1%
          $200 - $299                                             5%                                     3%
          $300 - $499                                             5%                                     3%
          $500 - $749                                           10%                                      6%
          $750 - $999                                           24%                                    17%
          $1,000 - $1,499                                       33%                                    37%
          $1,500 or more                                        19%                                    30%
          No Cash Rent                                            3%                                     3%
          Median Rent                                         $1,042                                $1,228
           Source: American Community Service 5-Year Survey 2007-2011
Fair Market Rent
Oakland rental rates can be compared to a measure of rental housing cost used by the federal
government in the administration of rental housing assistance programs for very low- and low-income
households. This measure is called the “Fair Market Rent” 23 and establishes the payment standard by
which public housing authorities determine the amount they will pay to property owners on behalf of
low-income tenants. Based on these rents, it is clear that very low-income households (those earning
less than 50 percent of the area median income) are unable to afford even a modest priced rental unit
without devoting more than 30 percent of their limited incomes to housing costs. Persons earning
minimum wage, or even Oakland’s Living Wage, make far less than what is required to afford
unsubsidized housing.
Median advertised rental rates in many parts of Oakland in 2012 (with the exceptions of East and
West Oakland) were equivalent or exceeded the 2012 Fair Market Rents. This could make it difficult
for low-income households with federal rental assistance vouchers to locate rental housing. Table 3-
32 below shows HUD Fair Market Rents over the past twelve years.
23
   “Fair Market Rents” are gross rent estimates that include shelter rent plus the cost of all utilities, except telephones. Fair
market rents are expressed as a percentile point within the rent distribution of standard-quality rental housing units. The
current definition for Oakland uses the 50th percentile rent, the dollar amount below which 50 percent of the standard-
quality rental housing units are rented. The 50th percentile rent is drawn from the distribution of rents of all units occupied
by recent movers (renter households who moved to their present residence within the past 15 months). Public housing units
and units less than two years old are excluded from the calculation.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                            153

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                      Table 3-32
                                  2002-2013 HUD Fair Market Rents
                       HUD Fair Market
                       Rents                     Studio        1 Bed           2 Bed            3 Bed
                          2002                    $     819     $      991      $ 1,243         $ 1,704
                          2003                    $     905     $ 1,095         $ 1,374         $ 1,883
                          2004                    $     936     $ 1,132         $ 1,420         $ 1,947
                          2005                    $     936     $ 1,132         $ 1,420         $ 1,947
                          2006                    $     865     $ 1,045         $ 1,238         $ 1,679
                          2007                    $     874     $ 1,055         $ 1,250         $ 1,695
                          2008                    $     866     $ 1,046         $ 1,239         $ 1,680
                          2009                    $     905     $ 1,093         $ 1,295         $ 1,756
                          2010                    $     963     $ 1,162         $ 1,377         $ 1,867
                          2011                    $     974     $ 1,176         $ 1,393         $ 1,889
                          2012                    $     980     $ 1,183         $ 1,402         $ 1,901
                          2013 24                 $     892     $ 1,082         $ 1,361         $ 1,901
Table 3-33 examines the affordability of the Fair Market Rents and 2012 median advertised rent and
shows the annual income required to pay for those rents. It also shows the number of hours needed to
afford these rents for a hypothetical household earning Oakland’s Living Wage, and the California
and the Federal minimum wages. Only a couple earning Oakland’s Living Wage and sharing a one-
bedroom could afford a median priced apartment in Oakland without working more than 40 hours a
week. Wages that are needed to afford housing in Oakland need to be substantially higher than the
minimum wage or Oakland’s Living Wage to afford rents in Oakland.
                                                      Table 3-33
                                       2012 Fair Market Rents and
 Weekly Work Hours Required to Afford a Market-Priced Rental Unit
                                          Oakland Living                CA State Minimum              Federal Minimum
  2012 Wages & Median                     Wage
                                                 25
                                                                        Wage                          Wage
  Rents
                                          $11.70                        $8.00                         $7.25
  Unit Size                               1 BR apt       2 BR apt       1 BR apt         2 BR apt     1 BR apt     2 BR apt
  HUD Fair Market Rents 26                $1,093         $1,295         $1,093           $1,295       $1,093       $1,295
  Median Advertised Rents                 $1,095         $1,395         $1,095           $1,395       $1,095       $1,395
  Hours required, 1 wage-
  earner 27                                   72             92             105               134         116          148
  Hours required by each wage
  earner in 2 person household 28             36             46              53                67          58           74
  Sources: Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and City of Oakland, July 2012.
24
   Note that this amount dropped from 2012 to 2013 with significant implications for ongoing affordable rental cash flows
for properties currently regulated by the City of Oakland.
25
   Oakland’s Living Wage with benefits as of July 1, 2012.
26
   50th percentile fair market rents.
27
   Based on a 40-hour work week, 52 weeks per year.
28
   Ibid
154                                                                             EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Availability of Subsidized Housing
Another measure of the need for financial assistance in rental housing affordability is the number of
lower-income households seeking rental housing assistance in relation to available assistance. There
are two types of rental housing assistance available to needy renters: 1) rent restricted housing units
in projects assisted with public funds, and 2) rental housing vouchers that pay property owners the
difference between what a renter can afford and a payment standard based on the fair market rent.
Some assisted rental housing projects also have vouchers allocated to those projects.
The Oakland Housing Authority (OHA) is responsible for the operation, management, maintenance,
and third-party management of 1,605 public housing units. OHA also provides contracted property
management services to 1,554 project based vouchers units in the Oakland Affordable Housing
Preservation Initiative (OAHPI) portfolio, which consists of former public housing scattered site units
that are now under a 30-year lease agreement with OAHPI (see Figure 3-14 and Figure 3-15).
Additionally, OHA operates the Section 8 Rental Assistance Program (rental housing vouchers) for
almost 13,700 households, and administers the Shelter Plus Care Program for Alameda County. All
of these programs serve very low- and extremely low-income persons, and the Housing Authority
programs are the principal programs available to meet the needs of persons with incomes below 30
percent of median income. The average wait list time (i.e. the period between when a household gets
on a housing wait list until they are offered a housing unit) for OHA’s programs varies. OHA opens
its waitlist periodically, and lotterizes the pre-applicants down to a shorter, more manageable list.
This is done to alleviate wait times that could exceed a decade for applicants, in an effort to more
closely link the opening of a wait list to a possible offer of housing for the applicant. According to
OHA, in early 2014 all of their waitlists were closed, with very few new families served due to severe
funding cuts and the Federal sequestration. According to their Making Transitions Work (MTW) FY
2015 annual plan, OHA plans to open some site-based wait lists for some of their public housing and
project based voucher sites in the years 2015-16. The current wait list length for all of their programs
are listed in Table 3-34.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                      155

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                         Figure 3-14
       Oakland Affordable Housing Preservation Initiative North, West, and Downtown 2014
156                                                                     EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                              Figure 3-15
                  Oakland Affordable Housing Preservation Initiative East Oakland, 2014
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                    157
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                   Table 3-34
  Oakland Housing Authority Housing Program Wait List Summary
                                                As of March 2014
                                                              Wait List    Plans to
                                                # of          Open,        open        Wait list   Average
                                OHA Wait
 Housing Program                                Households    Partially    wait list   last        Time on
                                List Type
                                                on Wait List  Open, or     in FY 14-   opened?     Wait List
                                                              Closed       15?
 MTW Housing Choice              Community
                                                     9,345      Closed         No        Jan 2011     5-7 years
 Voucher                             Wide
 MTW Public Housing
                                                       891      Closed        Yes       Sept 2012     1-3 years
 (OHA managed)                   Site Based
                                                                           No (List
                                                                           open for
                                                                           Lion
 MTW Public Housing
                                 Site Based          3,690      Closed     Creek            varies       varies
 (Third-party managed)
                                                                           Crossings
                                                                           3BR
                                                                           units)
 Project-based Voucher                                                                               6-12
                                 Site Based          3,821      Closed        Yes       Sept 2012
 (OAHPI)                                                                                             months
 Source: Oakland Housing Authority, March 2014.
OHA reports that the average wait time for entry to a public housing development is between one to
three years, however this time is expected to grow significantly due to historically low funding levels
for the near term. The average wait time for receipt of a rental housing voucher is between five and
seven years. Public housing wait list times have decreased since the last report, but may increase
again once all available units are leased.
The waiting list for privately owned and managed assisted rental housing also increased since it was
reported in the last Housing Element. City staff received responses to a phone survey from 34
privately owned and managed assisted rental housing developments (out of a total of 180 properties in
the City’s database). Only 17 of surveyed housing developments were accepting applications for
housing. Of the housing developments survey, the average wait list length was 103 households. The
average wait time for these units was about 18 months.
During the last Housing Element period it was thought that the need for additional affordable rental
housing was likely to be mitigated in the short term by the high number of market rate housing
developed in the early 2000s. In general, when there are increases in the supply and quality of rental
units, it is likely to result in a decrease in rental costs. This trend can be seen in market rental data in
Table 3-29 in 2009 and 2010. Subsequent years of this market rental data and anecdotal evidence
does not indicate any continuance of decreasing cost trends. Additionally, for much of the last
housing element planning period (2007-2014) housing starts stalled markedly. An illustration of this
comes from data on building permits issued—there were three months in 2011 that had no building
permits issued (the only year out of the last ten years that it has been tracked in the City). In addition,
the foreclosure crisis and subsequent economic and housing crisis resulted in many homeowners
158                                                                   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
losing their homes and likely moving into the rental housing market. All of these factors combined
point to potential need for affordable housing as competition for housing increases market rents. City
housing staff will monitor rental unit supply and costs to determine if this will in fact be the case in
Oakland.
Financing Gap for Rental Housing
With land and construction costs increasing rapidly in today’s market, the cost of developing new
apartments is approximately $509,000 per unit according to recent City-assisted housing development
statistics (2013-14). These costs cannot be recovered without rents high enough to support a
substantial mortgage. As a result, little unsubsidized rental housing was under construction, until
recently, especially outside the downtown area. Another way to look at this is to examine the gap
between the mortgage that can be supported with affordable rents and the cost of development.
Such an analysis would yield the following for a hypothetical 60-unit building with rents at
$1,361/month (Fair Market Rent for a two-bedroom unit) and $1,052/month (the maximum
affordable rent for a three-person very low-income household), operating costs at $5,000/unit per
year, and interest rates of 6.5 percent:
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                       159

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Sample Analysis of Rental Housing Development Cost:
With Average Unit Rent of $1,361/month (2013 Fair Market Rent for a 2-bedroom unit)
          Gross Rents (annual):                                                            $979,920
            (less vacancy/collection loss at 3 percent):                                  $(29,398)
          Effective Gross Income:                                                          $950,522
            (less operating expenses):                                                   $(300,000)
          Net Operating Income:                                                            $650,522
          Amount Available for Debt Service (1.10 debt coverage ratio):                    $591,384
          Development Cost ($509,000/unit):                                             $30,540,000
          Less Initial Equity Investment (10 percent):                                   $3,054,000
          Net Amount to Finance:                                                        $27,486,000
          Maximum Mortgage (at 6.5 percent, 30-year amortization):                       $7,796,946
          Financing Gap:                                                                $19,689,054
          Financial Gap Per Unit:                                                          $328,151
     With Average Unit Rent of $1,052/month (2013 Federal HOME Low Rent 29)
          Gross Rents (annual):                                                            $757,440
            (less vacancy/collection loss at 3 percent):                                  $(22,723)
          Effective Gross Income:                                                          $734,717
            (less operating expenses):                                                   $(300,000)
          Net Operating Income:                                                            $434,717
          Amount Available for Debt Service (1.10 debt coverage ratio):                    $395,197
          Development Cost ($509,000/unit):                                             $30,540,000
          Less Initial Equity Investment (10 percent):                                   $3,054,000
          Net Amount to Finance:                                                        $27,486,000
          Maximum Mortgage (at 6.5 percent, 30-year amortization):                       $5,210,371
          Financing Gap:                                                                $22,275,629
          Financial Gap Per Unit:                                                         $371,260
This simplified exercise demonstrates clearly that a substantial financing gap exists between the debt
that can be supported by a housing development at fair market rent, and the actual cost of
development. For these units to be affordable to very low-income tenants, a significant monthly
rental subsidy, about $2,000 to about $2,350 per dwelling unit, or an even greater capital subsidy, will
be needed in addition to the financial assistance to the developer.
E.        FORECLOSURES
The trend in subprime lending practices taking place from approximately 2005 to 2007 has
significantly impacted the City of Oakland. These high-risk mortgage loans including adjustable
rates and balloon payments led to large numbers of homeowners who lost or who were (or continue to
be) in danger of losing their homes to foreclosure. The City of Oakland continues to track the number
of houses that are in foreclosure by monitoring properties that are in default (NOD), that have a
trustee sale scheduled (NTS), or that are bank-owned (REO). Although foreclosure numbers have
decreased significantly, there are still large repercussions of the foreclosure crisis that the City and
other non-profit legal aid organizations continue to grapple with. As reported in the last Housing
Element, staff acquired data on properties that had an adjustable rate loans scheduled to reset in 2008-
29
   30% of 50% of Area Median Income of $40,150 for a 3 person household, 2 bedroom unit
160                                                                      EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
10 and that has 90% to 200% combined loan-to-value ratio. As of November 2008 30, this data show
that there are close to 7,365 properties that would have loan adjustments from 2008-2010. Of those
properties, 3,655 (50%) loans adjusted before the end of 2008; 6,303 (85%) loans adjusted between
December 2008 and November 2009. This data aligns pretty closely to the actual numbers of
foreclosures that happened during that period as is illustrated in Table 3-35.
Between 2006 and 2012, approximately 11,000 of Oakland’s residential properties have been
foreclosed (REO recorded on property title)—transferred back to the primary mortgage lender due to
unresolved payment defaults. This represents approximately 6.5 percent of Oakland’s residential
housing units. In the same time period close to 18,000 residential properties in Oakland were in some
stage of the foreclosure process as evidenced by a recorded NOD. NODs are properties that have a
recorded default from a bank indicating that the property is in crisis. Any lender that has a loan
secured by the property may file an NOD and depending on debt secured by the property there can be
multiple NODs per property. The City of Oakland data shown in Table 3-35 and Figure 3-16 is
consolidated and represents only one NOD per address. Additionally, the evolution of the foreclosure
crisis tells the story of the resulting economic instability for Oakland residents:
Another significant shift in conditions from the early years of the crisis is the length of ownership
prior to foreclosure. In the first few years of turnover (during the foreclosure crisis), most properties
lost to auction had been owned for less than two years and over 80 percent of properties had been
owned for less than six years. Five years later this trend had reversed: more than 88 percent of homes
sold at auction in 2012 had been owned for six years or more and 36 percent had been owned for
more than ten years. Overall, almost one in five Oakland properties lost since the crisis began had
been owned for more than 10 years. 31
30
    Adjustable Rate Loan Rider data for the City of Oakland acquired from First American Core Logic. This data consists of
first mortgage loans that will have at least one adjustment between November 2008 and November 2010 and that have a
combined loan to value ratio of >90%. These data include loans on the following types of properties: condominiums,
duplexes, multi-family, PUDs, four plexes, single family residential, townhomes and triplexes. The adjustable rate loans that
are counted in this data include: subprime, interest only, term and option. Data does not include negative or partial
amortization loans.
31
    Casey, Jean, “Oakland in the Wake of the Foreclosure Crisis: Impacts and Indicators in Pursuit of Neighborhood
Stabilization” (a planning report presented to the faculty of the Department of Urban Planning and Regional Development,
San Jose State University, in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Urban Development, May
2013).
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                        161

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                      Table 3-35
    Residential Notices of Default Recorded on Oakland Properties
                                                      2006 to 2012
                                                Percent of               Percent of
                    Notices of                  NODs with                NODs with final            Total Units Lost
  Year                       32
                    Default                     Other                    outcome as                 to Foreclosure
                                                              33
                                                Outcomes                 Foreclosure
  2006                      1,446                      26%                      74%                      1,074
  2007                      2,247                      18%                      82%                      1,842
  2008                      3,706                      23%                      77%                      2,844
  2009                      3,142                      25%                      75%                      2,360
  2010                      2,810                      49%                      51%                      1,445
  2011                      2,263                      57%                      43%                        984
  2012                      1,440                      78%                      22%                        314
  2013                        751               Data Not Available       Data Not Available         Data Not Available
  Total Units
  with a
  Default
  Recorded                                                               Total Units Lost
  between                                                                to Foreclosure
  2006-2013:               17,805                                        2006-12:                       10,863
Source: Oakland Department of Housing and Community Development using data from Foreclosure Radar, 2013
32
   This figure reflects unduplicated addresses of all NOD filings.
33
   Other outcomes of Notices of Default recorded could be (1)The owner sells the property to a third party. If that property
has a market value/sale price below what is currently owed, it is called a "short sale" and is subject to approval by the
lender. (2) The owner holds on to the property and brings the mortgage current or obtains a loan modification by the lender.
162                                                                            EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                        Figure 3-16
                              Distribution of Residential NOD Filings by Property Type,
                                                          City of Oakland 2006 to 2012
                                         4,000
                                         3,500
                                         3,000
                                         2,500
                                         2,000
                                                                                                                        OTHER
                                         1,500                                                                          5+Units
                                                                                                                        Condominium
                                         1,000
                                                                                                                        2-4 Unit
                                           500                                                                          Single Family Residence
                                              -
                                                    2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                       OTHER                           5       3     6      12     10        9      11       6
                       5+Units                        14      27    50      42     49       37      16      11
                       Condominium                    88     150   250     406    386      369     235      81
                       2-4 Unit                      263     393   596     502    461      359     184      91
                       Single Family Residence 1,076 1,674 2,804 2,180 1,904 1,489 994                     562
                  Source: Oakland Department of Housing and Community Development using data from Foreclosure Radar, 2013
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                                             163
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
F.       HOUSEHOLDS OVERPAYING FOR HOUSING
A standard measure of housing affordability is that housing expenses (including utilities) should not
exceed 30 percent of a household’s gross (before tax) income. This is the accepted measure of
affordability for state and federal housing programs.
For both 1990 and 2000, HUD provided special tabulations of Census data that measure the incidence
of overpayment problems by income category, based on both household income and household size
called Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) Data. For CHAS 2010 data, which is
based on the American Community 5-Year Survey, HUD has created a series of data sets which are
grouped by themes. Each of the data sets quantifies the numbers of households that contain HUD-
specified characteristics, such as prevalence of housing problems, degree of housing cost burden and
income in HUD-specified geographic areas.
Those who pay 30 percent or more of their income on housing may have trouble affording other
necessities. These households are said to “overpay” for housing or have a high “housing cost
burden.” Individual circumstances affecting a household’s ability to afford housing vary, such as
other long-term debt payments, the number of household members, and other large ongoing expenses
(such as medical bills). Since it is impossible to consider each household’s individual circumstances,
the 30 percent rule provides a general measure of housing affordability for the average household.
Households who pay more than 50% are considered to have a “severe cost burden” and at extremely
low and very low income levels, are considered to be “worst case needs” households who are at risk
of becoming homeless. Extremely low-income renters who pay half or more their incomes for
housing are at greatest risk of becoming homeless because of their precarious financial circumstances.
Extremely low-income homeowners who pay half or more of their incomes for housing have the least
ability to meet utility expenses and do not have sufficient incomes to borrow funds to maintain, repair
or improve their homes.
Not surprisingly, overpayment problems are most pronounced for those with the lowest incomes. In
2010, more than three-fourths of extremely low income households paid more than 30 percent of their
incomes for housing; 76 percent of households with incomes between 30 and 50 percent of median
income paid over 30 percent of income for housing; and more than a half of households with incomes
between 50 and 80 percent of median paid over 30 percent.
A similar pattern exists for extreme cost burden, but it falls off more quickly as incomes rise.
Extreme cost burdens are experienced by nearly 65 percent of extremely low income households, 39
percent of households with incomes between 30 and 50 percent of median, and 18 percent of
households with incomes between 50 and 80 percent of median.
These general patterns mask important differences between renters and owners. For renters, cost
burden for households in the 50 to 80 percent of median income range are much lower than for
owners with similar incomes. This difference is even more pronounced when comparing extreme
cost burdens for renters and owners. It appears that for renters, beyond a certain income level, cost
burdens fall quickly, but are replaced by much higher rates of other housing problems such as
substandard conditions and overcrowding, suggesting that many renters, and particularly large
families, resolve their affordability problems by living in inadequate housing rather than devoting
larger portions of their income to housing that is standard quality and adequate for their household
size. In addition, the figures on overpayment do not take into account tax benefits received by
homeowners, and thus the overpayment rates for homeowners are somewhat overstated.
164                                                                EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
The general rate of overpayment increased significantly between 2000 and 2010, housing
affordability improved for lower income renters but worsened for lower income owners. Production
of new affordable housing and an increase in the number of Section 8 vouchers lessened cost burdens
for lower income renters, while cost burdens for homeowners increased. Homeowner overpayment
rates may have increased in part because of willingness by lenders to allow debt-to-income ratios
higher than was true in the past. As reported in the last Housing Element, high-risk, sub-prime
lending contributed a high percentage of households with >90% combined-loan-to-value-ratios
(CLTV). According to First American Core Logic Adjustable Rate Loan-rider document data
acquired by the City of Oakland 34, there were 6,625 properties that had loans with a CLTV >100%;
there were 381 that had loans with a CLTV >200%. These homeowners likely had loan payments
that they could not afford and that were likely making payments on properties that were likely not
worth the loans that they were paying. As noted in the prior section, the foreclosure crisis data
illustrates the fallout from these types of liberal lending practices.
Table 3-36 compares the percentage of households paying more than 30 percent of their incomes on
housing in 1990, 2000 and 2010, broken out by tenure and HUD-defined income levels.
                                                       Table 3-36
             Households Paying Over 30 Percent for Housing Costs
                                             (1990, 2000 and 2010)
                                                  Renters                  Owners            All Households
Income Group                              1990 2000 2010 1990 2000 2010 1990                               2000       2010
Extremely Low (under 30% MFI)               78%      74%    79%      64%      73%    77%          76%         74%        79%
Very Low (30% to 50% MFI)                   72%      60%    78%      43%      58%    72%          63%         60%        76%
Low (50% to 80% MFI)                        43%      24%    46%      35%      46%    63%          40%         31%        52%
Moderate (up to 95% MFI)                     1%       n/a     n/a      7%       n/a    n/a          4%          n/a        n/a
Sources: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development: 1990, 2000 and 2010 CHAS Data Books, derived from 1990 and 2000
Census and American Community Survey 2006-2010 5 Year Average Data, respectively.
Note: Percentages may not sum to 100% due to rounding
Table 3-37 provides a similar comparison for households paying more than 50 of percent their income
for housing.
34
   Data are for loan adjustments that are due to occur between November 2008 and November 2010.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                         165
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                         Table 3-37
  Households Paying Over 50 Percent of Income for Housing Costs
                                              (1990, 2000 and 2010)
                                                            Renters                   Owners                 All Households
  Income Level                                         1990     2000 2010 1990            2000 2010 1990               2000 2010
  Extremely Low Income (under 30% MFI)                  61%      56%      66%   45%        60%      63%       58%       57%       65%
  Very Low-Income (31 to 50% MFI)                       26%      16%      32%   23%        35%      54%       25%       21%       39%
  Low Income (51 to 80% MFI)                             4%        3%       8%  12%        18%      38%        7%         8%      18%
  Moderate Income (81 to 95% MFI)                        1%        n/a      n/a   7%         n/a      n/a      4%         n/a      n/a
Sources: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development: 1990, 2000 and 2010 CHAS Data Books, derived from 1990 and 2000
Census and American Community Survey 2006-2010 5 Year Average Data, respectively.
Table 3-38 shows the number and percent of owners and renters by income who paid more than 30
percent of their incomes for housing in 2011. This table differs from the preceding tables because it
does not take into account differences in household size, which are a factor in determining the HUD-
defined income groups.
                                                         Table 3-38
     Households Paying 30 Percent or More of Income for Housing
                                                            (2011)
                                                          Renters                                       Owners
                                                                   1                                               1
   Income                                 Number           M.O.E         Percent        Number           M.O.E            Percent
  Less than $ 20,000                     3,813          +/-360          81%            22,920         +/-1,075           86%
  $ 20,000 to $ 34,999                   4,554          +/-453          70%            14,095         +/-828             84%
  $ 35,000 to $ 49,999                   3,733          +/-426          65%            6,024          +/-555             49%
  $ 50,000 to $ 74,999                   6,357          +/-601          63%            3,405          +/-438             24%
  $ 75,000 or more                       11,926         +/-702          32%            839            +/-225             5%
Source: American Community 5-Year Survey 2007-2011
1
  M.O.E. (Margin of Error) for American Community Survey 2007-2010 data represents the degree of uncertainty for an estimate arising
from sampling variability. Percentages may not sum to 100% due to rounding.
Finally, Table 3-39 which summarizes HUD’s CHAS Dataset, provides detailed information on
housing cost burdens and other housing problems, broken out by income level, tenure and household
type and size. The high percentage of low-income households with high housing cost burdens means
that Oakland will continue to experience a high demand for rental assistance, new low-cost rental
housing, and home repair assistance.
166                                                                              EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                           Table 3-39
                                                                     Summary of Oakland Housing Assistance Needs
                                                                       Renter Households (HHs) by                                           Owner Households (HHs) by                                     All
                                                                       Type and Number of Persons                                           Type and Number of Persons                                   Households
                                                                                    Small          Large           All                                    Small         Large           All
                                                                       Elderly                                               Total          Elderly                                            Total     Total
 Household by Type, Income, & Housing Problem                                       Related        Related         Other                                  Related Related               Other
                                                                       (1 & 2)                                               Renters        (1 & 2)                                            Owners    HHs
                                                                                    (2 to 4)       (5 or more)     HHs                                    (2 to 4)      (5 or more)     HHs
 1. Very Low Income(Household Income <=50% HAMFI)                      9,635        14,880         4,105           16,870 45,495            5,920         3,450         1,070           1,170  12,155    57,650
 2. Household Income <=30% HAMFI                                       7,195        9,400          2,625           11,030 30,250            3,100         1,195         360             960    5,615     35,865
 3. % with any housing problems                                        61.6%        89.3%          94.1%           81.6%     80.3%          72.9%         81.6%         97.2%           78.1%  77.2%     79.8%
 4. % Cost Burden >30%                                                 60.3%        88.8%          89.5%           80.0%     78.8%          72.4%         81.2%         95.8%           78.1%  76.7%     78.5%
 8. % Cost Burden > 50%                                                40.9%        74.2%          75.8%           72.3%     65.7%          55.2%         68.2%         86.1%           75.5%  63.3%     65.4%
 9. Household Income >30% to <=50% HAMFI                               2,440        5,480          1,480           5,840     15,245         2,820         2,255         710             750    6,540     21,785
 10. % with any housing problems                                       72.5%        84.7%          84.1%           85.8%     83.1%          59.8%         83.6%         99.3%           82.0%  74.8%     80.6%
 11. % Cost Burden >30%                                                71.5%        79.5%          59.1%           83.2%     77.6%          59.0%         80.7%         88.7%           80.7%  72.3%     76.0%
 12. % Cost Burden >50%                                                30.5%        29.6%          14.5%           39.0%     31.9%          41.8%         65.6%         57.7%           61.3%  54.1%     38.5%
 13. Household Income >50 to <=80% HAMFI                               1,655        5,445          1,025           7,235     15,355         2,625         2,805         1,280           1,400  8,110     23,465
 14. % with any housing problems                                       48.0%        49.9%          79.0%           53.2%     53.2%          40.6%         70.9%         84.4%           82.9%  65.4%     57.4%
 15. % Cost Burden >30%                                                46.5%        41.5%          30.2%           51.8%     46.2%          40.6%         70.2%         74.2%           81.4%  63.2%     52.1%
 16. % Cost Burden >50%                                                10.3%        6.6%           0.0%            8.8%      7.6%           21.5%         44.7%         38.3%           53.9%  37.8%     18.0%
 17. Household Income >80% HAMFI                                       2,870        8,655          1,080           15,765 28,370            9,350         21,990        2,950           11,085 45,380    73,750
 18. % with any housing problems                                       20.6%        13.3%          74.1%           10.7%     14.9%          26.4%         36.4%         48.5%           49.8%  38.4%     29.3%
 24. % Cost Burden >30%                                                14.4%        7.7%           4.2%            0.3%      8.8%           25.6%         35.1%         28.5%           49.8%  36.3%     25.7%
 25. % Cost Burden >50%                                                1.0%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%      0.1%           8.2%          9.3%          3.9%            16.5%  10.5%     6.5%
 29. Total Households                                                  14,160       28,980         6,210           39,870 89,220            17,895        28,245        5,300           14,195 65,645    154,865
 30. % with any housing problems                                       53.6%        58.3%          85.7%           49.0%     55.3%          41.8%         45.5%         67.3%           56.6%  48.6%     52.5%
Source: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) Data based on American Community Survey 2006-2010 5 year Average Data (Table 7, Table 1, Table 8 and
Table 16)
Notes: HUD’s data does not distinguish moderate income (80% - 120% of MFI) from above moderate income (greater than 120% of MFI).
Cost Burden refers to percentage of income devoted to housing. Housing Problems includes high cost burden (>30% of income), overcrowding (>1.01 persons per room) and/or lack of complete kitchen or bathroom facilities.
Because this is a very minimal definition of physical/structural problems, the number of persons in substandard housing (major health and safety risks) is greater than reflected here.
HAMFI refers to HUD Area Median Family Income. This is the median family income calculated by HUD for each jurisdiction, in order to determine Fair Market Rents (FMRs) and income limits for HUD programs.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                                                                                                         167

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
G.       OVERCROWDING
Overcrowding is a measure of the capacity of the housing stock to adequately accommodate residents.
Too many individuals living in a housing unit with inadequate space and number of rooms can result in
unhealthy living arrangements and accelerated deterioration of the housing stock. In the United States,
housing providers and government agencies typically consider a household as overcrowded if there is
more than one person per room or two persons per bedroom. Extreme overcrowding is often defined as
more than 1.5 persons per room. Overcrowding results when: 1) the cost of available housing with a
sufficient number of bedrooms for larger families exceeds the family’s ability to afford such housing; 2)
unrelated individuals (such as students or low-wage single adult workers) share dwelling units due to high
housing costs; 3) the cost of housing requires two families to double up; or 4) housing costs force
extended family members to become part of the household.
Overcrowding increased significantly between 1990 and 2000. Nearly 12 percent of the City’s
households lived in overcrowded conditions in 1990, increasing to 16 percent in 2000. Countywide,
about four percent of households lived in overcrowded conditions, increasing to 12 percent in 2000. Ten
percent of Oakland households lived in severely overcrowded conditions in 2000 (more than 1.5 persons
per room), compared to seven percent countywide. Table 3-40 summarizes overcrowding in 2000.
Renter households typically have a higher rate of overcrowding than homeowners. Nearly 16 percent of
renters lived in overcrowded conditions in 1990, while more than nine percent lived in extremely
overcrowded conditions. By 2000, 20 percent of renters lived in overcrowded conditions. Extremely
low-, very low- and low-income renter households, and low-, moderate-, and above moderate (>120
AMI) - income owners all experienced high levels of overcrowding.
By comparison, six percent of homeowners lived in overcrowded conditions in 1990, about half of which
were severely overcrowded. The rate of overcrowding increased to ten percent by 2000, according to the
Census Bureau.
Overcrowding is closely associated with income. As reported earlier, younger households and non-White
households have significantly lower incomes than older households and White, non-Hispanic households.
The 2000 Census reported that overcrowding was highest among households age 34 or less, Hispanic
households, and non-White households. Conversely, overcrowding was significantly lower among non-
Hispanic White households and older households (those with householders 55 years of age or more).
The increases in overcrowding are very likely due to a combination of two factors - rapidly rising housing
costs during the 1990s, and an increase in the number of lower-income large families (including a
substantial number of immigrant families). Large families frequently live in smaller housing units due to
the lack of affordable units with three or more bedrooms, in effect trading affordability for overcrowding.
This can be seen in particular in Table 3-39, which shows that for large families, the percentage that pays
less than 30 percent of income but has other housing problems is much higher than for any other
household type, even at income levels above 80 percent of median. Apart from the problems this causes
for the overcrowded families, it may also increase competition for housing units that otherwise might be
more affordable to smaller households.
The increase in overcrowding suggests that Oakland will need to continue to increase the supply of
affordable housing for all lower-income groups. The need for additional low-cost rental housing,
particularly rental housing affordable to large families will continue to be an especially urgent need.
168                                                                   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                           CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table 3-40
                     Persons per Room in All Occupied Housing Units
                                                                (2010)
                                                       Owner                          Renter                           Total
       Persons Per Room
                                              Number          Percent        Number           Percent        Number          Percent
Less than 1.00                                 62,951            96%          81,813             92%        126,384              84%
1.01 to 1.50                                    2,055              3%           4,390              5%          8,925               6%
1.51 or more                                      638              1%           3,007              3%         15,478             10%
Total                                          65,644          100%           88,305           100%         150,787            100%
Percent Overcrowded by Tenure                   2,693              4%           7,397              8%         24,403             16%
Source: American Community 5-Year Survey 2006-2010
Note: There are high Margins of Error (MOE) associated with the 2006-2010 Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) of the
American Community Survey.
The Census defines an overcrowded unit as one occupied by 1.01 persons or more per room (excluding bathrooms and kitchens). Units with
more than 1.5 persons per room are considered severely overcrowded.
H.        SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
Seniors
There were 43,559 seniors and 28,796 households headed by seniors residing in the City of Oakland as of
2010. According to the Census, these figures represent an increase of 4.2 percent in the number of
seniors living in Oakland and a 6.2 percent increase in the number of senior households, or an increase of
1,771 seniors and 1,669 senior households, respectively since the 2000 Census. In contrast, the citywide
population declined by 2.2 percent during the same period.
The City defines seniors (individuals over the age of 60 years) as a special-needs group. Lower-income
seniors may have special housing requirements due to their needs for accessibility, supportive services,
affordable rents, and smaller unit sizes. Many seniors also require housing near public transportation and
in proximity to local services and health care.
Nearly 45 percent of senior-headed households consist of a single elderly person living alone. In
comparison, a smaller percentage of non-senior individuals live alone. Unfortunately, income data was
not collected in the 2010 Census. According to the 2000 Census, a significant number of seniors—5,329
or 13 percent of seniors—had poverty-level incomes that at the time of the 2000 Census, was below that
of the general population35. According to the American Community Service 5-year data from 2006-2010
(ACS 5-year data for 2010) Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) Data, 48 percent of
seniors have very low-incomes and over 30 percent of these seniors paid half of their incomes or more for
housing.
The number of owner-occupied housing units headed by seniors also increased, from 16,052 to 16,443
between 2000 and 2010, a 2 percent increase. The number of senior renters increased by a larger number,
from 11,075 to 12,353 during the ten-year period, constituting, an 11.5 percent increase. While
Oakland’s general population declined between 2000 and 2010, the number of seniors and the number of
senior households increased.
35
   2000 Census, Table P 87, SF 3
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                      169

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
This trend suggests a continued and increasing need for affordable senior housing, especially rental
housing for very low-income seniors, and a growing need for assisted care facilities so that seniors do not
have to leave Oakland as they age. Even those seniors who do not need financial assistance may face
limited choices for suitable housing if they choose to stay in Oakland.
There are approximately 8,096 households headed by senior citizens that are receiving some form of
housing assistance (see Table 3-42). This level of assistance helps about 65 percent of senior households
renting in Oakland as of 2010 Census (12,353 senior households). In a recent survey of wait lists for
privately owned and managed assisted rental housing developments for senior citizens, City staff received
responses to a phone survey from 8 developments (out of a total of 53 properties in the City’s database).
Only 5 of the surveyed housing developments were accepting applications for housing. Of the housing
developments surveyed, the average wait list length was 95 households. The average wait time for these
units was about 15 months. Given the demographic trend of an increasing elderly population there is a
continued need for affordable housing targeted toward senior citizens. Housing developments for senior
households should contain smaller housing units than projects intended for the general population due to
the preponderance of one- and two-person senior households.
In addition to special subsidized rental housing developments for seniors, there are 42 community care
facilities licensed in the City of Oakland according to the California State Department of Social Services
Community Care Licensing Division (CCLD). These facilities provide assisted living for 2,419 seniors in
the City of Oakland. (Note that this is a decrease of 18 facilities over what was reported in the last
Housing Element. CCLD staff could not explain the difference though they said that it is conceivable that
some facilities that were listed in 2008 are no longer in operation). Facilities range in size from small (six
beds) to larger retirement hotels providing space for over 100 seniors at a single location.
Table 3-41 presents information on recent trends in the numbers of individual seniors and senior
households. Table 3-42 summarizes the characteristics of assisted senior housing units in Oakland.
                                                         Table 3-41
                        Senior Population and Households in Oakland
                                                 (1990, 2000 and 2010)
                                                                        Percent                    Percent
                                               1990       2000   Change Change     2010    Change Change
    Total Population (All ages)              372,242     399,484 27,242   7.3%     390,724 -8,760      -2.2%
               Senior Population               45,231     41,788 -3,443  -7.6%      43,559   1,771      4.2%
    Total Households (All ages)              144,766     150,790  6,024   4.2%     153,791   3,001      2.0%
               Senior Households               31,885     27,127 -4,758 -14.9%      28,796   1,669      6.2%
    Owner-Occupied Units Headed
                                               18,448     16,052 -2,396 -13.0%      16,443     391      2.4%
    by Seniors
    Renter-Occupied Units Headed
                                               13,437     11,075 -2,362 -17.6%      12,353   1,278    11.5%
    by Seniors
  Source: U. S. Census Bureau, 1990, 2000 and 2010.
  Note: Seniors are defined as persons age 65 and older.
170                                                                       EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Table 3-42
           Subsidized Senior Housing and Units and Vouchers (2014)
                                                                                                              Number of
    Type of Housing                                                                                           Units
    Subsidized Senior Housing Units
                                                                                                                 4,547
    (Privately Owned and in Subsidized Senior Housing Developments)
    Public Housing Units Occupied by Seniors (OHA)                                                                 302
    Subtotal Assisted Senior Units                                                                               4,849
    Seniors with Making Transition Work Vouchers—Head of Household 62+ years (OHA)                               2,609
    Seniors with Section 8 Certificates/Vouchers--Head of Household 62+ years (OHA)                                600
    Total Senior Households Receiving Assistance                                                                 8,058
  Sources: City of Oakland Department of Housing and Community Development and Oakland Housing Authority.
Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities may require living arrangements that meet their specific physical and financial
needs, depending on the severity of their disabilities and whether they are affected by a physical, mental,
alcohol/drug-related, or a chronic disease handicap. While some individuals require full support services
in their residences, others only require modifications to their homes to make their housing units more
accessible.
According to the 2000 Census, 23 percent of the population age five and older (84,452 individuals) who
live in Oakland reported a disability. As age increases, the incidence of disability increases. Nearly half
of the population 65 and older reported having a disability. Persons with disabilities often face limited
earning potential due to such factors as the nature of their disabilities, their status as retired seniors, and
the reluctance of some employers to hire persons with disabilities. The proportion of the population in
Oakland with disabilities is much greater than countywide. These factors create a high demand for
affordable and alternative housing and support services to meet the needs of persons with disabilities.
                                                        Table 3-43
                       Persons With Disability by Employment Status
                                                            (2000)
                                                                                                                  Percent of
                                                                                 Percent of        Alameda
                                                                Oakland                                           Alameda
Persons with a Disability                                                        Oakland           County
                                                                Population                                        County
                                                                                 Population        Population
                                                                                                                  Population
Age 5-64, Employed Persons with a Disability                         30,758            8.3%            101,014         7.6%
Age 5-64, Not Employed Persons with a Disability                     33,544            9.1%              85,649        6.4%
Persons Age 65+ with a Disability                                    20,150            5.5%              61,895        4.6%
Total Persons with a Disability                                      84,452           22.9%            248,558        18.7%
Total Population (Civilian Non-Institutional)                       368,769                         1,332,471
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                         171

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                   Table 3-44
                       Persons With Disability by Disability Type
                                                      (2000)
                       Persons with a Disability,                      Oakland
                       By Disability Type                              Population
                       Total Disabilities                                  154,925
                            Total Disabilities for Ages 5-64               112,146
                                 Sensory Disability                           6,500
                                 Physical Disability                        18,899
                                 Mental Disability                          14,853
                                 Self-care Disability                         6,743
                                 Go-outside-home Disability                 25,647
                                 Employment Disability                      39,504
                            Total Disabilities for Ages 65+                 42,779
                                 Sensory Disability                           5,869
                                 Physical Disability                        13,582
                                 Mental Disability                            6,746
                                 Self-care Disability                         5,790
                                 Go-outside-home Disability                 10,792
Developmentally Disabled
According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code a “developmental disability” means a
disability that originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to
continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which include mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also include disabling conditions found
to be closely related to mental retardation or to require treatment similar to that required for individuals
with mental retardation, but shall not include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in
nature.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional housing
environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment where supervision is
provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional environment where medical
attention and physical therapy are provided. Because development disabilities exist before adulthood, the
first issue in supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living
situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community based services to
approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families through a statewide
system of 21 regional centers. The Regional Center of the East Bay (RCEB) is the local coordinating
agency tasked with ensuring that individuals with developmental disabilities are receiving the services
and supports that they are entitled to per the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Act. Their primary
function is intake and eligibility assessment, and contracting with service providers. The State of
California’s Bay Area Office of the State Council on Developmental Disabilities (Developmental
Disabilities Area Board 5) is a federally mandated and funded organization charged with promoting the
development of a consumer and family-centered, comprehensive system of services and supports for
individuals with developmental disabilities. Area Board 5 is mainly a policy and advocacy organization.
The Housing Consortium of the East Bay (HCEB) is an Oakland-based nonprofit whose mission is to
172                                                                     EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
create inclusive communities for individuals with developmental disabilities and other special needs in
Alameda and Contra Costa Counties.
HCEB, RCEB and Area Board 5 collaborated to provide the City of Oakland with specific demographics
for individuals with developmental disabilities in the City using federal census data, demographic trends,
federally- and state-mandated trends, and the reported number of registered consumers of RCEB. RCEB
identified Oakland’s population and estimated housing needs during the Housing Element period of 2015-
2023. A “Housing Need Factor” per age group was inferred based on data collected by the State of
California Department of Developmental Services. Table 3-45 summarizes that need according to age
group.
                                                                 Table 3-45
              Oakland Developmentally Disabled Population* (2015-23)
                                 0-14              15-22              23-54             55-65
                                 years             years              years             years            65+years         All
  Total Population                   1,402               868              1,988              260                94            4,612
  Regional Center for
  the East Bay                        25%               50%                35%              25%               20%
   “Need Factor”
  Estimated Housing
                                        351              434                696                65               19            1,564
  Unit Need
*. State of California definition: the population with a lifelong disability caused by a mental or physical impairment manifested prior to
the age 18 years and includes conditions such as mental retardation, epilepsy, autism, cerebral palsy or other conditions that require
services similar to a person with mental retardation.
As identified in the last Housing Element and what seems to be still applicable in this planning period,
among the most urgent needs reported by organizations serving persons with disabilities are independent
living units with supportive services; treatment for persons with chemical dependency, mental illness, and
chronic illness; and life and job skills training to increase the ability of these individuals to live
independently.
A number of public and private organizations provide financial assistance, housing, residential care, and
support services to persons with disabilities. However, the number of persons with disabilities in need of
assistance is far greater than the availability of assistance. The waiting time to receive this assistance is
very long. As identified in the last Housing Element and what seems to be still applicable in this planning
period, service providers report that there is an urgent need for more housing vouchers with rental
assistance for this population. The City’s Assisted Housing Inventory identifies 1,079 assisted rental
units that are accessible to people with disabilities or that are targeted to the disabled population or people
with HIV/AIDS. As identified in the last Housing Element and what seems to be still applicable in this
planning period, there are a number of accessible units in private developments, but many people who
have disabilities still find it extremely difficult to locate housing that is either accessible or suitable for
adaptation. To address this problem, in new federally funded projects, including those funded with
CDBG and HOME funds, at least five percent of all units must be accessible to persons with disabilities.
The City’s Assisted Housing Inventory identified 166 permanent housing units in ten developments
designated specifically for individuals with mental and physical disabilities, as well as for those
individuals with HIV/AIDS. There are also a number of residential care facilities for the mentally
disabled scattered throughout the City, serving mostly non-senior adults and children and youths under
the age of 25 (though there are no tenant protections—they are exempted in Oakland’s Rent Adjustment
Ordinance Section 8.22.030). There is currently only one developer in the East Bay that specializes in
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                          173

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
housing for those people with developmental disabilities—Housing Consortium of the East Bay. Other
housing resources include landlords renting to tenants or living with a family caretaker/member 36.
There is a clear need for residential facilities offering HIV/AIDS services, including provision of mental
health counseling and support groups, advocacy for legal issues, and assistance in obtaining benefits and
paying bills, including medical expenses. Additionally, as the disease progresses, persons with AIDS
need additional services, such as help with meals, chores, transportation, child-care, and respite care.
There are also a number of residential alcohol and drug treatment centers, with inpatient and outpatient
counseling services. However, according to service providers, the waiting time for admission into these
programs is very long, during which time the needs of persons seeking services can become more severe.
Many people with disabilities, particularly those recently released from hospital care, have little or no
income. Individuals who receive housing vouchers (Section 8) for rental assistance often find it difficult
to locate rental housing for which housing vouchers can be used and property owners willing to accept the
voucher. In some cases, the rent is above the fair market rent the federal program will cover, creating a
gap between the assistance available under the voucher program and the actual rental cost, which must be
paid by the voucher holder.
Single-Parent Headed Households
According to the 2000 Census, the City of Oakland has 18,314 single parent households, about the same
number as in 1990. Over three-quarters of these households are female-headed. The number of male
single-parent households increased by nearly one-third, while the number of female single-parent
households decreased by six percent. Although the number of single-father households has increased
significantly since 1990, they still comprise less than one-quarter of all single-parent households.
Single-parent householders face constraints in housing due to their lower incomes and the need to access
childcare and other support services. It is important that single parent households live close to schools,
local services, child-care, and health care facilities because many lack private vehicles. Although the total
number of single parent households has remained steady, the extremely high poverty rate among female-
headed, single-parent households, suggests that the City will continue to face a need for additional,
affordable family housing with access to support services.
Table 3-46 compares the number of female-headed households in 2000.
36
   Additionally, there can be issues with those with a developmental disability who live with a family caretaker/member (e.g.:
parent or sibling), who might not effectively plan for housing in the case that the caretaker is unable to care for the family
member due to illness, aging or death.
174                                                                              EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                      Table 3-46
                               Female Headed Households (2000)
                                                                        Number       Percent
                Total Households                                       150,971        100%
                Total Female Headed Households                          26,486         18%
                Female Heads with Children under 18 years               14,932         10%
                Female Heads without Children under 18 years            11,554           8%
                Total Families under the Poverty Level                  14,136        100%
                Female Headed Households under the Poverty Level         7,816         55%
                Source: U. S. Census Bureau, 2000.
                Note: Percentages may not sum to 100% due to rounding.
Among single parent households, three percent of male-headed households are living below the poverty
line, compared to 55 percent of female-headed households (7,816 in 2000). Female-headed households
with children still have the highest poverty rates of all population groups. Poverty rates for women with
children have not improved significantly in the past decade, and are nearly double that of all families. (A
poverty level income for a single parent with two children is about the equivalent to a full-time job at
minimum wage.)
Although 2000 Census data indicate that the percentage of households on public assistance (which
includes many single mothers) has declined, anecdotal evidence suggests that many of these single
parents earn low wages that have not raised their incomes above the poverty level.
The Homeless
A lack of financial resources, education, and job training; the presence of disabilities; substance abuse;
chronic, debilitating illness; and domestic violence all contribute to homelessness. The most recent
information on the number of homeless persons and families in Oakland is inferred from the 2013
Alameda Countywide Homeless Count and Survey Report (2013 Count). This point-in-time homeless
count and survey conducted on January 30, 2013, provides the most current data on the homeless
population at the county level. Oakland has assumed 52% of the County’s homeless population is in
Oakland. This is based on findings from the 2009 Homeless Count (the last count with regional data), as
well as analysis of data in the Homeless Management Information System (HMIS). Approximately 2,217
individuals (1,412 households) are homeless at any point in time in Oakland. Minorities make up a
disproportionate share of this total. As many homeless persons have mental and/or chemical dependency
problems, supportive services are important.
As a companion to EveryOne Home (Alameda County’s 10 Year Plan to End Homelessness, adopted in
2006), Oakland’s Permanent Access to Housing (PATH) Strategy, adopted in 2007, is a roadmap for
ending homelessness in the city over the next 15 years. Both EveryOne Home and PATH emphasize
greater coordination and mutual accountability among all systems (homeless services, HIV/AIDS, and
mental health services and affordable housing development, affordable to populations 15% and below
area median income.) by broadening the population whose needs are addressed to include those who are
homeless or most at-risk of homelessness due to poverty or disability.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                          175

   CITY OF O AKL AND
   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
   The City of Oakland has adopted a “housing-first” approach through its PATH Strategy to end
   homelessness in Oakland. This plan has eight recommended strategies organized into the following five
   goal areas:
        •    Goal (P):            Prevent Homelessness and Other Housing Crisis
        •    Goal (H):            Increase Housing Opportunities for Targeted Populations
        •    Goal (S):            Deliver Flexible Services to Support Stability and Independence
        •    Goal (M):            Measure Success and Report Outcome
        •    Goal (L):            Develop Long-Term Leadership and Build Political Will
   Under PATH, homeless people are moved directly from the streets or shelter into permanent housing.
   Needed services are offered to those who are housed. These services offered are not mandatory and
   include but are not limited to client engagement around mental health and substance use after tenant is
   housed. These services are designed to meet the client “where they are”, providing only those services
   needed by the housed client. The desired outcome is the end of homelessness through the securing or
   retaining of housing.
   While the City of Oakland has a significant inventory of affordable housing, there are very long waiting
   lists for these units and most of them do not have supportive services or are not affordable to the current
   homeless population. There is tremendous unmet need for housing the 1,412 unsheltered homeless
   households or those at risk of being homeless. PATH contends that homelessness can be prevented or
   ended for these 1,412 households only by creating affordable and supportive housing units affordable to
   those with extremely low incomes. Further, resolving to end homelessness would require short-term
   subsidies for those who have obtained housing but are at risk of becoming homelessness. See Table 3-47
   and Table 3-48 for an estimate of the sheltered and unsheltered homeless population. Table 3-49 provides
   an inventory of the emergency shelters, transitional housing facilities and permanent supportive housing
   facilities in the City of Oakland.
                                                           Table 3-47
                           Household Type: All Households/All Persons
                                                          Sheltered
                                               Emergency                    Transitional         Unsheltered           Total
  County of Alameda
            Total Households                         667                            544               1,504            2,715
                Total Persons                        914                          1,013               2,337            4,264
  City of Oakland
            Total Households                         347                            283                782             1,412
                Total Persons                        475                            527               1,215            2,2171
Source: 2013 Alameda Countywide Homeless Count and Survey Report; Oakland’s homeless share derived from County survey
1
  This estimate is consistent with the estimate of Oakland’s share of the homeless population that Alameda County produced using
data from the Homeless Management Information System (HMIS). The 2013 HMIS assigned 2,202 homeless people to the City of
Oakland.
   176                                                                                EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                                       CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                 Table 3-48
                                          2013 Homeless Subpopulations
                                                                    County of Alameda                                               Oakland
                                                                        1                         2
                                                           Sheltered Unsheltered                       Total       Sheltered         Unsheltered        Total
                                                      3
            Chronically Homeless Individuals                       171                      760           931              89                  395        484
              Chronically Homeless Families4                        11                       26             37               6                   14        19
Persons in Chronically Homeless Families                            29                       94           123              15                    49        64
                                            Veterans               139                      353           492              72                  184        256
                                  Female Veterans                     9                      11             20               5                     6       10
                            Severely Mentally Ill                  477                      629        1,106             248                   327        575
                      Chronic Substance Abuse                      354                      935        1,289             184                   486        670
                        Persons with HIV/AIDS                       25                       72             97             13                    37        50
                Victims of Domestic Violence                       381                      665        1,046             198                   346        544
Source: 2013 Alameda Countywide Homeless Count and Survey Report; Oakland’s homeless share derived from County survey.
Notes:
1
  Includes persons in emergency shelters and transitional housing, except that chronically homeless individuals and families include only persons
in emergency shelters.
2
   Literally Homeless: An individual or family who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence, meaning: (i) has a primary nighttime
residence that is a public or private place not meant for human habitation; (ii) is living in a publicly or privately operated shelter designated to
provide temporary living arrangements (including congregate shelters, transitional housing, and hotels and motels paid for by charitable
organizations or by federal, state and local government programs); or (iii) is exiting an institution where (s)he has resided for 90 days or less and
who resided in an emergency shelter or place not meant for human habitation immediately before entering that institution
3
  HUD defines a chronically homeless individual as an unaccompanied homeless adult living on the street or in a shelter who has a disabling
condition and has either been continuously homeless for a year or more, or has had at least four episodes of homelessness in the past three years.
4
   A chronically homeless family is a family (including at least one minor child) with at least one adult member (18 or older) who has a disabling
condition who has either been continuously homeless for a year or more, or has had at least four episodes of homelessness in the past three years.
In addition to the homeless subpopulations presented above in Table 3-48, the 2013 Count also included a
breakdown of the number of males and females who are homeless. In 2013, women were just over 13%
of the unsheltered homeless population; men comprised 84% of the unsheltered homeless population.
The County of Alameda prepares inventories of emergency shelters, transitional housing and permanent
supportive housing. Although Oakland’s 2007 PATH Strategy promotes a housing first policy,
emergency shelters still provide a key link in the care for homeless people, particularly due to budget cuts
negatively impacting the production of new affordable housing. The City’s Human Services Department
provided the Oakland-specific list of shelters (based on the County inventory) for the 2012-2013 period in
Table 3-49.
The inventory includes 12 emergency shelter facilities and 18 transitional housing facilities and each
housing a variety of households: single women with children, households with children, youth (male and
female), single males and females, and single males. The emergency shelters and transitional housing
facilities in Oakland have a combined 1,086 beds. The average utilization rate across the shelters is
approximately 75%. Additionally, transitional housing facilities outside the City of Oakland, including a
total of approximately 66 beds for families and single individuals, have been included because many
homeless people originate in the City of Oakland and are placed in the surrounding cities.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                                   177

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                          Table 3-49
                                                         City of Oakland Homeless Shelters
                                                                    2012 County of Alameda
                                         Inventory of Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing Facilities in Oakland
                                                                                      Beds      Units       Beds
                                                                                                                       Year-     Total
 Prog.   Organization                             Physical      Target    Target       HH        HH          HH                            Total  Utilization
                          Program Name                                                                                Round    Seasonal
 Type         Name                                Address       Pop. A    Pop. B       w/        w/          w/o                           Beds      Rate
                                                                                                                       Beds      Beds
                                                                                    Children  Children    Children
       24 Hour Oakland   77th Street Shelter
       Parent / Teacher  (4700 International
 ES    Children's Center Blvd)                                 SFHC                 17        5                      17        0         17       71%
                         A Safe Place (DV
 ES    A Safe Place      shelter)                              HC        DV         20        6           0          20        0         20       100%
                         Nika's Place
       Alameda Family    (formerly Dream
 ES    Services          Catcher)             422 Jefferson St YMF                  8         2                      8         0         8        100%
                         Emergency
                         Housing - Henry
       Anka Behavioral   Robinson Multi-
 ES    Health Inc.       Service Center       559 16th St      HC                   20        8                      20        0         20       50%
                         Ariel Outreach
                         Mission -
       Ariel Outreach    Emergency Shelter
 ES    Mission           (DV shelter)                          SFHC                 12        3           7          19                  19       95%
       City Team         City Team            722 Washington
 ES    Ministries        Ministry Shelter     St               SM                                         50         50        0         50       92%
       Covenant House    Youth Crisis         200 Harrison
 ES    Oakland           Shelter              Street           SMF                                        18         18        0         18       83%
                         Emergency Storm      located in
 ES    Dorothy Day House Shelter              Berkeley         SMF                                                             40        40       0%
       East Oakland      Shelter Service      7515
       Community Project Program              International
 ES    (EOCP)            (Crossroads)         Blvd             SMF+HC               15        5           85         100                 100      98%
                                              4848
       Oakland Catholic  Oakland Catholic     International
 ES    Worker            Worker Shelter       Blvd             SMF                                        8          8         0         8        100%
                         Salvation Army
                         Family Emergency     2794 Garden
 ES    Salvation Army    Shelter              Street           SMF+HC               76        16                     76        0         76       67%
178                                                                                                                          EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   2012 County of Alameda
                                         Inventory of Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing Facilities in Oakland
                                                                                     Beds       Units       Beds
                                                                                                                       Year-    Total
 Prog.     Organization                           Physical     Target     Target      HH         HH          HH                          Total Utilization
                           Program Name                                                                               Round   Seasonal
 Type          Name                               Address      Pop. A     Pop. B       w/        w/          w/o                         Beds     Rate
                                                                                                                       Beds     Beds
                                                                                   Children   Children    Children
                                              925 Brockhurst
                          St MC Winter        Street, Oakland
 ES     St. Mary's Center Shelter             CA 94608        SMF                                                             25       27      100%
                          BACS Transitional
        City of Oakland   Housing / Henry
 TH     HDS / BACS        Robinson            559 16th St     SMF                                                    137               137     75%
                          BOSS Casa Maria     2280 SAN
 TH     BOSS              (not ES or TS)      PABLO AVE       SMF                                         25         25                25      96%
 TH     BOSS              Rosa Parks House    521 W Grand     SMF        HIV                              23         23                23      61%
        City of Oakland
        Human Services
        Department (HDS)
        East Oakland
        Community Project Matilda Cleveland   8314 MacArthur
 TH     (EOCP)            Transitional        Blvd            HC                   44         14                     44                44      86%
        City of Oakland   Families in         10 single units
 TH     DHS / EOCP        Transition          scattered       HC                   32         9                      32                32      91%
        Covenant House /
        City of Oakland /
        Oakland Homeless
        Youth Housing
        Collaborative     CH RS Rites of      200 Harrison
 TH     (OHYHC)           Passage (ROP)       Street          SMF                                         12         12                12      100%
        East Oakland                          7515
        Community Project EOCP SSP VA -       International
 TH     (EOCP)            GPD (Crossroads)    Blvd            SMF        VET                              15         15                15      100%
        EOCP / City of                        1024 101st
 TH     Oakland / OHYHC   EOCP Our House      Avenue          SMF                                         7          7                 7       86%
                                              scattered site
        First Place for                       model (30 sites
 TH     Youth             Oakland PATH        of 1-2 res)     SMF+HC               6          3           7          13                13      115%
                                              scattered site
        First Place for                       model (30 sites
 TH     Youth             OPRI Probation      of 1-2 res)     SMF+HC               6          3           7          13                13      108%
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                                          179
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     2012 County of Alameda
                                          Inventory of Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing Facilities in Oakland
                                                                                       Beds      Units       Beds
                                                                                                                        Year-     Total
 Prog.    Organization                             Physical      Target    Target       HH        HH          HH                           Total   Utilization
                           Program Name                                                                                Round    Seasonal
 Type         Name                                 Address       Pop. A    Pop. B       w/        w/          w/o                          Beds       Rate
                                                                                                                        Beds      Beds
                                                                                     Children  Children    Children
                                               scattered site
       First Place for                         model (30 sites
 TH    Youth              OYHC                 of 1-2 res)      SMF+HC               6         3           6          12                  12       117%
                                               scattered site
       First Place for                         model (30 sites
 TH    Youth              THP Plus             of 1-2 res)      SMF+HC               50        25          50         100                 100      69%
                          Rising Oaks
       Fred Finch Youth   (Turning Point is    3800 Coolidge
 TH    Center (FFYC)      in Berkeley)         Ave              SMF                                        30         30                  30       78%
                          FEED (Family,
                          Economic,
                          Empowerment,
                          Development)
 TH    Images on the Rise Program                               HC                   100       16                     100                 100
                          Images on the Rise
                          (Domestic
 TH    Images on the Rise Violence)                             SMF                                        10         10                  10       100%
       Oakland Elizabeth
 TH    House              Elizabeth House      6423 Colby St    SMF+HC               25        7           0          25                  25       88%
                          House of Dignity
 TH    Operation Dignity  (HoD)                585 8th St       SMF       VET                              30         30                  45       110%
                                               3202 San Pablo
 TH    St. Mary's Center  Closer to Home       Ave              SMF       SR
                                                                          TOTAL      437       125         390        964       65        1,046
                                               Cherryland
       Family Emergency                        District of
       Shelter Coalition  Banyan House         unincorporated
 TH*   (FESCO)            Transitional         Alameda Co.      HC                   24                                                   24
       Building
       Opportunities for
       Self-Sufficiency   McKinley Family
 TH*   (BOSS)             Transitional House   City of Berkeley HC                   24                                                   24
                          Bessie Coleman
                          Court/Alameda
       Alameda Point      Point Transitional
 TH*   Collaborative      House                Alameda Point    HC        DV                   44
       Women’s Daytime    Bridget
 TH*   Drop-in Center     Transitional House   City of Berkeley SFHC
180                                                                                                                           EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                    2012 County of Alameda
                                                    Inventory of Emergency Shelters and Transitional Housing Facilities in Oakland
                                                                                                         Beds        Units       Beds
                                                                                                                                              Year-          Total
 Prog.       Organization                                     Physical          Target      Target        HH           HH         HH                                    Total      Utilization
                                    Program Name                                                                                             Round        Seasonal
 Type            Name                                          Address          Pop. A      Pop. B         w/          w/         w/o                                   Beds           Rate
                                                                                                                                              Beds           Beds
                                                                                                       Children    Children    Children
                                                           Union City,
                                   Bridgeway               Fremont,
 TH*      Tri-City FESCO           Apartments              Hayward
                                   Harrison House
                                   Family Services
 TH*      BOSS                     Program                 West Berkeley       HC
                                                           Cherryland
                                                           District of
                                   South County            unincorporated
 TH*      BOSS                     Sober Housing           Alameda Co.         SMF                                             18                                      18
                                                                                           TOTAL       48          44          18                                      66
*Transitional housing facilities not physically located in the City of Oakland have been included here because many homeless people and families originate in Oakland and are placed in the
surrounding cities.
 KEY:                                                                                                 Program Type:
 Target Population:                                                                                   ES: Emergency Shelter
 CO: couples only, no children                                                                        TH: Transitional Shelter
 DV: domestic violence                                                                                PSH: Permanent Supportive Housing
 HC: households with children
 HIV: human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) that causes the acquired immunodeficiency
 syndrome (AIDS)
 SF: single females
 SFHC: single females and households with children
 SM: single males
 SMHC: single males and households with children
 SMF: single males and females
 SMF + HC: Single male and female plus households with children
 SR:
 VET: Veterans
 YF: youth females (under 18 years old)
 YM: youth males (under 18 years old)
 YMF: youth males and females (under 18 years old)
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                                                                              181
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Breaking the cycle of homelessness will require a comprehensive approach that combines housing
assistance first with needed support services. According to homeless service providers, in addition to
actual housing, treatment of mental illness and substance abuse, life skills training, and intensive case
management are among the highest priorities for reducing homelessness. Greater availability of
supportive housing with support services is identified as a high priority as is subsidies for a rapid
rehousing model of care for all homeless population groups.
Recent legislative decisions have impacted the rate of implementation of Oakland’s PATH Strategy.
The dissolution of redevelopment agencies, and the subsequent loss of redevelopment funds targeted
towards affordable housing, coupled with Federal cuts to housing programs, has severely hindered the
production of new affordable housing in Oakland, bringing production to a near standstill. A limited
amount of affordable housing funding is available through the City's annual federal HOME grant, tax
credits, and through the Affordable Housing Trust Fund, but these resources are not sufficient to
produce affordable housing in the volume of the recent past. The loss of redevelopment blight
abatement funding has also impacted homeless outreach activities and the abatement of homeless
encampments. The federal sequestration cuts have brought about a freeze in the Section 8 housing
subsidy program and a nearly complete halt to the Oakland Housing Authority (OHA) portion of the
Oakland PATH Re-housing Initiative, all but eliminating the City's ability to rapidly house re-entry
and encampments populations. Budget cuts to the Federal HOME program for affordable housing,
and for the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program has likewise impacted housing
activities. Similarly, on the homeless services side, a reduction of 5% in the Emergency Solutions
Grant (ESG), CDBG, and Housing Opportunities to Persons with AIDS (HOPWA) in 2013 is
projected to result in cuts to services provided under PATH, and for provision of housing and services
to persons living with AIDS. ESG and CDBG funding make up approximately 64% of the City’s
PATH Strategy funding. These budget cuts will lead to severely reduced services provided under
PATH, and stalled affordable housing production for extremely low and very low income people. 37
In response to policy and funding challenges, and in light of prevailing demographic data, the PATH
strategy is necessarily shifting available resources towards a concentration on the single adult
homeless population, especially those who are living in homeless encampments. The PATH strategy
is heavily data driven by the outcomes of our interventions and data developed over the past five
years. The ongoing strategy will rely upon emerging models and best practices such as the Oakland
Path Rehousing Initiative and the Interim Housing Model being developed at the Henry Robinson
Center. PATH will use a multi-disciplinary team-based approach that will focus on:
     •    Enhanced outreach efforts, including field outreach for housing programs and cleanup of
          encampments;
     •    Coordinated human services, public works and Oakland Police Department interventions
          through implementation of CityWorks, mapping and GIS technologies; and
     •    Implementation of new interim housing programming and use of temporary winter shelter
          beds through the redesigned Henry Robinson Multi-Service Center.
PATH outcomes will remain oriented towards the overarching goal of moving homeless persons into
permanent housing with appropriate support services.
37
   Bedford, Sara. Oakland City Council Agenda Report. Update on PATH Homeless Strategy. Oct. 24, 2013.
182                                                                   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
The Affordable Care Act and the Public Safety Realignment Act (AB 109) offer new systems for the
health of homeless people and people at-risk of becoming homeless. Under the Affordable Care Act
(“Obama Care”), many low income persons currently without healthcare will become insured, and
some supportive housing services may be eligible for Medicaid funding. However, the type of
services eligible for Medicaid funding is limited, continuing challenges with ongoing funding for
supportive housing services. The Public Safety Realignment Act focuses on alleviating overcrowding
in the California State prisons and reducing the corrections budget by transferring responsibility for
incarceration and supervision of many low-level inmates and parolees to the county. These non-
violent, non-serious, non-high risk offenders are being released to local supervision, not state parole.
The county has established a housing first program (similar to the PATH housing first policy) that
provides permanent housing for this population.
Large Households
The U.S. Department of Housing (HUD) defines a large household or family as one with five or more
members. Large households typically require units with more bedrooms. In general, housing for
these households should provide safe outdoor play areas for children and have convenient access to
schools and child-care facilities. These types of needs can pose problems, particularly for large
families that cannot afford to buy or rent single-family houses, because apartments and condominium
units are most often developed for smaller households and may not provide adequate outdoor spaces
for children. When housing prices rise faster than incomes and when the number of larger housing
units with three or more bedrooms is limited, large families are often forced to live in overcrowded
conditions.
The 2005-10 Consolidated Plan acknowledged the difficulty that large families face when trying to
find suitable accommodations, particularly if they are low-income renters. According to the Plan,
there is a correlation between the number of large, low-income families, the shortage of low-cost
rental housing with three or more bedrooms, and the incidence of overcrowding and overpayment.
Large, low-income renter families at all income levels face a higher percentage of housing problems
than other households of similar income.
At the time of the 2010 Census, Oakland was home to 10,044 renter households and 7,276 owner
households with five or more persons, for 17,320 large family households. In comparison to 2000,
there has been a decrease in the number of large households among both renters and owner-
occupants.
Table 3-50 compares the number of large families in 1990, 2000 and 2010.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                     183

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                    Table 3-50
    Number of Large Households in Oakland (1990, 2000 and 2010)
                                      1990                    2000                      2010
Large
Households                Number             Percent   Number      Percent      Number        Percent
Owner-Occupied
5-or-More Person            7,163            5.0%       8,526      5.7%         7,276         4.7%
Households
Renter-Occupied
5-or-More Person            9,966            6.9%      11,365      7.5%        10,044         6.5%
Households
Total 5-or-More
Person                    17,129            11.9%      19,891     13.2%        17,320        11.3%
Households
Total Households        144,521              100%     150,790      100%       153,791         100%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990, 2000 and 2010.
As noted earlier and in Table 3-40, overcrowding rates are especially severe for large families,
regardless of income. This is due to an acute shortage of housing units with four or more bedrooms,
especially rental units. The 2000 Census identified 11,365 renter households with five or more
persons, but only 2,341 rental units with four or more bedrooms (data for number of bedrooms in
housing units not available in 2010 Census data). Despite the fact that there is a much better
relationship between the number of large homeowner families and large owner-occupied units,
overcrowding rates are still very high for lower income large families, which suggests that more
affluent families are able to occupy homes larger than they might need, while low and moderate
income large families can achieve homeownership only by buying units smaller than what they might
need.
184                                                                EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Table 3-51 compares the number of housing units by tenure and number of bedrooms in 2000.
                                                Table 3-51
         Housing Units by Tenure and Number of Bedrooms (2000)
                                                                        Tenure
                                                                Owner-          Renter-       Total
Number of Bedrooms                                             Occupied        Occupied
Studios                                                          1,426          16,972         18,398
One-bedroom                                                      6,015          34,842         40,857
Two-bedrooms                                                    21,140          24,887         46,027
Three-bedrooms                                                  22,785           9,263         32,048
Four-bedrooms                                                    8,647           1,763         10,410
Five-or-more-bedrooms                                            2,469             578          3,047
Total Units                                                     62,482          88,305        150,787
Number of units with four or more bedrooms                      11,116           2,341         13,457
Percent of total units with four or more bedrooms                 17%              3%             9%
Source: U. S. Census Bureau, 2000
Farmworkers
Few migratory farmworkers are housed, even seasonally, within Oakland. Oakland is too far from
significant agricultural areas to serve as a residential base for such workers who, by the nature of their
employment, tend to live in close proximity to their jobs. According to the 2000 Census
Supplemental Survey, less than one percent of the City’s residents were employed in farming, fishing,
and forestry occupations in 2000. Many of these residents were not employed as field workers.
Therefore, the likely need for farmworker housing in Oakland is insignificant.
I.        ASSISTED RENTAL HOUSING
There is a substantial amount of subsidized housing in the City of Oakland. Most of this housing is
privately owned and was developed under various federal, state, and City of Oakland funding
programs. Although these units are located throughout the City, there is a higher concentration in
East and West Oakland and near the Downtown area.
As of December 2014, there are 9,797 privately owned, publicly subsidized rental housing units in
over 180 developments in Oakland. Of these units, 166 are designated for persons with disabilities
and/or HIV/AIDS, 3,649 for families, and 4,547 for seniors. Another 685 privately owned subsidized
rental units are in residential hotels and 141 are transitional housing units for homeless individuals
and families. Note that many of these units include Project-Based Section 8 Voucher Allocations.
In addition to these private units, the Oakland Housing Authority (OHA) owns and operates public
housing units According to its 2013 Making Transitions Work Annual Report, OHA portfolio
includes 1,605 public housing units, 915 of which are located at large family sites, 383 units are
located in one of the five designated senior sites, and 307 units at OHA’s HOPE VI redevelopment
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                      185

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
properties. OHA also provides rental subsidies to 13,565 households under the Housing Choice
Voucher program for low-income residents to use in the private rental market through tenant-based or
project-based vouchers.
As reported in the last Housing Element, a sizeable number of senior households benefited from this
assistance. Combining the number of seniors receiving assistance from OHA with the number of
senior households living in privately owned, subsidized apartments, a total of 8,058 senior households
received housing assistance (See Table 3-42 for details).
The Oakland Housing Authority continues its efforts to rehabilitate and preserve its portfolio of units
in the Oakland Affordable Housing Preservation Initiatives (OAHPI) by extending their long-term
viability as an affordable housing resource. OHA completed disposition of 1,615 scattered site units
that are now owned and managed by OAHPI with an ongoing rehabilitation program for these units.
(See detail in Table 3-52)
There are several differences between the housing assistance provided by OHA and that provided by
privately owned subsidized apartments and OAHPI. These include the following:
            Size of units provided –. 38
            Amount of subsidy provided – The Section 8 and conventional public housing
            programs provide deep subsidies to residents since these programs require that
            residents pay only 30 percent of their incomes for rent. In comparison, rents in
            the privately assisted rental housing developments are set by formula that is
            independent of the income of individual tenants. Unless residents who live in the
            privately assisted rental housing also receive Section 8 certificates and vouchers
            or initial financing of a project facilitated lower rents, tenants in these properties
            could pay rents that exceed 30 percent of household income.
Table 3-52 provides information on privately owned subsidized rental units, and Table 3-53 provides
information on Oakland Housing Authority’s portfolio of housing units in Oakland.
38
   Many of the privately-owned assisted units are in senior housing developments, which typically have only studio and one-
   bedroom units.
186                                                                         EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                   Table 3-52
                Privately-Owned Assisted Housing Units, City of Oakland (December 2014)
                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                     Size of Subsidized Rental Units
                                                                 Total         Subsidized
                                                                                          2
                                                                 Units            Units             SRO           Studio           1 BR          2 BR          3 BR          4+ BR
              Apartments for Persons
              with Disabilities/Special                          172               166               12             35             91             23            --             --
              Needs
              Apartments for Families                           4,725            3,649               --            292           1,107          1,227          890            190
              Residential Hotels                                 739               685              542            120             27              6             3             --
              Apartments for Seniors                            4,576             4,547             212           1,456          2,852            16            --             --
              Transitional Housing                               143               141               57             30              7             35            11             1
           Total Assisted Rental Units                         10,355            9,188              823           1,933          4,084          1,307          904            191
           Total Assisted For-Sale Units                         616               609               --             --              --            --            --             --
           Total OAHPI Units                                    1,615            1,615               --             --              --            --            --             --
           Total Rental and For-Sale Units                     12,586            11,412              --             --              --            --            --             --
         Sources: City of Oakland
         1
           The City does not have complete information on unit breakdowns, therefore this information is incomplete for rental developments and not included for ownership developments.
         2
           The Subsidized Unit count includes project-based rental assistance provided directly by HUD as well as units assisted with project-based Section 8 Vouchers and Section 8
         Moderate Rehabilitation administered by the Oakland Housing Authority. It does not include public housing units owned by the Oakland Housing Authority, which are accounted for
         separately, and it does not include tenant-based Section 8 vouchers and certificates because that assistance is not restricted to particular housing units and is also accounted for
         separately.
         Note: Does not include households assisted with first-time homebuyer assistance to purchase existing homes.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                                                                             187
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                             Table 3-53
        Summary of Oakland Housing Authority Housing Units and
                                Housing Vouchers, Oakland 2014
                                                                                Elderly
                                                               People with        and
                                        Total       Elderly     Disabilities   Disabled       Family
 Occupied Public Housing Units          1,543         302             300          187            754
 Section 8 Certificate/Voucher
                                       12,329         600           2,954        2,468          6,307
 Recipients
 Total Households Receiving
 Assistance from Oakland Housing       13,872         902           3,254        2,665          7,061
 Authority
Source: Oakland Housing Authority
In the earlier section on Housing Cost, Availability of Subsidized Housing, OHA reports that the
average wait time for entry to a public housing development is between one to three years, however
this time is expected to grow significantly due to historically low funding levels for the near term.
The wait time for receipt of a rental housing voucher is between five and seven years. Public housing
wait list times have decreased since the last report, but may increase again once all available units are
leased. According to Oakland Housing Authority’s Making Transitions Work (MTW) Annual Report
FY 2014, MTW Housing Choice Vouchers has 9,345 households on the waitlist; OHA-managed
Public Housing has 891 households on the waitlist; third-party-managed Public Housing has 3,690
households on the waitlist. There is also a separate wait list for Project-based Voucher units.
The maps on the following pages show the location and distribution of privately-owned subsidized
housing (nonprofit and for-profit) and public housing (owned and managed by the Oakland Housing
Authority). These maps show that assisted housing is well dispersed throughout the flatland areas of
the City – where most rental housing is located – and particularly along major corridors and other
areas well-served by public transportation.
188                                                               EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                               Figure 3-17
                      Assisted Housing in North, West and Downtown Oakland, 2014
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                               189
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                       Figure 3-18
                          Assisted Housing in East Oakland, 2014
190                                                              EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                            Figure 3-19
            Oakland Housing Authority Units in North, West and Downtown Oakland, 2014
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                             191
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                        Figure 3-20
                    Oakland Housing Authority Units in East Oakland, 2014
192                                                                  EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
J.       ANALYSIS OF ASSISTED, AT-RISK HOUSING
         PROJECTS
In 1989, the California Government Code was amended to include a requirement that localities identify
and develop a program in their housing elements for the preservation of assisted, affordable multifamily
units. Subsequent amendments have clarified the scope of the analysis to include units developed
pursuant to inclusionary housing and density bonus programs. In the preservation analysis, localities are
required to provide an inventory of assisted, affordable units that are eligible to convert within ten years.
The analysis must include an estimation of the cost of preserving and replacing the units is to be included,
as well as programs designed to preserve the affordable units.
Assisted Rental Housing Eligible for Conversion
Over the past several decades, hundreds of thousands of affordable rental housing units have been
constructed in California with the assistance of federal, state, and local funding (loans or grants) that
restricted rents and occupancy of units to low-income households for specified periods. Once these
restrictions expire, a property owner may charge market rents. Low-income occupants are often displaced
when rents rise to market levels. As of the writing of the last Housing Element (2007-2014 planning
period), the City of Oakland had lost 209 affordable rental units in five projects: Park Village (84 units),
S&S Apartments (5 units), Garden Manor Square (71 units), Park Villa (44 units), and the Smith
Apartments (5 units). There have not been any additional units lost to the affordable housing supply since
then.
The Housing Element must identify any such publicly assisted rental units eligible for conversion during
the ten years following adoption of the Housing Element and include a program to address their
preservation, if possible. The California Housing Partnership Corporation (CHPC), a non-profit
organization, assists cities in tracking at-risk units by providing lists of at-risk units. The City has
supplemented this information with its own study that included interviews with managers and owners of
many at-risk projects.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                        193
              CITY OF O AKL AND
              HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                       Table 3-54
                                                 At-Risk Housing in Oakland as of April 2014
                                                     Total
                                                                                                                        Date
                               Total     Total      Units
  Property         Property                                                Funding                    Management     Regulatory  Options for     At-
                              Units in Subsidized     for   Type of Unit            Owner Org Name
    Name           Address                                                 Source                       Org Name     Agreement    Renewal       Risk?
                              Property   Units      Senior
                                                                                                                      Expires*
                                                   Citizens
Lottie Johnson    970 14th St    27       22                Families        TCAC   LOTTIE JOHNSON     Charter Realty  6/30/2013 As of early      Yes
Apts                                                                               MEMORIAL           & Investments             2014
                                                                                   HOUSING, INC.,     Inc.                      ownership
                                                                                   NP                                           entity not
                                                                                                                                clear that they
                                                                                                                                want to renew
                                                                                                                                HUD
                                                                                                                                contract.
San Pablo         2551 San                                  Large Family    TCAC   Mead Avenue        Keith J. Kim    6/24/2022 City staff was  Yes?
Suites            Pablo                                                            Housing Associates                           unable to
                  Avenue                                                                                                        contact
                                                                                                                                building
                                                                                                                                ownership to
                                                                                                                                determine
                                                                                                                                their plans for
                                                                                                                                renewal.
Santana Apts      2220 10th      30       30                Families        TCAC   2220 Tenth Avenue, Mercy           7/27/2022 City staff was    ?
                  Ave                                                              Inc.               Services                  unable to
                                                                                                                                contact
                                                                                                                                building
                                                                                                                                ownership to
                                                                                                                                determine
                                                                                                                                their plans for
                                                                                                                                renewal.
              194                                                                                      EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                    Total
                                                                                                                   Date
                               Total     Total     Units
  Property       Property                                               Funding                  Management    Regulatory   Options for     At-
                              Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit          Owner Org Name
    Name         Address                                                Source                     Org Name    Agreement      Renewal      Risk?
                              Property   Units     Senior
                                                                                                                 Expires*
                                                  Citizens
Taylor          1080 14th        12       12               Families             Taylor United           ?                  City staff was    ?
Methodist       St                                                              Methodist Church                           unable to
                                                                                                                           contact
                                                                                                                           building
                                                                                                                           ownership to
                                                                                                                           determine
                                                                                                                           their plans for
                                                                                                                           renewal.
The Claridge    634 15th                                   Single Room   TCAC   Urban Green      Urban Green    12/25/2023 In              Yes?
Hotel (Ridge    Street                                     Occupancy            Investments      Investments               approximately
Hotel)                                                                                                                     2011 property
                                                                                                                           was sold to
                                                                                                                           for-profit
                                                                                                                           entity and not
                                                                                                                           clear that they
                                                                                                                           want to renew
                                                                                                                           HUD
                                                                                                                           contract.
Allen Temple    8135             76       75         75    Senior        TCAC   Allen Temple     American        5/31/2013 Currently        No
Arms I          International                              Citizens             Development      Baptist Homes             owned by a
                Blvd                                                            Corporation      of the West               non-profit
                                                                                                                           entity and
                                                                                                                           highly likely
                                                                                                                           to renew
                                                                                                                           HUD contract
                                                                                                                           when it
                                                                                                                           expires.
             EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                    195
             CITY OF O AKL AND
             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                     Total
                                                                                                                    Date
                                 Total     Total    Units
  Property        Property                                                Funding                 Management    Regulatory   Options for   At-
                               Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit          Owner Org Name
    Name          Address                                                 Source                    Org Name    Agreement     Renewal     Risk?
                               Property    Units    Senior
                                                                                                                  Expires*
                                                   Citizens
Allen Temple     1388 81st     51       51         51       Senior         TCAC   ALLEN TEMPLE    American        4/30/2017 Currently      No
Arms II          Ave                                        Citizens              DEVELOPMENT     Baptist Homes             owned by a
                                                                                  CORPORATION     of the West               non-profit
                                                                                  NO.2                                      entity and
                                                                                                                            highly likely
                                                                                                                            to renew
                                                                                                                            HUD contract
                                                                                                                            when it
                                                                                                                            expires.
E.E.             2611          54       53         53       Senior         TCAC   HOPE SENIOR     American       10/31/2015 Currently      No
Cleveland        Alvingroom                                 Citizens              HOUSING         Baptist Homes             owned by a
Manor            Ct                                                               CORPORATION     of the West               non-profit
                                                                                                                            entity and
                                                                                                                            highly likely
                                                                                                                            to renew
                                                                                                                            HUD contract
                                                                                                                            when it
                                                                                                                            expires.
Allen Temple     7607          24       23                  Disabled/HIV-  TCAC   Allen Temple    American        7/31/2021 Currently      No
Manor            International                              AIDS                  Housing Corp IV Baptist Homes             owned by a
                 Blvd.                                                                            of the West               non-profit
                                                                                                                            entity and
                                                                                                                            highly likely
                                                                                                                            to renew
                                                                                                                            HUD contract
                                                                                                                            when it
                                                                                                                            expires.
             196                                                                                   EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                    Total
                                                                                                                      Date
                               Total     Total     Units
  Property       Property                                               Funding                     Management    Regulatory   Options for   At-
                              Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit           Owner Org Name
    Name         Address                                                 Source                       Org Name    Agreement     Renewal     Risk?
                              Property   Units     Senior
                                                                                                                    Expires*
                                                  Citizens
Allen Temple    10121            50       49          49   Senior         TCAC    Allen Temple      American       10/31/2013 Currently      No
Gardens         International                              Citizens               Housing Corp IIII Baptist Homes             owned by a
                Blvd                                                                                of the West               non-profit
                                                                                                                              entity and
                                                                                                                              highly likely
                                                                                                                              to renew
                                                                                                                              HUD contract
                                                                                                                              when it
                                                                                                                              expires.
Northgate       550 24th St     201       200        200   Senior       HUD - 202 GRAPHIC           Christian      9/30/2014  Currently      No
Terrace                                                    Citizens               COMMUNICATION     Church Homes              owned by a
                                                                                  RETIREMENT        of Northern               non-profit
                                                                                  CENTER            California                entity and
                                                                                                                              highly likely
                                                                                                                              to renew
                                                                                                                              HUD contract
                                                                                                                              when it
                                                                                                                              expires.
Posada de       2221            100       100        100   Senior       HUD - 202 Posada de Colores Christian      9/30/2014  Currently      No
Colores         Fruitvale                                  Citizens                                 Church Homes              owned by a
                Ave                                                                                 of Northern               non-profit
                                                                                                    California                entity and
                                                                                                                              highly likely
                                                                                                                              to renew
                                                                                                                              HUD contract
                                                                                                                              when it
                                                                                                                              expires.
             EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                       197
             CITY OF O AKL AND
             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                   Total
                                                                                                                        Date
                              Total     Total     Units
   Property       Property                                             Funding                        Management    Regulatory   Options for   At-
                             Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit             Owner Org Name
    Name          Address                                               Source                          Org Name    Agreement     Renewal     Risk?
                             Property   Units     Senior
                                                                                                                      Expires*
                                                 Citizens
Sojourner        5815, 5915,    88       87          87   Senior         HUD -    SOJOURNER           Christian       9/30/2013 Currently      No
Truth Manor      6015 Martin                              Citizens      236(j)(1) TRUTH HOUSING       Church Homes              owned by a
                 Luther King                                                      INC.                of Northern               non-profit
                 Jr Way                                                                               California                entity and
                                                                                                                                highly likely
                                                                                                                                to renew
                                                                                                                                HUD contract
                                                                                                                                when it
                                                                                                                                expires.
Las              1231-7 37th    67       67         67    Senior       HUD - 202  Las Bougainvilleas  Christian       3/31/2018 Currently      No
Bougainvilleas   Ave                                      Citizens                Senior Housing, INC Church Homes              owned by a
                                                                                                      of Northern               non-profit
                                                                                                      California                entity and
                                                                                                                                highly likely
                                                                                                                                to renew
                                                                                                                                HUD contract
                                                                                                                                when it
                                                                                                                                expires.
Irene Cooper     1218 2nd       40       39         39    Senior       HUD - 202  EVERGREEN           Christian       9/30/2020 Currently      No
Terrace          Ave                                      Citizens                ANNEX, INC.         Church Homes              owned by a
                                                                                                      of Northern               non-profit
                                                                                                      California                entity and
                                                                                                                                highly likely
                                                                                                                                to renew
                                                                                                                                HUD contract
                                                                                                                                when it
                                                                                                                                expires.
             198                                                                                       EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                   Total
                                                                                                                        Date
                              Total     Total     Units
   Property      Property                                              Funding                         Management   Regulatory   Options for   At-
                             Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit             Owner Org Name
    Name         Address                                                Source                           Org Name   Agreement     Renewal     Risk?
                            Property    Units     Senior
                                                                                                                      Expires*
                                                 Citizens
Bancroft        5636           61        60          60   Senior       HUD - 202  BANCROFT             Christian     9/30/2013  Currently      No
Senior Homes    Bancroft                                  Citizens                SENIOR HOMES,        Church Homes             owned by a
                Ave                                                               INC.                 of Northern              non-profit
                                                                                                       California               entity and
                                                                                                                                highly likely
                                                                                                                                to renew
                                                                                                                                HUD contract
                                                                                                                                when it
                                                                                                                                expires.
Percy Abram,    1070           44        44          44   Senior       HUD - 202  Abram Housing        Christian     7/31/2013  Currently      No
Jr Senior       Alcatraz                                  Citizens                Corporation          Church Homes             owned by a
Apartments      Ave                                                                                    of Northern              non-profit
                                                                                                       California               entity and
                                                                                                                                highly likely
                                                                                                                                to renew
                                                                                                                                HUD contract
                                                                                                                                when it
                                                                                                                                expires.
Beth Eden       1100           54        54          54   Senior         HUD -    Beth Eden Hsg. Dev., Christian     12/31/2016 Currently      No
                Market St                                 Citizens      236(j)(1) a Calif. Non-profit  Church Homes             owned by a
                                                                                  Corp.                of Northern              non-profit
                                                                                                       California               entity and
                                                                                                                                highly likely
                                                                                                                                to renew
                                                                                                                                HUD contract
                                                                                                                                when it
                                                                                                                                expires.
             EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                         199
             CITY OF O AKL AND
             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                 Total
                                                                                                                       Date
                            Total     Total     Units
  Property        Property                                             Funding                       Management    Regulatory   Options for    At-
                           Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit            Owner Org Name
    Name           Address                                              Source                         Org Name    Agreement     Renewal      Risk?
                           Property   Units     Senior
                                                                                                                     Expires*
                                               Citizens
Coolidge Ct      3800         19       18               Disabled/HIV- HUD - 811 Coolidge Court, Inc. Fred Finch      6/30/2018 Currently       No
                 Coolidge                               AIDS                                         Youth Center              owned by a
                 Ave                                                                                                           non-profit
                                                                                                                               entity and
                                                                                                                               highly likely
                                                                                                                               to renew
                                                                                                                               HUD contract
                                                                                                                               when it
                                                                                                                               expires.
Frank G. Mar     283 13th    119       119         38   Families      TCAC      East Bay Asian Local East Bay        7/30/2005 Currently       No
Community        street                                                         Development Corp.    Asian Local               owned by a
Housing                                                                                              Development               non-profit
                                                                                                     Corporation               entity and
                                                                                                                               highly likely
                                                                                                                               to continue as
                                                                                                                               an affordable
                                                                                                                               housing
                                                                                                                               development
                                                                                                                               when
                                                                                                                               regulatory
                                                                                                                               agreement
                                                                                                                               expires.
             200                                                                                      EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                   Total
                                                                                                                    Date
                              Total     Total     Units
  Property      Property                                               Funding                      Management  Regulatory   Options for    At-
                             Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit         Owner Org Name
    Name        Address                                                Source                        Org Name   Agreement     Renewal      Risk?
                             Property   Units     Senior
                                                                                                                  Expires*
                                                 Citizens
Madrone        477 8th St       32       32               Residential   TCAC   East Bay Asian Local East Bay      9/17/2003 Currently       No
Hotel                                                     Hotel                Development Corp.    Asian Local             owned by a
                                                                                                    Development             non-profit
                                                                                                    Corporation             entity and
                                                                                                                            highly likely
                                                                                                                            to continue as
                                                                                                                            an affordable
                                                                                                                            housing
                                                                                                                            development
                                                                                                                            when
                                                                                                                            regulatory
                                                                                                                            agreement
                                                                                                                            expires.
Hismen Hin-    2555             92       92               Families      TCAC   East Bay Asian Local East Bay     12/22/2024 Currently       No
nu Terrace     International                                                   Development Corp.    Asian Local             owned by a
               Blvd                                                                                 Development             non-profit
                                                                                                    Corporation             entity and
                                                                                                                            highly likely
                                                                                                                            to continue as
                                                                                                                            an affordable
                                                                                                                            housing
                                                                                                                            development
                                                                                                                            when
                                                                                                                            regulatory
                                                                                                                            agreement
                                                                                                                            expires.
            EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                      201
           CITY OF O AKL AND
           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                               Total
                                                                                                               Date
                          Total     Total     Units
  Property      Property                                           Funding                   Management    Regulatory   Options for    At-
                         Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit          Owner Org Name
    Name        Address                                            Source                      Org Name    Agreement     Renewal      Risk?
                         Property   Units     Senior
                                                                                                             Expires*
                                             Citizens
Marcus         721 Wood     22        21              Families      TCAC   Jubilee West      East Bay        8/24/2022 Currently       No
Garvey         St                                                                            Asian Local               owned by a
Commons                                                                                      Development               non-profit
                                                                                             Corporation               entity and
                                                                                                                       highly likely
                                                                                                                       to continue as
                                                                                                                       an affordable
                                                                                                                       housing
                                                                                                                       development
                                                                                                                       when
                                                                                                                       regulatory
                                                                                                                       agreement
                                                                                                                       expires.
San Pablo      1955 San    144       144        144   Senior        TCAC   San Pablo         East Bay       12/23/2024 Currently       No
Hotel          Pablo Ave                              Citizens             Renaissance, Inc. Asian Local               owned by a
                                                                                             Development               non-profit
                                                                                             Corporation               entity and
                                                                                                                       highly likely
                                                                                                                       to continue as
                                                                                                                       an affordable
                                                                                                                       housing
                                                                                                                       development
                                                                                                                       when
                                                                                                                       regulatory
                                                                                                                       agreement
                                                                                                                       expires.
           202                                                                                EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                  Total
                                                                                                                Date
                             Total     Total     Units
   Property     Property                                              Funding                  Management   Regulatory   Options for    At-
                            Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit          Owner Org Name
    Name        Address                                               Source                     Org Name   Agreement     Renewal      Risk?
                           Property    Units     Senior
                                                                                                              Expires*
                                                Citizens
Town Center    1143-10th      206       206              Families      TCAC   BRIDGE West      John Stewart   8/31/2014 Currently       No
at Acorn       St.                                                            Oakland Housing, Company                  owned by a
                                                                              Inc.                                      non-profit
                                                                                                                        entity and
                                                                                                                        highly likely
                                                                                                                        to continue as
                                                                                                                        an affordable
                                                                                                                        housing
                                                                                                                        development
                                                                                                                        when
                                                                                                                        regulatory
                                                                                                                        agreement
                                                                                                                        expires.
Eldridge       1165 3rd        40       39               Families      TCAC   ELDRIDGE II, LLC John Stewart  10/31/2013 Currently       No
Gonaway        Ave                                                                             Company                  owned by a
Commons                                                                                                                 non-profit
                                                                                                                        entity and
                                                                                                                        highly likely
                                                                                                                        to continue as
                                                                                                                        an affordable
                                                                                                                        housing
                                                                                                                        development
                                                                                                                        when
                                                                                                                        regulatory
                                                                                                                        agreement
                                                                                                                        expires.
            EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                  203
             CITY OF O AKL AND
             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                   Total
                                                                                                                         Date
                              Total     Total     Units
  Property        Property                                              Funding                        Management    Regulatory   Options for   At-
                             Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit            Owner Org Name
    Name          Address                                                Source                          Org Name    Agreement     Renewal     Risk?
                             Property   Units     Senior
                                                                                                                       Expires*
                                                 Citizens
Marlon Riggs     269 Vernon     13       12               Disabled/HIV- HUD - 811 Vernon Street        John Stewart    2/29/2016 Currently      No
Apts             St                                       AIDS                    Housing, Inc.        Company                   owned by a
                                                                                                                                 non-profit
                                                                                                                                 entity and
                                                                                                                                 highly likely
                                                                                                                                 to renew
                                                                                                                                 HUD contract
                                                                                                                                 when it
                                                                                                                                 expires.
Eastmont         6850           19       18               Disabled/HIV- HUD - 811 Eastmont Court, Inc. John Stewart    2/28/2013 Currently      No
Court            Foothill                                 AIDS                                         Company                   owned by a
                 Blvd                                                                                                            non-profit
                                                                                                                                 entity and
                                                                                                                                 highly likely
                                                                                                                                 to renew
                                                                                                                                 HUD contract
                                                                                                                                 when it
                                                                                                                                 expires.
James Lee        690 15th St    26       25               Families        TCAC    Dignity Housing      John Stewart    8/21/2022 Property       No
Court                                                                             West Associates      Company                   recently
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitated
                                                                                                                                 with City
                                                                                                                                 funds and
                                                                                                                                 new
                                                                                                                                 regulatory
                                                                                                                                 agreement
                                                                                                                                 recorded on
                                                                                                                                 property.
             204                                                                                        EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                  Total
                                                                                                                  Date
                             Total     Total     Units
  Property      Property                                               Funding                      Management Regulatory  Options for    At-
                            Units in Subsidized    for   Type of Unit                Owner Org Name
    Name        Address                                                 Source                       Org Name  Agreement    Renewal      Risk?
                           Property    Units     Senior
                                                                                                                Expires*
                                                Citizens
Otterbein      5375 Manila    39        39          38   Senior          HUD -      SATELLITE       Satellite   7/31/2024 Currently       No
Manor          Ave                                       Citizens     236(j)(1)/202 SENIOR HOMES,   Affordable            owned by a
                                                                                    INC             Housing               non-profit
                                                                                                    Associates            entity and
                                                                                                                          highly likely
                                                                                                                          to renew
                                                                                                                          HUD contract
                                                                                                                          when it
                                                                                                                          expires.
Doh On Yuen    211 8th St     48        46          46   Senior                                     Satellite             Currently       No
                                                         Citizens                                   Affordable            owned by a
                                                                                                    Housing               non-profit
                                                                                                    Associates            entity and
                                                                                                                          highly likely
                                                                                                                          to continue as
                                                                                                                          an affordable
                                                                                                                          housing
                                                                                                                          development
                                                                                                                          when
                                                                                                                          regulatory
                                                                                                                          agreement
                                                                                                                          expires.
            EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                    205
                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                           Total
                                                                                                                                                                                           Date
                                         Total             Total          Units
  Property             Property                                                                                Funding                                         Management             Regulatory            Options for    At-
                                       Units in       Subsidized            for       Type of Unit                              Owner Org Name
    Name               Address                                                                                 Source                                            Org Name             Agreement              Renewal      Risk?
                                      Property             Units          Senior
                                                                                                                                                                                        Expires*
                                                                        Citizens
Glen Brook           4030                  66                66             65        Senior                                                                   Satellite                                   Currently       No
Terrace              Panama Ct                                                        Citizens                                                                 Affordable                                  owned by a
                                                                                                                                                               Housing                                     non-profit
                                                                                                                                                               Associates                                  entity and
                                                                                                                                                                                                           highly likely
                                                                                                                                                                                                           to continue as
                                                                                                                                                                                                           an affordable
                                                                                                                                                                                                           housing
                                                                                                                                                                                                           development
                                                                                                                                                                                                           when
                                                                                                                                                                                                           regulatory
                                                                                                                                                                                                           agreement
                                                                                                                                                                                                           expires.
Park Blvd            4135 Park             42                39              39       Senior                                                                   Satellite                                   Currently       No
Manor                Blvd                                                             Citizens                                                                 Affordable                                  owned by a
                                                                                                                                                               Housing                                     non-profit
                                                                                                                                                               Associates                                  entity and
                                                                                                                                                                                                           highly likely
                                                                                                                                                                                                           to continue as
                                                                                                                                                                                                           an affordable
                                                                                                                                                                                                           housing
                                                                                                                                                                                                           development
                                                                                                                                                                                                           when
                                                                                                                                                                                                           regulatory
                                                                                                                                                                                                           agreement
                                                                                                                                                                                                           expires.
  Sources: City of Oakland and California Housing Partnership Corporation
  1
    Definition as per CHPC: Date Regulatory Agreement Expires data for TCAC properties is an estimation based on when the property was placed in service and typical affordability term used at the time the property
  was placed in service. HUD dates based on data received from HUD.
                 206                                                                                                                                            EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Other Risks of Loss of Affordable Housing
Many of the City-assisted affordable rental projects that were completed in the last two decades are
now experiencing a growing number of operating and maintenance problems yet lack sufficient
income or reserves to properly maintain the properties or to pay for necessary rehabilitation expenses
to keep them viable over the long term. This has been well demonstrated with the problems at many
of the older affordable rental properties developed by local non-profit affordable housing developers.
The gap between the rental income and the operating costs continues to grow, making it almost
impossible to have enough cash flow to cover monthly expenses and maintain the properties; making
it difficult to finance any additional debt for repairs. In February 2008 Oakland City
Council/Redevelopment Agency approved the development of a separate Notice Of Funding
Availability (NOFA), a Preservation and Rehabilitation NOFA, to help fund needed operations and
capital improvements for these older projects. Since then, this NOFA has allocated millions
of dollars to these properties with a focus on protecting and preserving older existing
affordable housing developments that have been funded by City and/or the former
Redevelopment Agency loans and are currently regulated with City/Agency regulatory
agreements. This NOFA also focuses on older projects, regulated by other public agencies,
that the City wishes to preserve as affordable housing. Eligible capital improvements include
those needed to maintain and improve the habitability of the housing and its marketability,
and reduce excessive maintenance and repair costs. Table 3-55 is an analysis of the cost to
preserve or replace units that are currently considered at-risk affordable housing in Oakland.
                                                             Table 3-55
           Cost to Preserve and Replace At-Risk Housing in Oakland
Project                                                                 Units          Per Unit Cost                         Total
                             1
Preservation Costs
     Lottie Johnson Apartments (Family)                                    27                    $92,273                   $2,491,378
     The Claridge Hotel (SRO)                                             200                    $72,906                  $14,581,149
Total Cost to Preserve Units                                              227                                             $17,072,527
                              2
Replacement Costs
     Lottie Johnson Apartments (Family)                                    27                   $437,661                  $11,816,851
     The Claridge Hotel (SRO)                                             200                     N/A                      N/A
Total Costs to Replace Units                                               27                                             $11,816,851
Sources: City of Oakland Department of Housing and Community Development, Housing Development Section
1
  Preservation cost comparables are based on cost certifications of developments supported by City funding in the last three years.
2
  Replacement cost comparables are based on cost certifications of similar new construction developments supported by City funding in the
last three years. There are no comparables for new single-room occupancy developments in the City of Oakland.
Entities with Capacity to Preserve Assisted Housing
There are several non-profit organizations that have the financial capacity to own and manage rental
housing. Table 3-56 lists the organizations active in Alameda County that have expressed an interest
in being notified of the availability of assisted at-risk rental housing for the purpose of acquiring the
units to continue affordability.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                                     207
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Resources for Preservation of Assisted Housing
There are a number of resources available to finance the acquisition and preservation of existing
affordable housing. The most important is HUD’s willingness to renew and extend Section 8
contracts. The State of California’s Department of Housing and Community Development has
programs available to finance the acquisition of at-risk projects, and the California Housing Finance
Agency has also provided bond financing coupled with low income housing tax credits. The City will
continue to make funds as they are available for preservation projects through the annual Notice of
Funding Availability used to fund affordable housing development, and preservation projects
received special points in that competition.
208                                                              EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                         Table 3-56
              Non-Profit Housing Organizations Interested in Acquiring
                                              At-Risk Rental Housing
Organization                                                         Address                               City
Alameda County Allied Housing Program                                224 W. Winton Avenue, Room 108        Hayward
American Baptist Homes of the West                                   6120 Stoneridge Mall Road, 3rd Flr.   Pleasanton
BRIDGE Housing Corporation                                           345 Spear Street, Suite 700           San Francisco
Bridge Partners                                                      2950 Buskirk Ave., Ste. 312           Walnut Creek
C. Sandidge and Associates                                           2200 San Pablo Ave # 202              Pinole
                                                                     4530 E. Thousand Oaks Blvd., Suite    Westlake
California Commercial Investment Group
                                                                     100                                   Village
Community Housing Development Corporation of North
                                                                     1535-A Fred Jackson Way               Richmond
Richmond
California Housing Partnership Corporation                           369 Pine Street, Suite 300            San Francisco
Community Housing Developers, Inc.                                   255 N. Market Street, Suite 290       San Jose
Community Housing Works                                              4305 University Ave. Suite 550        San Diego
Domus Development, LLC                                               594 Howard St., Suite 204             San Francisco
East Bay Asian Local Development Corporation                         1825 San Pablo Ave., Ste. 200         Oakland
East Los Angeles Community Corporation                               530 South Boyle Avenue                Los Angeles
Foundation for Affordable Housing III, Inc.                          2600 Michelson Dr, Ste. 1050          Irvine
                                                                                                           San Juan
Foundation for Affordable Housing, Inc.                              30950 Rancho Viejo Road, Suite 100
                                                                                                           Capistrano
Hampstead Development Group, Inc.                                    3413 30th Street                      San Diego
                                                                                                           Rancho
Hendricks & Partners                                                 3100 Zinfindel Drive, Suite 100
                                                                                                           Cordova
Housing Authority of City of Alameda                                 701 Atlantic Ave                      Alameda
KDF Communities, LLC                                                 1301 Dove St., Suite 720              Newport Beach
Linc Housing Corporation                                             100 Pine Avenue, # 500                Long Beach
Mercy Housing California                                             1360 Mission St., Suite 300           San Francisco
Mesa Realty Advisors                                                 56 Cbana Blanca                       Henderson
                                                                                                           Rancho
National Housing Development Corporation                             10621 Civic Center Drive, First Floor
                                                                                                           Cucamonga
Resources for Community Development                                  2220 Oxford Street                    Berkeley
Satellite Affordable Housing Associates, Inc.                        1521 University Avenue                Berkeley
The John Stewert Company                                             1388 Sutter St., 11th Floor           San Francisco
The Trinity Housing Foundation                                       836 Avalon Ave                        Lafayette
West Bay Housing Corporation                                         1390 Market Street, Ste. 405          San Francisco
Source: California Department of Housing and Community Development, 2014 and City of Oakland
    EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                              209
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
K.      POPULATION AND EMPLOYMENT TRENDS
Population Trends
Between 2000 and 2010, Oakland’s population decreased by two percent, from 399,484 to 390,724.
According to Census data, the number of family households decreased in Oakland between 2000 and
2010, and the percent of household types composed of families declined.
Table 3-57 compares population growth in Oakland, Alameda County, and State of California
between 1990, 2000 and 2010. While Oakland’s population declined at two percent, the county’s
population increased by 5 percent and the state’s increased by 10 percent rates during the prior
decade.
                                                     Table 3-57
                                    Oakland Population Growth
                                                           1990–2000                2000–2010
                                                            Percent                  Percent
                                1990              2000      Change         2010      Change
         City                  372,242           399,484        7%        390,724       -2%
         County             1,279,182          1,443,741       13%      1,510,271        5%
         State             29,760,021         33,871,648       14%     37,253,956      10%
         Sources: U.S. Census Bureau, 1990, 2000 and 2010.
Table 3-58 compares past population growth and projected population growth through 2040
according to the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG). According to ABAG’s 2013
Projections, the City of Oakland is expected to reach a population of more than 551,000 by 2040. For
Oakland, ABAG projected a 12.5 percent population growth rate between 2010 and 2020, an 11.9
percent increase between 2020 and 2030, and a 12 percent increase between 2030 and 2040. The
ABAG population growth projection for Alameda County is 9.5 percent between 2010 and 2020, 9.4
percent between 2020 and 2030, and 9.8 percent between 2030 and 2040. In Oakland, household
growth is projected to be about the same as population growth. The Jobs Forecast in Oakland
according to ABAG shows significant increases with a projected a 22.6 percent growth rate between
2010 and 2020, a 7.3 percent increase between 2020 and 2030, and a 10 percent increase between
2030 and 2040.
210                                                                 EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                         Table 3-58
   City, County and Regional Projected Population Growth 2010-2040
                                                                      1              1              2              2               2
Jurisdiction                                                    2000           2010           2020          2030            2040
Population Forecast
Oakland                                                         399,484        390,724        439,600       492,100         551,100
Alameda County                                                1,443,741      1,510,271      1,654,200     1,810,300       1,987,900
Regional Total3                                                  N/A         7,150,739      7,786,800     8,496,800       9,299,100
Households Forecast
Oakland                                                         150,790        153,791        173,270       192,790         212,470
Alameda County                                                  523,366        545,138        598,430       651,720         705,330
                   3
Regional Total                                                   N/A         2,608,023      2,837,680     3,072,920       3,308,090
Jobs Forecast
Oakland                                                          N/A           190,490        233,630       250,800         275,760
Alameda County                                                   N/A           694,460        826,790       875,390         947,650
                   3
Regional Total                                                   N/A         3,385,300      3,987,150     4,196,580       4,505,230
1
  U. S. Census Bureau, 2000 and 2010.
2
  Association of Bay Area Governments, Projections 2013.
2
  Alameda County, Contra Costa, Marin County, Napa County, City and County of San Francisco, San Mateo County, Santa Clara County,
Solano County, and Sonoma County.
  Employment Trends
  As the economic recovery continues in the East Bay—Alameda and Contra Costa Counties—key
  indicators such as employment are showing steady growth. Employment is expected to continue to
  grow steadily in the future, as consumer spending and hiring have improved throughout the rest of the
  country. Oakland and the East Bay, whose economic recovery had lagged behind that of San
  Francisco and the South Bay in recent years, will continue catching up to those regions.
  The outlook for the East Bay remains very positive. Businesses in most sectors of the region’s
  economy are continually creating new jobs, increasingly innovating, and employing more and more
  productive employees. At the same time, consumers are spending more in the East Bay than at any
  point since the onset of the recession in 2007. Home prices are rising fast, while mortgage defaults
  and foreclosures are falling precipitously, though negative equity among homes in the East Bay
  remains high, at over 25%. Single-family and multifamily residential construction picked up
  considerably in 2012. The East Bay Economic Development Association (EBEDA) expects this
  pattern of economic growth to continue in the coming years.
  Strong and growing sectors in Oakland continue to be health care, trade/logistics, manufacturing,
  innovative tech and clean tech.
  EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                             211

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                              Table 3-59
          Occupations and Industries of Oakland Residents (2014)
                                                                               Percent of All
                                               Number              Number of   Business
 Occupation                                     of Jobs % Jobs     Businesses  establishments
 Public Administration and Education            40,174   22%         860           3.6%
 Health Care                                    22,309   12%        2,529         10.5%
 Professional / Business/Other Services        17,056    9%         10,990        45.7%
 Wholesale, Transportation and Utilities       15,021    8%         1,708          7.1%
 Manufacturing                                  13,526    8%         780           3.2%
 Finance, Insurance, Real Estate Professional             7%                       7.9%
 Services                                       12,037              1,891
 Construction and Resources                       9,831    5%         1,723          7.2%
 Leisure/Entertainment/Retail                   9,517     5%        3,560         14.8%
 TOTALS                                        180,187              24,041
  Source: Dun & Bradstreet, March 2013
212                                                          EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                      Table 3-60
                   Occupations and Industries in Oakland (2014)
                                            Number of            Number of          Gross Sales         Percent of All
 Occupation                                 Businesses           Jobs               (Thousands)         Employees
 Health Care & Social Assistance                   4,090            29,559               $3,784,804        15.8%
 Professional / Scientific/Technical               3,999            18,718               $3,262,710        10.0%
 Public Administration                                325           17,028                       n/a        9.1%
 Finance, Insurance, Real Estate
                                                   2,479            16,830               $5,622,456         6.0%
 Professional Services
 Retail                                            2,730            15,205               $4,386,752         8.1%
 Educational Services                                 659           14,481                  $49,943        10.0%
 Other Services                                    3,140            14,133                 $648,179         7.6%
 Accommodations, Food Service                      1,620            13,946                 $862,695         7.5%
 Transportation and Utilities                         633           10,083               $1,890,698         5.4%
 Waste and Remediation                             1,037              9,107                $667,784         2.5%
 Wholesale                                            721             7,900             $12,871,946         4.2%
 Manufacturing                                        631             7,782              $2,118,937         3.6%
 Construction and Resources                        1,418              6,758              $2,260,861         0.8%
                                                                                           $856,999
 Information                                          503             5,592                                 3.0%
 “Other Unclassified”                              2,211              4,924                $179,897         2.6%
 Arts Entertainment Recreation                        366             3,846                $365,168         2.1%
 Utilities                                             12             1,584                $896,561         <1%
 Agriculture, Mining                                   36                93                 $22,442         <1%
 Management of Companies                               19                73                 $21,423         <1%
 TOTALS                                           23,915          187,126               $39,733,359
  East Bay EDA City of Oakland, March 2013. Note: Percentages may not equal 100 due to rounding.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                   213

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
     1. Employment by Industry Trends
With a strategic location at the hub of multimodal transportation lines, Oakland has always had
strength in the production and distribution of goods. With globalization, Oakland has undergone a
post-industrial transformation from a manufacturing-strength to a service-oriented economy and is
now taking advantage of the new industrial/technical-based economy: software/multimedia,
healthcare, telecommunications, bioscience/biotechnology, new advanced and specialty
manufacturing, etc. Oakland is one of the country’s greenest cities, and despite a slowdown in
venture capital funding for the region’s clean tech industry, data suggest that Oakland and the East
Bay continues to serve as a hub for renewable energy investment.
While the total number of business establishments has increased in the East Bay over time, this
growth is concentrated heavily among business establishments with few employees. In fact, many of
these new firms have no paid employees. From 2006 to 2011, the East Bay added a net total of
10,719 new firms with 0-4 employees, while the total number of firms in nearly every other size
category decreased, and the East Bay lost a number of large employers during this time. More
recently, however, from 2010 to 2011, there was an increase in the number of business establishments
in the East Bay across many size categories. Bureau of Labor Statistics data show that the overall
number of establishments fell by 4.9% from 2011 to 2012. Because California Employment
Development Department (EDD) data are not yet available, it remains to be seen whether this
decrease was concentrated among small-sized firms.
                                             Table 3-61
           Oakland Top 25 Sales Tax Producers, 3rd Quarter 2013
                   (sorted by business type, then alphabetical)
Stores                                                Business to Business
Best Buy                                              East Bay Restaurant Supply
Home Depot                                            LN Curtis & Sons
Quik Stop Market                                      One Source Supply Solutions
Safeway
Target                                                Building Materials
Walgreens                                             Economy Lumber
Walmart                                               Westside Building Material
Auto & truck sales                                    Fuel
Audi Mazda of Oakland                                 Chevron
Broadway Volkswagen                                   Shell/Texaco
Downtown SAAB Subaru Toyota                           Southwest Jet Fuel
Enterprise Commercial Truck
Honda of Oakland                                      Entertainment/Hospitality
Mercedes Benz of Oakland                              Aramark Entertainment
One Toyota of Oakland
TEC Volvo, Mack & GMC Trucks                          Cannabis
                                                      Harborside Health Center
Stores                                                Business to Business
Best Buy                                              East Bay Restaurant Supply
Home Depot                                            LN Curtis & Sons
Quik Stop Market                                      One Source Supply Solutions
214                                                              EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Safeway
Target                                                Building Materials
Walgreens                                             Economy Lumber
Walmart                                               Westside Building Material
Auto & truck sales                                    Fuel
Audi Mazda of Oakland                                 Chevron
Broadway Volkswagen                                   Shell/Texaco
Downtown SAAB Subaru Toyota                           Southwest Jet Fuel
Enterprise Commercial Truck
Honda of Oakland                                      Entertainment/Hospitality
Mercedes Benz of Oakland                              Aramark Entertainment
One Toyota of Oakland
TEC Volvo, Mack & GMC Trucks                          Cannabis
                                                      Harborside Health Center
 Source: HdL, October 2013
     2. Recent and Anticipated Changes in Employment and Impacts on the Housing
          Market
Beacon Economics forecasts that East Bay employment will grow 2.1% from the fourth quarter of
2013 to the fourth quarter of 2014, or 3.3% over current levels, to over 1 million jobs. These short-
run growth rates are forecast to continue in the long run. As economic growth persists over time and
firms become more confident about the long-run health of the economy, higher-skilled sectors will
begin to take on more permanent employees at a faster rate. The result is that by the end of 2018,
many higher-skilled sectors are expected to have matched, or surpassed, the overall rates of growth in
lower-wage sectors. Given these trends that will likely put pressure on the housing market, it will be
important to encourage the development of affordable housing for low wage workers and strengthen
rental protections for existing residents.
Employment has steadily grown in the East Bay since mid-2010, as East Bay businesses hire more
employees almost every month, and as more and more East Bay residents find work in the East Bay
and elsewhere. East Bay residents are finding work at a faster pace than East Bay businesses are
adding new workers. Lower-skilled employment sectors have seen some of the biggest job growth in
the East Bay in recent years. Some of these sectors, such as Administrative Support and Leisure &
Hospitality, employ many part-time and temporary workers. Employment in the Construction sector
is increasing quickly, in turn, up 9.9% from March 2012 to March 2013. As firms have begun to
ramp up construction, labor demand is increasing rapidly as a result.
Even as the economy of the East Bay has improved, many firms have been reluctant to add
permanent, full-time employees to their payrolls, and thus job growth in sectors such as Financial
Activities (-0.7% March 2012 to March 2013 year over year) and Information (-3% year over year)
have been slow or negative, while job growth in sectors such as Administrative Support, which
includes temporary employees, has been very strong (4%). Note, though, that employment in the
Professional sector has been very strong since early 2011. This sector, which includes scientific and
technical occupations such as research, is one of the East Bay’s strengths relative to other regions,
and its strong growth during the economic recovery is a reason to be optimistic about the health of the
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                     215

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
East Bay economy in years to come. Jobs in this sector will be key as the economy transitions toward
more higher-skill, higher-tech business in the future.
The Management and Professional sectors, which have already shown solid growth throughout the
economic recovery, will continue to lead the recovery among higher-skilled employment sectors. By
the end of 2014, employment in these sectors is expected to rise by 3.5% over current levels. This
should come as a benefit to advanced manufacturing in the East Bay, which is a crucial employment
cluster in the region.
The rebound of the housing market will come as a boon to a Construction sector that lost 40% of its
jobs during the recession. By the fourth quarter of 2018, the Construction sector is forecast to grow
36% over current levels, to 75,000 jobs.
2012 proved a turning point for both the construction sector and the housing market, as residential
construction truly took off. Single-family and multifamily residential building permitting increased
dramatically from 2011 to 2012. Oakland played one of the biggest roles in this growth: the number
of single-family residential building permits grew by 380% from 2011 to 2012.
The Education and Healthcare sectors have grown over the past several years, bolstered by a strong
Health Care sector that continued to add new jobs even amid the Great Recession. Over the last five
years, in both sectors employment has increased by 11%. Together, the Education and Health
Services sectors are forecast to grow by approximately 9% over current levels (1% to 1.5% growth
per year) by the end of 2018, surpassing 150,000 jobs by the first quarter of 2018.
Commercial Real Estate
The office property vacancy rate in the East Bay as of May 2013, at 18%, has fallen to its lowest level
since 2009 (18%), but it has yet to decrease to pre-recession levels. The Oakland Central Business
District holds the lowest vacancy rate in the East Bay, at 12% and the highest rent, at $28.67 per
square foot.
Warehouse vacancy rates have fallen in the East Bay and elsewhere in the Bay Area, while rents have
climbed slightly in each area. Warehouse occupancy continues to increase in the East Bay, with a
large increase in net absorption in the fourth quarter of 2012 relative to the fourth quarter of 2011.
Among industrial property in the Bay Area, the East Bay continues to have the highest rate of
vacancy, at 10%, but the steady declines in the vacancy rates since 2010 is reason to be optimistic.
Net absorption increased substantially among East Bay industrial property in the fourth quarter of
2012 relative to the fourth quarter of 2011, led primarily by a large uptick in leasing at manufacturing
centers along the I-880 corridor, a good-sized portion of which is located in Oakland.
Retail property in the East Bay has had a slower process of recovery. Among retail property in the
Bay Area, the East Bay continues to have the highest rate of vacancy, at 6%--which is seen as
healthy—but the steady declines in the vacancy rates in retail property since 2010 is reason to be
optimistic. Anchor stores in Alameda County maintain a low vacancy rate, such as Central/North
Alameda at 5%, with relatively affordable rents for the region.
Over 3.8 million square feet of commercial, industrial and civic space was developed in 1999-May
2013. Another 6.1 million square feet is in process (a Planning application has been submitted or
approved). This new space represents thousands of jobs at private firms, regional medical centers and
other employers.
216                                                               EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                      Table 3-62
                           Mixed Use or Non-Residential Projects
                                           Underway in Oakland
 Retail/Entertainment/Hospitality
                                                           Retail,                               Central   300,000 sf +
 Brooklyn Basin                                            residential         Entitled          Estuary   3,100 units
                                                                                                 North
 The Ridge Shopping Center (Safeway)                       Retail              Entitlements      Oakland   303,700 sf
                                                           Retail office       Application       Jack       1.2million
 Jack London Square                                        entertainment       Submitted         London    sf, 660 units
                                                                                                 Upper
 Shops at Broadway (Sprouts)                               Retail              Entitled          Broadway   35,000 sf
                                                           Retail,
                                                           residential ,       Under             Upper      104,063 sf
 The Hive                                                  office              Construction      Broadway  + 105 units
                                                           Retail,
                                                           residential,                          Oakland
 Oak Knoll                                                 office              In the pipeline   Hills     TBD
 City Centers 1 & 2                                        Office                                Downtown  1 million sf
 Sears site                                                Retail, office      In the pipeline   Downtown  400,000 sf
 Telegraph & 19th                                          Hotel               In the pipeline   Uptown    100 rooms
 Telegraph & 22nd                                          Hotel               In the pipeline   Uptown    100 rooms
 Jack London Square Redevelopment Phase 2                  Entertainment       In the pipeline   Downtown  1.2million sf
 Broadway at 11th                                          Hotel               In the pipeline   Downtown   150 rooms
                                                           Retail,
 MacArthur BART Transit Village                            residential                                      535 units
 Foothill Square Shopping Center (Foods Co,                Retail              Under             East      157,000 sf
 Ross, Anna’s Linens)                                                          Construction      Oakland
                                                                               Under
 Safeway at Claremont & College                            Retail              Construction                55,000 sf
 Office, Institutional & Logistics
                                                                               Under             West
 Oakland Army Base                                         Industrial          Construction      Oakland   1 million sf
                                                                               Under             Airport
 Goodman Birtcher                                          Industrial          Construction      Area      360,000 sf
                                                                               Under
 Alta Bates Summit Medical Center                          Hospital            Construction      Pill Hill 230,000 sf
                                                                               Under             Central
 Highland Medical Center                                   Hospital            Construction      Oakland   900,000 sf
 Children’s Hospital                                       Hospital            Entitlements      North     380,000 sf
                                                                                                 Oakland
                                                           Hospital -          Under             Mid Town
 Kaiser Permanente                                         Garage              Construction      Broadway   1 million sf
Source: City of Oakland Summary Information from Office of Mayor Jean Quan February 2014.
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                                217

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Residential Real Estate
A rapid decrease in the number of lower-value distressed properties on the market has contributed to
a substantial increase in home prices in the East Bay, and as home inventories remain very low by
historical standards, EBEDA expects home prices to continue to rise quickly in the coming year. An
increase in supply, caused by a substantial increase in residential construction, will mitigate growth in
prices over time, but the impact of this new construction will not be significant in the short term.
Despite the increase in home prices in the past year, home affordability remains near an all-time high.
Even as home prices appreciate faster than incomes in the Bay Area, interest rates on mortgages
remain so low that homes are about as inexpensive as they were at the end of 2011, and as
inexpensive in the East Bay as they were upon the onset of the recession in late 2007, at 34.5% of
income. Compare this to the peak of the housing bubble, when home costs in the East Bay were as
high as 93% of income.
Apartment rents are continuing to rise quarter after quarter, but the East Bay offers the lowest average
apartment rent in the Bay Area. The monthly cost of rent in Oakland increased by 4.7% from the
fourth quarter of 2011 to the fourth quarter of 2012, to $1,371. By comparison, in San Jose, the
monthly cost of rent increased by 5.4% to $1,616 over the same period, and in San Francisco, the
monthly cost of rent increased by 5.6% to $1,970.
     1. Opportunities for Promoting and Improving Job Housing Balance
Oakland is relatively dense residentially39 and offers many land-use-diverse neighborhoods. City
policies support further density and multi-level buildings. Specific initiatives to support these
policies include:
     •    Oakland General Plan – Dense residential development encouraged along transit corridors
          and arterials and in the Central Business District.
     •    Specific Plans – Several specific plans are under way across the City. They all support
          densely developed transit corridors and horizontal and vertical mixed use development. See
          Table 3-63 below.
     •    Priority Development Areas – Regional transportation funds will be funneled to the 6 PDAs
          in Oakland and around the Bay Area.
     •    Zoning – Mixes of uses generally permitted or conditionally permitted, with consideration to
          preserving and encouraging public safety and lively ground level/pedestrian experiences.
     •    Micro Housing Units – A building featuring “micro housing units” has been approved in the
          Central Business District. Likely tenants of these units will be young professionals eager to
          be in the heart of the City.
     •    Strong commitment to affordable housing – Oakland will set aside an amount equal to 25%
          of funds distributed to the City as a taxing entity under the Redevelopment dissolution laws
          into the City’s Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Additionally, the City is a recipient of
          Federal HOME housing entitlement funds. All affordable housing development funds are
          distributed in annual competitive “Notice of Funding Availability” competitions.
39
   Of its peer cities in California (by population)—Anaheim, Fresno, Long Beach, Sacramento and Santa Ana—Oakland
ranks third in most population density per square mile, after Santa Ana and Long Beach.
218                                                                          EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
    •    Highly walkable/bikable city – Oakland has an overall Walk Score of 69 “Somewhat
         Walkable,” though 13 neighborhoods have scores in the range of 90-98. The City’s Bike
         Score is 57.
    •    Excellent transit – AC Transit and BART provide Oakland residents and workers with a
         robust transit system, augmented by the Free B Shuttle on Broadway and the upcoming
         BART Oakland Airport Connector. City staff are exploring the feasibility of a streetcar on
         Broadway, resurrecting a popular mode of connection between transit, office, residential and
         retail centers. Oakland has an overall Transit Score of 54.
                                                        Table 3-63
                          Oakland’s 25-Year Development Horizon
                                                    (Specific Plans)
                                                                                         Potential
                                                                     Lake
                                                                                         Development
                                Broadway          Central  Coliseum  Merritt   West
                                                                                         Total over
                                Valdez            Estuary  Area      Station   Oakland
                                                                                         next 25
                                                                     Area
                                                                                         years
   Residential Units               1,800            422      5,170     4,900     5,000     17,292
   Retail square feet           1,114,000         268,071  470,000   404,000   385,000   2.2 million
   Office square feet           695,000           443,950  84,000    1,229,000 -         2.4 million
   High Intensity                  -              -        7,400,000 -         3,460,000 10.8 million
   Campus/Office
   square feet
   Hotel Rooms                  180               -        875       -         -         1,055
   Industrial/Logistics            -              374,857  285,000   -         855,000   1.5 million
   square feet
   Parks                           -              10 acres 25 acres  -         -         35 acres
   Source: City of Oakland, Strategic Planning Division
EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES                                                                     219

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
     2. Larger Employers in the Area
As of 2013, most of Oakland’s largest employers are government and education agencies, health care
providers, and professional/business/service companies. The 2000 Census counted 174,743
employed residents in Oakland, about 92% of the civilian labor force of 190,666. EDD reported in
2012 that there were 180,311 jobs—a nearly 2% decrease in the number employed in Oakland since
January 2002—as reported in the 2007-2014 Housing Element. There is a nearly 11.8%
unemployment rate as of March 2013. The Census and EDD indicate that unemployment in Oakland
is more than a function of job opportunities in the City in relation to the number of individuals in the
labor force.
                                                       Table 3-64
                                    Oakland’s Top 20 Employers
                                                                  Oakland
Top 20 Employers in Oakland                                                           Business Type
                                                                 Employees
     1.    Kaiser Permanente                                       10,914                Health Care
     2.    Oakland Unified School District                          7,664                 Education
     3.    State of California                                      7,480                Government
     4.    Alameda County                                           6,218                Government
     5.    City of Oakland                                          5,082                Government
     6.    Alta Bates Summit Medical Center                         3,623                Health Care
     7.    Children’s Hospital & Research Center                    2,600                Health Care
     8.    Internal Revenue Service                                 2,500                Government
     9.    Southwest Airlines                                       2,100                  Airline
     10.   Peralta Community College District                       1,420                 Education
     11.   FedEx                                                    1,300                 Logistics
     12.   Bay Area Rapid Transit                                   1,158               Public Transit
     13.   Caltrans                                                 1,190                Government
     14.   Clorox Co.                                               1,004             Consumer Goods
     15.   Alameda Contra-Costa Transit District                    1,000               Public Transit
     16.   AT&T                                                      880             Telecommunications
     17.   Wells Fargo Bank                                          667              Financial Services
     18.   East Bay Municipal Utility District                       680                   Utilities
     19.   U.S. Postal Service                                       646                 Government
     20.   Safeway                                                   596                    Retail
     Total                                                         58,722
Source: City of Oakland Economic Development staff, August 2013.
Much information for this chapter was adapted from the East Bay Economic Outlook, May 2013, East
Bay Economic Development Association.
220                                                                       EXISTING CONDITIONS/OPPORTUNITIES

                                                                                                       CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
4.          LAND INVENTORY
A. SUMMARY OF SITE INVENTORY FINDINGS
This chapter of the Housing Element presents an inventory of sites suitable for residential
development in Oakland within the planning period of the Housing Element. It demonstrates that the
housing potential on land suitable for residential development is more than adequate to accommodate
Oakland’s housing allocation under ABAG’s Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA).
The chapter also describes the types of housing production occurring in Oakland, typical residential
densities and the availability of infrastructure and public services to support development of housing
suitable for households with a range of income levels and housing needs.
The City’s approach to identifying suitable sites involved two distinct exercises. First, the City
looked at sites where there was a specific housing development identified for that site, and therefore it
was possible to identify a specific number of housing units and the income level to which those units
were targeted. Within this tier, there were three groups – projects already constructed, projects with
planning approvals in place, and projects in predevelopment where a specific number of units has
been proposed but had not yet been approved. Second, the City identified additional sites sufficient
to accommodate the need for very low, low and moderate income units, in addition to sites for above-
moderate income units to meet its RHNA. As a result, there is a second tier (“opportunity sites”)
consisting of vacant and underutilized sites suitable for multifamily development that could
accommodate affordable housing units 40.
Legal Requirements
California law (Government Code Section 65583(a)(3)) requires that the Housing Element contain:
              “An inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites
              and sites having potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship
              of zoning and public facilities and services to these sites.”
State law further requires that the Housing Element:
              “…identify adequate sites with appropriate zoning and development standards and with
              services and facilities to accommodate the local agency's share of the regional housing need
              for the very low and low-income categories…”(65589.5(d)(5)(B)) and “…sites shall be
              identified as needed to facilitate and encourage the development of a variety of types of
              housing for all income levels, including multifamily rental housing, factory-built housing,
              mobilehomes, housing for agricultural employees, supportive housing, single-room
              occupancy units, emergency shelters, and transitional housing…” (65583(c)(1))
40
   Factors that went into determining the opportunity sites: 1) minimum zoning of 30 dwelling units per acre (“Mullin Densities”), 2) a
minimum parcel size of 10,000 square feet, 3) vetted by various planners (Strategic Planning staff members working on the area and
Specific Plans) and Project Implementation staff (former Redevelopment Agency) for known sites of interest, 4) sites that are not vacant
were included as “under-utilized sites” and were identified as such using Alameda County parcel data, where the value of improvements
was substantially less that the value of the land.
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                                                      221

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
State law (Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B)(iv)) declares 30 dwelling units to an acre is a
sufficient density for a site to be “appropriate” to accommodate affordable housing. Most housing
analysts agree, however, that higher permitted densities generally increase the feasibility of producing
affordable housing, up to the point at which more expensive construction techniques for multistory
buildings are needed to achieve the higher density. The “break point” at which added construction
costs outweighs the cost savings of increased residential density will vary depending on the cost of
land and site preparation. In most communities, maximum densities significantly below 20 units per
acre create a cost constraint for constructing affordable housing. Conversely, maximum densities
significantly above 30 units per acre may not offset the added cost of construction at such a density,
unless land and site preparation costs are extremely high.
Projected Housing Need
The California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) determines the amount
of housing needed for income groups in each region based on existing housing need and expected
population growth. For the 2014-2022 housing element planning cycle, the housing need was based
on population projections produced by the California Department of Finance which took into
consideration the extraordinary uncertainty regarding national, State and local economies and housing
markets. Each city’s share of the regional housing demand is prepared by the Association of Bay Area
Governments (ABAG) through the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) process. For this
RHNA cycle only, HCD made an adjustment to account for abnormally high vacancies and unique
market conditions due to prolonged recessionary conditions, high unemployment, and unprecedented
foreclosures.
The RHNA methodology, new to this cycle, expands upon the inclusion of compact growth principles
that began with the 2007-2014 RHNA methodology. Senate Bill 375 (SB 375) strengthened the
coordination between housing and transportation planning. SB 375 (2008) requires that each region
plan for future housing needs and complementary land uses, which in turn must be supported by a
transportation investment strategy with a goal of reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Further,
the RHNA must be consistent with the development pattern included in the Sustainable Communities
Strategy (SCS) of the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP). The Bay Area’s sustainable growth
framework is built around Priority Development Areas (PDAs). PDAs are existing neighborhoods
near transit nominated by jurisdictions as appropriate locations for future growth. For this cycle, 70
percent of the region’s housing need is allocated based on growth in PDAs.
Initially, the Jobs-Housing Connection Strategy (a component of the Sustainable Communities
Strategy) substantially increased the number of units forecast for the three largest cities in the Bay
Area (San Jose, San Francisco, and Oakland), adding approximately 36,000 units between 2010 and
2040. However, many of these core cities require investments in transit infrastructure, utilities, and
improvements in public services before they can assume a high level of housing production. Taking
this factor into account along with the expected pace of recovery from the current housing and fiscal
crisis, ABAG shifted a small share of housing production (1.5 percent) from Oakland, San Jose, and
Newark to the balance of the region. This minor adjustment retains a strong housing production target
in San Jose and Oakland.
Additionally, the law requires that the RHNA not only provide guidance on the number of total units
produced by a jurisdiction, but specifically allocations for affordable housing. The allocations are
broken out by very low-, low-, moderate- and above moderate-income populations. Income
distribution was shifted in this cycle so that counties with residents below the regional median
household income (such as in Alameda, Napa, San Francisco, Solano, and Sonoma) experienced
222                                                                                      LAND INVENTORY

                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
shifts towards a greater concentration in the above moderate income category. This promotes the
objectives for reducing concentrations of poverty and increasing the mix of housing types among
cities and counties equitably.
Despite the regional shifts toward greater concentration in the above moderate income category, in
Oakland, the share of the population in the moderate income category decreased by 327 households,
from 3,142 in the previous planning period to 2,815 in the current planning period. Similarly, the
required number of low income units has decreased from 2,098 in the prior period to 2,075 in the
current period. However, the allocation between very low income and low income increased from
1,900 in the prior period to 2,059 in the current period.
State Housing Element law also requires that the City project the need for extremely low income
households (at or below 30% of area median income). The City has assumed that half of the very low
income need is for extremely low income families, yielding an estimated need of 1,029 units.
In summary, the RHNA requires the City to plan to accommodate 14,765 housing units between
January 2015 and June 2023, of which 1,029 should be for extremely low-income households, 1,030
should be affordable to very low-income households, 2,075 to low-income households, 2,815 to
moderate-income households, and 7,816 to above-moderate-income households. Sites on which such
housing might be constructed should permit adequate densities and contain infrastructure and services
to increase the financial feasibility of producing housing affordable to low-income residents. See
Table 4-1 illustrating this breakdown.
The 2013 income limits under Federal and State housing programs for Oakland that apply to a four-
person household is as follows 41:
      •    Extremely Low Income (up to 30% Area Median Income) = $26,750
      •    Very Low Income (up to 50% of the Area Median Income) = $44,600
      •    Low Income (80% of the Area Median Income) = $64,400
      •    Area Median Income = $89,200
      •    Moderate Income (120% of the Area Median Income) = $107,050
41
   See Table 3-7 and Table 3-8 The entire chart is available online at the City of Oakland website:
http://www2.oaklandnet.com/Government/o/hcd/s/Data/DOWD008693
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                                     223

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table 4-1
         Regional Housing Needs Assessment for the City of Oakland
                         Housing Element Planning Period: 2014-2022
                                                          Units by Affordability Category
                                              Total       Extremely Very                                                 Above
                                                                                         Low-           Moderate-
                                              Units       Low-              Low-                                         Moderate
                                                                     1                1  Income Income
                                                          Income            Income                                       -Income
Oakland's Regional Housing
Needs Allocation (RHNA)
(as per ABAG Regional                          14,765       1,029             1,030        2,075         2,815             7,816
Housing Needs Plan)2
1
  : Extremely Low-Income and Very Low-Income unit counts add to RHNA total of 2,059 for Very Low-Income. The City has estimated
future housing need for extremely low income households as 50% of the overall RHNA need for very low income households.
2
  : See publication by the Association of Bay Area Governments “San Francisco Bay Area Housing Needs Plan 2014-2022” at the following
website: http://www.abag.ca.gov/planning/housingneeds/
Housing Element Methodology
The City’s analysis divides sites into four groups.
       •     Group 1: Housing Developments Recently Completed
       •     Group 2: Housing Developments with Planning Approvals
       •     Group 3: Sites with Housing Projects Planned
       •     Group 4: Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
Group 1: Units Constructed
The first group consists of sites on which projects have been constructed between January 2014 and
March 2014. For sites included in Group One, the number and affordability is clearly identifiable
since only one actual project exists (61 market-rate units). There were no publicly-subsidized
affordable projects completed during this period, though there were a number of them under
construction. Those subsidized affordable projects were not counted during this planning period
because they had already been counted towards the 2007-2014 RHNA.
Group 2: Units Approved
The second group consists of sites with approved development proposals. Because there are specific
proposals for each site, the number of units and their affordability can be identified. This group
includes market-rate housing projects that have already been approved by the City (all discretionary
permits have been issued). Group 2 also includes affordable housing projects that have received
development funding commitments from the City with Federal HOME funds and/or Low/Mod
Housing Funds (former Redevelopment Agency tax-increment set-aside for housing) and thus have a
specific number of affordable units identified.
224                                                                                                           LAND INVENTORY

                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Group 3: Units Planned
Group 3 contains sites on which projects are planned but that have not yet have secured planning
approvals. This group includes projects that have started pre-application discussions with the City,
and projects that had applications under review as of March 2014. Group 3 also includes
development sites that were acquired by nonprofit developers with funding provided by the Low/Mod
Housing Fund (former Redevelopment Agency tax-increment set-aside for housing) under an
Affordable Housing Site Acquisition program. These sites will be subject to long-term affordability
controls, and have a projected number of units (based on information submitted as part of the
application for site acquisition funding), but the specific mix of very low- and low-income units is not
yet confirmed, as it is dependent on the type and amount of financing that can be secured for each
project.
Group 4: Additional Capacity on Opportunity Sites
The fourth group consists of “opportunity sites” identified by the City as a result of several studies
and planning analyses. The inventory focuses on larger sites suitable for multiple-unit housing
development. Many are sites envisioned for development along the City’s transit corridors and in
higher-density and mixed-use developments downtown.
Estimate of Possible Density
In determining the residential development potential of a site with no current specific development
proposal (Group 4), the City used projections that are based on conservative estimates of the capacity
of these sites based on other existing proximate similar developments. In some cases these estimates
are either equal to or less than the current maximum densities permitted by the City’s General Plan
and Zoning Ordinance. This analysis yields a potential for about 10,032 units.
The results of this analysis show that housing potential on land suitable for residential development is
more than adequate to meet Oakland’s allocation of regional housing needs (RHNA).
Exclusion of Single-Family and Small Project Sites
The inventory of suitable sites focused on sites with current housing projects or with the potential for
multi-family housing development. The incompatibility of data systems and records from multiple
City offices did not facilitate including in the site inventory sites that contain individual single-family
lots or small projects. It is estimated that the inclusion of individual lots and small sites being
developed for housing throughout Oakland could increase the number of additional housing units
recently built and currently under construction by about one to five percent over the total presented
herein. From January 2014 to March 2014, development on these sites yielded approximately 10
single-family homes in the moderate and above moderate income categories. These units are not
counted with the totals on Table 4-2. Applying this rate over the next five years would yield an
additional 200 units.
Relationship of Site Groups to Detailed Inventory in Appendix C
The detailed inventory listing the sites in each of the groups is presented in Appendix C. Additional
background information on assumptions and sources of data is also included Appendix C. Table 4-2
provides a cross-reference between the four groups discussed in the remainder of this chapter, and the
detailed tables that are found in Appendix C Units Constructed, Approved and Planned.
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                          225

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Oakland’s efforts to meet its “fair share” of regional housing needs go beyond simply identifying
adequate sites. In the past the City has actively encouraged housing production by providing
substantial assistance for development of affordable housing. To the extent possible, the City will
continue to encourage affordable housing, though with substantially less financial resources given the
dissolution of redevelopment agencies and the capacity to set-aside tax-increment funds. Other sites
are the subject of active housing projects in various stages of the approval or planning process.
Group 1: Units Constructed
Development occurring on sites with housing projects recently completed in Oakland represents
progress toward meeting Oakland’s share of regional housing needs. Between January 2014 and
March 2014, a total of 61 new housing units had been constructed. Those units are noted as “units
constructed 1/1/14 to 3/27/14 (permits issued after 1/1/14).” 42
To be consistent with State requirements, the City included in this group only those sites where
building permits were issued after January 2014. There were many other residential projects
completed or under construction between January 1, 2014 and March 2014, but because their building
permits were issued prior to January 1, 2014, those developments were not counted as sites for the
current planning period.
Group 2: Units Approved
Again, between January 2014 and March 2014, there were 4,409 units that had received planning
approvals but had not yet started construction (including 221 affordable units). Those units are noted
as “units receiving planning approvals.”
Group 3: Units Planned
Additionally, there are 3,468 units planned and are noted as “units planned” (including 221 affordable
units). Affordable housing units approved or planned have either preliminary funding commitments
or site acquisition assistance from the City. Table 4-2 summarizes housing production for the City of
Oakland.
Based on these three stages of housing unit development, the City has identified more than half
of the units, in specific projects that have been built, approved or proposed, to accommodate
the units required to meet its Regional Housing Needs Allocation. To make up the difference in
number of units to meet the RHNA, and because many of these sites were developed or are
proposed as market rate projects, the City has also identified “opportunity sites” which are
suitable for development of multifamily projects that could accommodate very low, low and
moderate income housing as well as additional market-rate units.
Group 4: Additional Capacity on Opportunity Sites
The City has identified available “housing opportunity sites” capable of accommodating
approximately 10,032 additional units. Most of these sites are zoned for multi-family development
along major corridors, in the downtown, and in transit village areas, and thus could accommodate a
range of income types depending only on the availability of adequate financial subsidies to make
possible the development of units for very low, low and moderate income households. As indicated
42
   All 61 housing units received final building permits after 1/1/14. Planning permits were issued prior to 1/1/14. This total
does not include single-family housing built or under construction on small in-fill lots.
226                                                                                                    LAND INVENTORY

                                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
in Appendix C Table C-6, all of these opportunity sites have a density of at least thirty dwelling units
per acre. 43
Total Capacity to Meet RHNA
In combination with the first tier of sites (those with housing completed and those with specific
projects approved or planned), the City has identified sites capable of accommodating a total of
approximately 18,009 units.
In sum, the City has identified sufficient sites that can accommodate its housing needs
allocation and specifically addressing the needs for affordable housing development.
Appendix C, Table C-1, itemizes housing units completed from January 2014 to March 2014 (no
building permits were issued – indicating that a housing unit was under construction – during the
period January 2014 to March 2014); Tables C-2 through C-5 list projects approved and planned as of
March 2014. The sub-total of these units, subtracted from the total Regional Housing Needs
Allocation, indicates that there is a deficit of 6,827 housing units. However, Appendix C, Table C-6,
itemizes the opportunity sites sufficient to address the deficit, including the deficit in affordable units.
The balance of this chapter describes the methodology used to identify sites and provides details on
characteristics of the sites, the projects and the individual units.
43
   As per AB 2348 (Mullin), Chapter 724, Statutes of 2004, this California law recognized that thirty dwelling units per acre
in metropolitan jurisdictions is sufficient to accommodate affordable housing. This is typically referred to as the "Mullin
Densities." While local governments are not compelled to zone at these densities, HCD must accept them as appropriate
when evaluating a jurisdiction's housing element to determine whether the jurisdiction has identified sufficient sites to
accommodate its share of the regional housing need (http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/plan/he/ab2348stat04ch724.pdf).
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                                           227

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
                                                                                              Table 4-2
                     Actual Housing Production to March 2014 and Balance of Units to be Provided
                                                                                                                                                      Units by Affordability Category
                                                                                                                                  Extremely              Very                                            Above
                                                                                                             Total Units                                                  Low        Moderate
                                                                                                                                       Low               Low                                           Moderate
                                                                                                                                                                        Income        Income
                                                                                                                                     Income            Income                                           Income
Oakland's Regional Housing Needs Allocation                                                                              14,765             1,029            1,030            2,075         2,815           7,816
  Group 1: Units Constructed 1/1/14 to 3/27/14 (Permits Issued after 1/1/14)
    C-1: Private Sector Market Rate (includes private sector affordable units)-complete                                      61                                                                                61
  Group 1 Subtotal                                                                                                           61                                                                                61
  Group 2: Units Receiving Planning Approvals
    C-2: Private Sector Market Rate units-approved                                                                        4,188                                                                             4,188
    C-3: Publicly Subsidized Affordable-funded and in pre-development                                                       221                 54               99              47             17              4
  Group 2 Subtotal                                                                                                        4,409                 54              99               47             17          4,192
  Group 3: Units Planned
    C-4: Publicly Subsidized Affordable-site acquisition                                                                    221                                                 187               2            32
                                                                           1
    C-5: Private Sector Market Rate--in Planning pre-development                                                          3,247                                                  72                         3,175
  Group 3 Subtotal                                                                                                        3,468                                                 259              2          3,207
  Total Units C-1 to C-5 (completed, approved, pre-development):                                                          7,938                 54              99              306             19          7,460
Total Sites Needed Given RHNA Requirement -- Surplus/(Deficit):                                                         (6,827)             (975)            (931)          (1,769)       (2,796)           (356)
Sites Needed to comply with Affordable Requirements -- Surplus/(Deficit):                                               (6,471)
    C-6: Opportunity Sites2 (Units with > 30 dua)                                                                        10,032
    C-6: Opportunity Sites (Units with < 30 dua)                                                                             70
1
  Some of these 3,247 units will be affordable.
2
  As per AB 2348 (Mullin), Chapter 724, Statutes of 2004, this California law recognized that 30 dwelling units per acre in metropolitan jurisdictions is sufficient to accommodate housing for very low-
and low-income populations. This is typically referred to as the "Mullin Densities." While local governments are not compelled to zone at these densities, HCD must accept them as appropriate when
evaluating a jurisdiction's housing element to determine whether the jurisdiction has identified sufficient sites to accommodate its share of the regional housing need.
(http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/plan/he/ab2348stat04ch724.pdf)
-228                                                                                                                                                                                   LAND INVENTORY
                                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                              HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
                                                       Table 4-3
                      Site Groups in Narrative and Site Inventory Tables in Appendix C
Site Group in Narrative (Chapter 4)   Appendix C Tables                          Data Source/Assumptions
Group 1: Completed                    Table C-1 (completed market-rate projects) Market rate projects completed between January
                                                                                 2014 to March 2014. (No building permits were
                                                                                 issued – indicating that a housing unit was under
                                                                                 construction – during the period January 2014 to
                                                                                 March 2014).
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                                                     229

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
Site Group in Narrative (Chapter 4) Appendix C Tables                                 Data Source/Assumptions
Group 2: Approved                   Table C-2 (market-rate projects with planning     Includes projects with planning approvals.
                                    approvals)                                        Number of units based on number approved for
                                                                                      market-rate projects and number funded for
                                    Table C-3(affordable projects with an allocation  affordable housing projects.
                                    of City funding)
                                                                                      Sites for market-rate projects are based on major
                                                                                      projects that have received planning approvals.
                                                                                      Affordability estimated based on projected
                                                                                      rents/sales prices; most are above moderate
                                                                                      income. Some of these market rate rentals may
                                                                                      have rents affordable to “moderate” income
                                                                                      households.
                                                                                      Sites for affordable units are City-assisted projects
                                                                                      that have financial assistance for site acquisition or
                                                                                      have development subsidy commitments from
                                                                                      City. Affordability based on developer’s proposal
                                                                                      and City requirements tied to affordable housing
                                                                                      funding.
Group 3: Planned                    Table C-4 (affordable projects that used Low/Mod  Includes planned projects: major projects that have
                                    Housing Fund (former Redevelopment Agency         applied for approvals, have submitted
                                    funds for site acquisition).                      predevelopment applications or are under
                                                                                      discussion and expected to apply. Also includes
                                    Table C-5(market-rate projects in predevelopment) sites acquired with financing from former
                                                                                      Redevelopment Agency affordable housing funds
                                                                                      and subject to affordability controls.
                                                                                      Affordability based on restrictions and estimates
                                                                                      by developer and City.
                                                                                      Affordability estimated based on projected
                                                                                      rents/sales prices; most are above moderate
                                                                                      income. Some of these market rate rentals may
                                                                                      have rents affordable to “moderate” income
                                                                                      households.
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                                                              230

                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
Site Group in Narrative (Chapter 4) Appendix C Tables                                  Data Source/Assumptions
Group 4: Opportunity Sites          Table C-6 (lists of potential sites for affordable Sites identified by City site inventories in the
                                    and market rate).                                  downtown, in redevelopment areas on corridors,
                                                                                       and near rapid transit stations.
                                                                                       Most sites are vacant. Some involve “under-
                                                                                       utilized parcels” where the value of the existing
                                                                                       improvements is substantially less than the value
                                                                                       of the land.
                                                                                       Build-out analysis in Appendix C based on
                                                                                       conservative estimates of the capacity of these
                                                                                       sites based on other existing proximate similar
                                                                                       developments.
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                                                           231

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
B.       SUMMARY OF AVAILABLE LAND
Oakland’s Ability to Accommodate the ABAG Housing Allocation
Oakland contains more than enough suitable land which is zoned at higher densities to meet the
City’s regional housing needs allocation (RHNA) target of 14,765. An overall summary is provided
in Table 4-2.
The City has identified one project that has been built since January 2014. This site contains 61 units.
This site is analyzed in Section C below as “Group 1.”
The City has identified a substantial number of sites with the potential to meet the balance of housing
needs still to be provided in Oakland. Using conservative estimates, as explained below, the total
capacity of these sites is approximately 7,711 units, consisting of the potential on sites with housing
projects approved (4,409 units) and planned (3,468 units). There is potential for additional 10,032
units on housing opportunity sites. Total identified housing unit potential is significantly more
than the remaining need.
It is more difficult to compare housing potential with housing need by affordability category as the
affordability levels are not yet known and the funding commitments are not yet in place for all of the
potential housing units. However, it is clear that the number and location of suitable sites and the
densities of permitted and potential development are more than adequate for developing housing to
meet the needs identified in all of the affordability categories. Further, as explained earlier, the extent
to which units can be developed to meet the needs in all income categories is a funding question and
depends on the future availability of public subsidies required to feasibly develop housing affordable
to lower-income households.
Funding commitments identified for housing projects approved and planned indicate that a small
share of the funding required to meet affordable needs is already in place. The sum of affordable
units already identified for extremely low-, very low- and low-income households represents about 11
percent of the balance of housing unit need identified for low-income households (459 units funded
compared to 4,134 units needed). The number of units planned in the moderate- and above moderate-
income groups is about 71 percent of the need for additional housing in those two groups (about
7,540 units planned compared to 10,631 units needed). The need for moderate- and above moderate-
income housing is highly likely to be met given the current market conditions and by identified
opportunity sites. The need for extremely low-, very low-, and low-income housing will require
additional funding and additional development beyond what is already in the pipeline (See Appendix
C, Tables C3 and C-4) as of March 2014.
C.       GROUP 1: SITES WITH HOUSING PROJECTS
         COMPLETED
Numbers of Sites, Housing Projects, and Housing Units
The pace of housing development in Oakland, during the first 3 months of the 2014-2022 planning
period for this Housing Element (starting January 1, 2014), slowed reflecting global economic trends
resulting from the slow recovery from the recession and the small timeframe from which to count
projects (the planning period for counting projects with active or final building permits is January
2014 to March 2014). Just 61 units have been completed and no projects are currently under
232                                                                                      LAND INVENTORY

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
construction in Oakland (i.e., have building permits issued between January 2014-March 2014), as
summarized in Table 4-4. The inventory is provided in Appendix C (see Table C-1).
                                                Table 4-4
    Summary Totals of Housing Units Built or Under Construction
                                      (through March 2014)
                                                              Housing                    Additional
                                                           Sites/Projects             Housing Units
Completed since January 1, 2014                                        1                          61
Under construction                                                     0                           0
Total                                                                  1                          61
 Source: City of Oakland, 2014.
Table 4-4 shows the 61 units of market rate housing had a building permit issued, was fully built, and
which passed final inspection in the first 3 months of the planning period (January 1, 2014 to March
27, 2014).
Characteristics of Housing Completed
The housing project built between January and March 2014 was the third phase of the Bakery Lofts
project, a mixed use project located in North Oakland. The project included 61 market-rate rental
units and 3,161 square feet of commercial space. The project is approximately 40 units per acre.
D. GROUP 2: HOUSING PROJECT SITES WITH
PLANNING APPROVALS
Numbers of Sites, Housing Projects, and Housing Units
There are 16 sites with planning approvals, as of March 2014. These projects include 4,470
additional housing units for Oakland. The projects fall into the following two categories:
    •     private sector projects with all necessary land use entitlements (approved projects)
    •     affordable projects with City or former Redevelopment Agency financing commitments that
          are in the predevelopment phase; affordability of these units are subject to regulatory
          agreements enforced by the City
Details regarding these sites are contained in Table 4-5.
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                       233

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
                                                 Table 4-5
        Summary Totals of Housing Units with Planning Approvals
                                                                    Housing               Additional
                                                                 Sites/Projects        Housing Units
                                                                 (as of 3/27/14)       (as of 3/27/14)
  Private Sector Approved Projects                                            9                  4,188
  Funded Affordable Projects with Approvals                                   7                    221
  Total                                                                      16                  4,409
 Sources: City of Oakland.
As of March 2014, Oakland completed 61 units, and had 4,409 units with planning approvals. Large
market-rate projects approved include Brooklyn Basin that includes 3,100 market-rate units (which
will likely include a portion of affordable units) located along the City’s waterfront and the “The
Hive” located at Broadway and West Grand with 367 units. Additionally the Fruitvale Transit
Village Phase II is also entitled for 275 units. Affordable housing developments in pre-development
will serve families and special needs populations such as seniors and the formerly homeless.
Affordable developments include 11th & Jackson, a 71 unit multi-family housing project, 1701
Martin Luther King Jr. Way, with 26 units including housing for people with special needs, 94th &
International, with 59 units of multi-family housing, and Civic Center 14 TOD, with 40 units for
families and persons with special needs. Additionally, there are two ownership projects in pre-
development, including one that will renovate formerly blighted and foreclosed single family
residential properties.
The status of sites and housing projects in each of the two categories of approved projects are
described below. The inventory of all sites with planning approvals is provided in Appendix C (see
Tables C-2 and C-3).
          Private Sector Approved Projects. There are 9 projects with 4,188 housing units that have
          already received planning approvals. These projects are fully entitled and can proceed with
          construction once financing and building permits are in place. The new housing units in
          approved projects are anticipated to be affordable to households with above-moderate-
          incomes, as determined by the market. Some of these will be market rate rental apartments
          that will be affordable to moderate income households. The list of approved projects does
          not include affordable projects with City or other public sector assistance.
          Affordable Projects with Planning Approvals. There are seven (7) projects with 221
          housing units with funding commitments from the City for assistance in developing
          affordable housing. The projects are in various stages of predevelopment and financing.
          Nearly all of these units in this category will be affordable to very low- and low-income
          households, and will have long-term restrictions on affordability and occupancy.
Characteristics of Housing with Planning Approvals
The characteristics of housing on sites with planning approvals are summarized in Table 4-6 and
Table 4-7. They are similar to the characteristics described above for housing recently completed in
234                                                                                       LAND INVENTORY

                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
Oakland. The approved projects include both rental and for-sale housing. There are projects with
housing for people with special needs and families. The project densities include a wide range from
under 34 units per acre to over 200 units per acre. The large majority of the housing is in multifamily
developments, with some micro-units and townhome projects.
About 37% of the approved housing projects are located in the North and West Oakland area.
Approximately 30% are located in the Downtown area and 25% are located in East Oakland.
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                      235
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                               Table 4-6
                       Approved Housing Projects (Sites)
                                               Private            Funded
                                               Sector             Affordable
                                               Approved           Projects in Pre-             Total Projects
                                               Projects           development
Number of Sites/Projects                               9                          7                       16
                            Rental                     3                          5                        8
Tenure                      Ownership                   1                         2                        3
                            Unknown                    5                          0                        5
                            Seniors                    0                          0                        0
Special Use
                            Special Needs              0                          1                        1
                            Downtown
                                                       2                          3                        5
                            Oakland
                            East Oakland2              1                          3                        4
Location
                            West Oakland/
                                                       6                          0                        6
                            North Oakland
                            Hills areas                0                          0                        0
                            <20 du/acre                0                          0                        0
                            20-39 du/acre              1                          0                        1
                            40-64 du/acre              0                          0                        0
                            65-89 du/acre              2                          0                        2
Density                     90-149 du/acre             0                          0                        0
                            150-199                    1                          0                        1
                            du/acre
                            200+ du/acre               1                          0                        1
                            Unknown                    4                          7                       11
Source: City of Oakland, 2014
N/A = Not Available
NOTE: Data summarized above is as of 3/27/14, and are summarized from the site inventory in Appendix C.
Most of the projects represent development on infill sites and the redevelopment of vacant and
underutilized properties. The Byron Avenue Homes offers 10 units of affordable ownership housing
in East Oakland and the Oakland Home Renovation Program plans to rehabilitate 3-5 foreclosed
properties into ownership units on scattered sites citywide.
The 221 units of affordable housing in pre-development is primarily located in downtown and east
Oakland, aside from the 3-5 ownership sites scattered citywide. The affordable unit breakdown of
populations served by this affordable housing is: 82% for families, 3% for ownership housing and
11% for special needs population.
236                                                                                                       LAND INVENTORY
                                                                                                           CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                               Table 4-7
                       Characteristics of Approved Projects (Units)
                                                                                           Funded
                                                                                           Affordable
                                                                             Approved      Projects in Pre-            Total Units
                                                                             Projects      development
Number of Housing Units                                                          4,188                     221               4,409
                      Very Low-income                                             N/A                       99                  99
                      Low-income                                                  N/A                       47                  47
Affordability    1    Moderate-income                                             N/A                       17                  17
                      Above moderate-income                                      4,188                        4              4,192
                      With long-term affordability
                                                                                  N/A                      221                 221
                      restrictions
                      Downtown Oakland                                           3,196                     137               3,333
                                        3
Location              East Oakland                                                 275                      89                 364
                      W. Oakland/N. Oakland                                        720                        0                720
                      Hills areas                                                    0                        0                  0
                      <20 du/acre                                                    0                        0                  0
                      20-39 du/acre                                                 52                        0                 52
                      40-64 du/acre                                                  0                        0                  0
                      65-89 du/acre                                                343                        0                343
Density2
                      90-149 du/acre                                                 0                        0                  0
                      150-199 du/acre                                               40                        0                 40
                      200+ du/acre                                                  96                        0                 96
                      N/A                                                        3,657                     221               3,878
   Source: City of Oakland, 2014.
N/A = Not Available
NOTE: Data summarized above is as of 8/1/08, and are summarized from the site inventory in Appendix C.
1
  The approved projects are anticipated to include units affordable to moderate-income households as determined by the market.
2
  Density expressed as units per net acre of site area, exclusive of streets.
3
  Including the San Antonio, Fruitvale, Central East Oakland, and Elmhurst districts
E.          GROUP 3: SITES WITH HOUSING PROJECTS
            PLANNED
Numbers of Sites, Housing Projects, and Housing Units
There are 16 sites with planned housing developments, as of March 2014. These projects include
3,468 additional housing units for Oakland. The projects fall into the following two categories:
       •    proposed affordable projects on sites acquired with financing from the former Redevelopment
            Agency, and subject to affordability controls
       •    planned private sector projects
Details regarding these sites are contained in Table 4-8.
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                                                     237

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                Table 4-8
                        Summary Totals of Planned Housing Units
                                                                     Housing              Additional
                                                                  Sites/Projects       Housing Units
                                                                  (as of 3/27/14)       (as of 3/27/14)
Affordable Projects with Site Acquisition Loans                                6                    221
Proposed Private Sector Projects Planned                                      10                  3,247
Total                                                                         16                  3,468
 Sources: City of Oakland.
Although planned projects represent a significant amount of additional units for Oakland,
development of all or most of the sites with the planned housing projects would fall short of meeting
Oakland’s allocation of regional housing needs (RHNA). As of March 2014, Oakland completed 61
units, approved 4,409 units and planned 3,468 units. With a RHNA of 14,765 units, the combined
units completed, approved and planned fell short by 6,827 units in meeting the need for market-rate
housing during the study period. The City also fell short by 6,471 units in meeting its RHNA for
affordable housing units. However, this shortfall is more than made up for in opportunity sites.
The status of sites and housing projects planned are described below. The inventory of all planned
sites is provided in Appendix C (see Tables C-4 and C-5).
          Affordable Projects with Site Acquisition Loans. There are six (6) proposed affordable
          housing developments that have land acquired using financial assistance from the City’s Site
          Acquisition Program. The program was designed to assist developers with land banking for
          affordable housing. Tentative unit counts total 221 additional housing units on these sites.
          All of the units will be required to be available to low-income households (up to 80% of area
          median income).
          Proposed Private Sector Housing Projects Planned. There are 10 other projects in various
          stages of the planning process. In total, these projects include 3,247 housing units. Much of
          this new housing is anticipated to be affordable to households with moderate- and above
          moderate-incomes, as determined by the market, although some affordable units for lower-
          income households also are likely as a result of project negotiations and approvals. For
          example, the transit villages planned for the West Oakland BART station are anticipated to
          include some affordable units.
Characteristics of Planned Housing Development Proposals
The characteristics of housing on sites with planned projects are summarized in Table 4-9 and Table
4-10. Although fewer details are known at this time for planned developments, generally, the
characteristics of planned projects are similar to the characteristics for housing recently completed
and approved in Oakland.
238                                                                                      LAND INVENTORY

                                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
The location of the planned projects varies as follows: 56% are located in North Oakland and West
Oakland; approximately 25% are located in the Downtown area; and 0.06% are located in East
Oakland. Planned projects also include 985 units located in the hill areas.
                                                   Table 4-9
                              Planned Housing Projects (Sites)
                                                  Affordable
                                                  Projects
                                                  with Site             Planned                 Total
                                                  Acquisition           Private Sector          Projects
                                                  Loans                 Projects
                Number of Sites/Projects                    6                     10               16
                                Rental                      0                       2                2
                Tenure          Ownership                   0                       4                4
                                N/A                         6                       4              10
                Special         Seniors                  N/A                        1                1
                Use             Special Needs            N/A                        0                0
                                Downtown
                                                            0                       4                4
                                Oakland
                                East Oakland2               0                       1                1
                Location
                                West Oakland/
                                                            6                       3                9
                                North Oakland
                                Hills areas                 0                       2                2
                                <20 du/acre                 0                       0                0
                                20-39 du/acre               0                       0                0
                                40-64 du/acre               0                       0                0
                                65-89 du/acre               0                       0                0
                Density         90-149 du/acre              0                       0                0
                                150-199                     0                       0                0
                                du/acre
                                200+ du/acre                0                       6                6
                                N/A                         6                     10               10
                Source: City of Oakland, 2014
                N/A = Not Available
                NOTE: Data summarized above is as of 3/27/14, and are summarized from the site inventory in Appendix C.
Most of the projects represent development on infill sites and the redevelopment of vacant and
underutilized properties. The Emerald Views project includes 370 residential units with a ground
floor café near Lake Merritt. The land available for the Lake Merritt Boulevard project is the result of
the realignment of the 12th Street Bridge. This project is anticipated to include 247 residential units
with 5,000 sf of retail and community space. The project at 1900 Broadway is a proposed 28 story
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                                          239

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
residential tower with 294 units and 11,000 sf of commercial space. The Uptown Parcel 4 project
would complete the Uptown project, a proposed 370 unit project, components of which include public
art and gathering space, as well as synergies with the surrounding theatres and artist community.
Proposed projects in the Oakland Hills include the Oak Knoll Redevelopment project, a 167 acre site
planned for 960 residential units comprised of single-family dwellings, townhomes and
condominiums. The Felton Acres project includes the subdivision of property into 25 single-family
homes and two new access roads. The West Oakland Transit Village project is anticipated to include
563 residential units on the 2.76 acre site.
                                                                Table 4-10
                             Characteristics of Planned Projects (Units)
                                                                Affordable Projects
                                                                with Site Acquisition            Planned Private             Total Units
                                                                Loans                            Sector Projects
Number of Housing Units                                                               221                      3,247                 3,468
                          Very low-income                                                0                           0                   0
                          Low-income                                                  187                          72                  259
Affordability1            Moderate-income                                                2                           0                   2
                          Above-moderate income                                        32                      3,175                 3,207
                          With long-term
                                                                                      221                       N/A                    221
                          affordability restrictions
                          Downtown Oakland                                               0                     1,206                 1,206
                                           3
Location                  East Oakland                                                   0                       247                   247
                          W. Oakland/N. Oakland                                       221                        851                 1,072
                          Hills areas                                                    0                       985                   985
                          <20 du/acre                                                    0                      N/A                   N/A
                          20-39 du/acre                                                  0                           0                   0
                          40-64 du/acre                                                  0                           0                   0
Density2                  65-89 du/acre                                                  0                           0                   0
                          90-149 du/acre                                                 0                           0                   0
                          150-199 du/acre                                                0                           0                   0
                          200+ du/acre                                                   0                     2,049                 2,049
                          N/A                                                         218                      1,201                 1,419
   Source: City of Oakland, 2014.
N/A = Not Available
NOTE: Data summarized above is as of 3/27/14, and are summarized from the site inventory in Appendix C.
1
  The affordability is not yet known for many of the planned projects. Affordable projects in site acquisition will be affordable to
households with low- and very low-incomes although the mix among income categories has not yet been defined. Other planned projects
are likely to include affordable units (to be identified during project negotiations and approvals) and moderate-income units (to be
determined by market prices/rents at the time the housing is available). Very low-income is defined as below 50 percent of area median
income, low-income as from 50 to 80 percent of area median income, and moderate-income as from 80 to 120 percent of area median
income.
2
  Density expressed as units per net acre of site area, exclusive of streets.
3
  Including the San Antonio, Fruitvale, Central East Oakland, and Elmhurst districts
240                                                                                                                     LAND INVENTORY
                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
F.       GROUP 4: ADDITIONAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY
         SITES
Methodology for Selecting Sites
The City identified an additional 10,032 units of housing potential on sites that are suitable for
housing development within the planning period of this Housing Element (refer to Appendix C, Table
C-6 and Figure C-5). The majority of sites are located in and around downtown or along major
corridors and are easily accessible to transit, jobs, shopping and services. The methodology for
identifying the housing opportunity sites is described below.
1. To identify potential housing opportunity sites, staff evaluated the previously identified housing
opportunity sites from the 2007-14 Housing Element Update. The sites without completed projects or
current building permits, approvals or preliminary applications were checked to ensure that they were
still zoned for housing. Additionally, the site’s current land use was verified using assessor land use
coding data, as well as aerial photos to ensure that existing residential units were excluded from the
analysis. Viable sites were subsequently re-counted because they still constitute opportunity sites.
2. The list of previously identified opportunity sites accounted for areas throughout the city that
permitted residential uses at 30 units an acre or greater. In metropolitan jurisdictions such as
Oakland, 30 units per acre is sufficient to accommodate affordable housing. In areas mapped with the
zoning designations that allow higher density housing, such as Urban Residential, Community
Commercial, Transit Oriented Development, Neighborhood Commercial and Central Business
District, the development on the sites could achieve a residential density of more than 30 units to the
acre. These areas occur mostly along major corridors and in the downtown areas planned for high-
density and mixed use development by the General Plan as implemented in the residential and
commercial zoning districts adopted in 2011. Recent trends in residential development suggest that
some residential buildings include ground floor retail, commercial or civic space. Completed projects
in the site inventory that include non-residential uses include Bakery Lofts with 3,161 sq. ft. of
commercial area. Therefore, the opportunity sites analysis presumes the likely development
assumption of ground floor commercial use and upper story residential use in multi-family buildings.
3. The list of previously identified opportunity sites also filtered sites based on a minimum parcel size
of 10,000 square feet. A minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet is usually necessary to support
higher density development. Assembled sites also measure larger than 10,000 square feet (with a few
exceptions).
4. All sites were reviewed against the State environmental hazards database: “GeoTracker”, produced
by the California State Water Resources Board. When a site was listed on this database, it was noted
in the “Environmental Constraints” section of this chapter, below. Specifically noted were sites on
the Leaking Underground Fuel Tanks database.
5. Additional opportunity sites were identified based on sites identified in Appendix A of the Lake
Merritt Station Area Plan Public Review Draft 2012. The potential development identified for each
opportunity site (in terms of residential units and square feet of non-residential space) was determined
based on a variety of factors, including market dynamics, building feasibility, site size and location,
and conceptual Plan policies (as discussed and refined by the Community Stakeholder Group). Total
development potential also takes into account regional growth projections and the market opportunity
assessment.
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                        241

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
The sites without completed projects or current building permits, approvals or preliminary
applications were checked to ensure that they were zoned for housing. Additionally, the site’s current
land use was verified using assessor land use coding data, as well as aerial photos to ensure that
existing residential units were excluded from the analysis.
6. Lastly, the properties formerly retained by the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Oakland for
future development that are slated to be sold by the Oakland Redevelopment Successor Agency were
evaluated and added to the list of housing opportunity sites. The sites without completed projects or
current building permits, approvals or preliminary applications were checked to ensure that they were
zoned for housing. Additionally, the site’s current land use was verified using assessor land use
coding data, as well as aerial photos to ensure that existing residential units were excluded from the
analysis. Additional background on these sites is provided below.
Per the revised legislation dissolving redevelopment agencies, Assembly Bill 1484 (“AB 1484”)
enacted on June 27, 2012, successor agencies are given certain powers after they obtain a finding of
completion from the California Department of Finance. Among them, successor agencies are required
to prepare and submit a long-range property management plan addressing the disposition and use of
real properties formerly owned by the dissolved redevelopment agency. The Oakland Redevelopment
Successor Agency (“ORSA”) has prepared the long range property management plan (the “Property
Management Plan” or “Plan”). The Property Management Plan divides the properties formerly owned
by the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Oakland into four categories: 1) properties retained for
governmental use; 2) properties retained to fulfill an enforceable obligation; 3) properties retained for
future development; and 4) properties to be sold by ORSA.
The properties retained for future development and proposed for sale by ORSA pursuant to Health
and Safety Code Section 34191.5 were evaluated for identification of housing opportunity sites.
Under Section 34191.5(c)(2)(A), the properties retained for future development will be transferred to
the City of Oakland for eventual disposition to a developer. There are 67 parcels clustered into 25
development sites designated for future development. This includes seven sites in the Central City
East project area, ten sites in the Central District project area, six sites in the Coliseum project area,
one site in the Oak Knoll project area, and one site that straddles both the Coliseum and Central City
East project areas. Most of the properties proposed for sale are currently owned by ORSA, though the
ones that are owned by the City will be transferred to ORSA for sale. The properties will be sold for
fair market value at their highest and best use. ORSA will follow the City of Oakland’s rules and
procedures for disposing of surplus properties, as those rules may be modified for ORSA. The net
proceeds from the sale will be distributed as property tax to each taxing entity in an amount
proportionate to its share of property tax revenues pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 34188,
to the extent permitted under bond covenants and federal law.
Assumptions for Estimating Housing Potentials
Housing unit potentials for the opportunity sites have been estimated using the residential densities
allowable under the residential and commercial zoning regulations adopted in 2011. Generally,
densities permitted by the various zoning districts reflect on-the-ground conditions; increased
densities were assigned to areas downtown, along the major corridors and around transit hubs, such as
BART stations. The density estimates provide a reasonable estimate of overall housing development
potentials for the opportunity sites.
The City identified surplus opportunity sites that provide capacity for housing development
that more than meets the City’s unmet housing need.
242                                                                                        LAND INVENTORY

                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Numbers of Sites and Housing Units
In total, 221 housing opportunity sites meeting the criteria above have been identified, some including
several parcels of land combined. The inventory of additional opportunity sites is presented in
Appendix C, Table C-6.
The number of housing units allowable on the 221 opportunity sites is 10,032 units under current
General Plan policies and zoning regulations.
                                              Table 4-11
                      Summary Total of Housing Opportunity Sites
         Number of Housing Opportunity Sites Identified                                    221 sites
         Maximum Allowable Housing Units Under Zoning Code                              10,032 units
 Sources: City of Oakland.
Characteristics of Housing Opportunity Sites
The additional sites suitable for housing development provide opportunities for developing new
multi-family housing along with some single-family housing, opportunities for both rental and
ownership housing, and opportunities for housing built to meet special needs. Characteristics of the
identified opportunity sites are described below.
Existing Uses. The majority of the opportunity sites currently are vacant or mostly vacant, and many
are being used for parking, particularly those in the downtown area. Some are underutilized sites
with outmoded facilities, vacant buildings, and/or marginal existing uses on them. For the most part,
these are sites where the value of existing structures is less than the value of the land.
Tables C-4 and C-5 in Appendix C includes sixteen (16) sites that are aggregations of mostly vacant
parcels with auto-related or other commercial uses on other adjacent parcels. Historically,
consolidating parcels has been a typical approach to building multi-family projects in Oakland. This
trend is likely to continue as demonstrated in the inventory of approved projects (included in
Appendix C, Tables C-2 and C-3). Consolidated parcels of these approved projects resulted in six
projects, some that included assembling parcels from multiple owners. These projects included the
94th and International (59 units), Redwood Hill (20 units), Fruitvale Village Phase II (275 units),
Brooklyn Basin (3,100 units), 51st and Telegraph, Civiq (68 units), and 377 2nd Street (96 units).
Based on these likely development trends, it is reasonable to assume that parcel aggregation will
continue to be a prevalent practice. If for some reason parcel aggregation was not possible, the
elimination consolidated parcels from Table C-5, including 10 projects for a total of 3,247 housing
units, would result in the City falling short by approximately 64 housing units. City staff will work
within its capacity to ensure that the practice of parcel aggregation continues as an accepted
development practice.
Locations. About one-half of the identified housing opportunity sites are in East Oakland, about one-
third are in downtown Oakland, and the rest are in West Oakland and North Oakland. There are also
a handful of sites in the South Hills and Lower Hills areas.
Among these locations, the opportunity sites in the downtown area account for the largest number of
potential housing units as the densities of development are highest there. The rest of the potential
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                       243
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
housing units are about evenly divided between East Oakland and West/North Oakland, with a share
of potential units also included in South Hills and Lower Hills area.
Feasibility of Developing Housing on Commercially Zoned Property. Opportunity sites identified
in Appendix C, Table C-6 are located in both residentially and commercially zoned areas. Only 44
out of 221 opportunity sites are zoned exclusively for high density residential uses. The majority of
opportunity sites identified in this Housing Element are located along the City’s major commercial
corridors. However, few projects developed on the commercial corridors are exclusively commercial
or civic uses. A more common practice is ground floor commercial space with housing above; the
analysis of capacity for the opportunity sites assumed a similar pattern of mixed use development.
The City’s General Plan, zoning and development guidelines all encourage such mixed use along the
commercial corridors. Housing projects located on commercial corridors maximize residents’ access
to services including retail opportunities, transportation alternatives and civic activities, while
reducing the need for automobiles, thus increasing the sustainability of such developments. An
illustration of this trend are plans for the Broadway-Valdez Area Specific Plan slated for the upper
Broadway corridor (see below). Planners are seeking to encourage residential development as a part
of the overall specific plan area. Retail “strip” developments along major commercial corridors are
not typical in Oakland. More common are retail “nodes” with residential uses interspersed between
them.
Specific Plan Areas.
There are four Specific Plan processes and one area plan either recently completed or occurring in
Oakland during the planning period of the Housing Element:
     • Lake Merritt BART Specific Plan (sites within a one-half mile radius of the Lake Merritt
         BART station);
     • Broadway-Valdez Area Specific Plan (parcels on Broadway and Valdez between Interstate
         580 and Grand Avenue);
     • West Oakland Specific Plan (the entire west Oakland area)
     • Coliseum Area Specific Plan (large area surrounding the Coliseum BART station and
         extending partially to the airport including major sports stadiums)
     • Central Estuary Area Plan (area between 19th Avenue and 54th Avenue on the Oakland
         waterfront)
The Housing Element identifies opportunity sites for residential uses in all of the Specific and Area
Plans. Each of the planning processes includes substantial public participation, and there are
established targets for the amount of residential uses that are to be accommodated in each Specific
Plan area (see Ch. 7, policy 1.3). Therefore, within these Specific Plan areas, any individual lots
which are listed as opportunity sites in Appendix C, Table C-6 and Figure C-5, could be the site of
future housing.
Priority Development Areas. In 2008, California Senate Bill 375, the Sustainable Communities and
Climate Protection Act (SB 375), was adopted, which strengthened coordination between regional
housing allocation and transportation planning. The Bay Area’s sustainable growth framework is
built around the Priority Development Areas (PDAs). In 2010, the Oakland City Council approved a
resolution designating Planned PDAs at six established transit-oriented development centers,
specifically: Downtown at 12th/19th Street, MacArthur, West Oakland, Fruitvale, Coliseum BART
stations and the Eastmont Transit Center in Oakland. PDA designations are intended to enable the
City to better compete for grant funding for future planning, technical assistance, and capital funding
for transportation, infrastructure, and housing. PDA designation has the primary goal of encouraging
244                                                                                       LAND INVENTORY

                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
growth near transit and in the existing communities that surround transit by enhancing existing
neighborhoods and providing good housing and transportation choices for all residents. Therefore,
Oakland has positioned itself through the identification of opportunity sites within PDAs to
accommodate future growth in a sustainable manner that achieves regional objectives of enhancing
existing neighborhoods, reducing congestion and protecting natural resources. Within the concept of
the PDAs are the ideas for Transit Villages and Transit Corridors. Each of these ideas are described
below.
           Transit Villages. Potential for about 1,868 housing units are identified for the four BART
           transit villages currently being planned for the areas surrounding the Fruitvale, West
           Oakland, MacArthur, and Coliseum BART stations 44.. The City has begun a planning
           process for new development near the Lake Merritt BART station. The transit village
           projects are anticipated to include mixed-income housing.
           Transit Corridors. The identified opportunity sites along the major travel corridors of the
           City show potential for 8,163 additional housing units, with the largest numbers of units
           identified along Broadway and International and Foothill Boulevards. The new housing
           along the corridors is anticipated to serve households over a range of incomes. Additional
           capacity exists along corridors elsewhere in the City, but detailed site analyses have not been
           conducted in those areas.
                                                      Table 4-12
     Summary of Housing Opportunity Sites by Development Area 45
                                                     Number of                 Zoning Code
                                                                                                 Likely Number of
                                                    Opportunity                 Allowable
                                                                                                  Housing Units
                                                        Sites                Housing Units
Total Potential                                             202                         24,057              10,032
By Development Area
Coliseum BART Station Area                                   13                           1,967                527
Downtown & Jack London Square                                48                          10,403              4,310
Eastmont Town Center                                         17                             748                211
Fruitvale & Dimond Avenue                                    36                           1,447                489
MacArthur Transit Village                                    13                             610                351
Oakland Priority Development Area                            12                             446                172
West Oakland                                                 11                           1,746                501
Potential Priority Development Area                          54                           6,690              3,470
Environmental Constraints. The City recognizes that lots identified as Housing Opportunity Sites
may have some environmental contamination, due to Oakland’s long history as an urbanized city.
For example, the California State Regional Water Quality Control Board “Geo Tracker” database
identifies underground hazardous substance storage tanks on 23 of the 221 opportunity sites listed in
44
    Potential housing units based on the City of Oakland Major Projects List, and Project Implementation (former
Redevelopment Agency) website for each BART station area as of 2014.
45
   Table does not include opportunity sites zoned for under 30 units per acre.
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                                 245

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Table C-6 (there are 3 sites with a status of “remediation” and 20 sites with a status of “site
assessment”).
In 1998, the Environmental Impact Report of the Land Use and Transportation Element (LUTE EIR)
identified over 100 sites in the City of Oakland as being on the state’s “Cortese List” of hazardous
waste sites (as of 1997) and devotes in excess of fifty (50) pages discussing hazardous materials.
More recently, the City Council has adopted Standard Conditions of Approval (Uniformly Applied
Development Standards), which, in part, contain measures designed to substantially reduce or
eliminate hazardous materials impacts. These Standard Conditions of Approval are applied to all
projects, including housing projects. At this time, the City is not aware of anything unique or peculiar
about the contamination, remediation or other factors relating to these Housing Opportunity Sites not
adequately addressed in the 1998 LUTE EIR or Standard Conditions of Approval. In 2009, California
Environmental Quality Act review for the 2007-2014 Housing Element included an Initial Study that
also discussed hazardous materials including soil contamination. However, the impacts were found to
be less-than-significant with the application of the City’s policies in the General Plan, municipal code
provisions and standard conditions of approval for development projects.
In addition, several innovative programs are in place to encourage and foster development of
brownfields. For example, the Cal ReUSE Loan Program was used for cleanup related to the
Macarthur Transit Village residential project. The City also operates the Oakland Brownfields
Revolving Loan Fund with funds provided by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for the
cleanup of brownfields sites. Through the Urban Land Redevelopment Program, the City provides a
well-defined process for addressing contamination at development sites.
Opportunity Sites Allow and Encourage Higher-Density
Development
As estimated, the allowable number of housing units that can be built on the housing opportunity sites
is sometimes larger than the potential number of units for those sites based on recent, average
densities of development. This indicates that the densities of actual housing development in
opportunity site areas are being determined largely by market factors, as reflected in the costs of
development. Land use policies are in place to allow and encourage as high a density of development
as is feasible to build. As the market supports higher densities in the future compared to today, land
use policies are not anticipated to become a constraint on housing development in the parts of the City
where growth is desired and encouraged.
For example, housing in the Central Business District land use classification in downtown Oakland
can be built to a maximum density of 500 units per net acre of site area (300 units per gross acre
including streets). However, the housing projects proposed in downtown (as of March 2014) are a
mixture of steel frame residential towers and mid-rise buildings of wood-frame construction over
either subterranean or podium parking.
Multifamily housing proposed along the City’s major corridors, including affordable housing with
public sector assistance, is typically wood-frame construction, often with at least some at-grade
parking, with higher densities for micro-living quarters. However, the General Plan allows housing
development at densities up to 193 units per net acre of site area under the Urban Residential, and
Community Commercial land use classifications that apply along the corridors and in the BART
transit village areas. See Table 4-12 for the geographic distribution by PDA of the opportunity sites.
246                                                                                     LAND INVENTORY

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Opportunity Sites Allow and Encourage Affordable Housing
The number and location of opportunity sites and the permitted densities of development are
appropriate and effective to provide opportunities for development of housing for households with a
range of income levels and housing needs. As exemplified by recent and current housing projects in
Oakland, the private market is producing new housing affordable to moderate-income households in
addition to housing for households with above-moderate incomes. The identified housing
opportunity sites provide substantial potential for continuing such development in the future. The
moderate-income housing being produced by the market tends to be affordable to households with
incomes at the higher end of the moderate range, from 80 to 120 percent of area median income.
The opportunity sites also provide substantial potential for producing new housing affordable to low-
and very low-income households as well as to moderate-income households, as has been occurring in
Oakland. With the dissolution of California redevelopment agencies and associated funding in 2012,
the City’s primary funding tool for redevelopment and revitalization has been eliminated. In addition,
Oakland is still suffering the after-effects of the recent economic recession. Thus, the production of
new housing affordable to low- and very low-income households and to households with incomes at
the lower end of the moderate-income category will require a combination of funding sources. Most
affordable housing is expected to be funded with a mix of local and non-local sources (federal, state,
and regional grant programs) such as Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC), Federal HOME
funds, Mortgage Revenue Bonds and HUD funds in addition to local funding sources. As of 2014, a
new source of funding from Cap & Trade Proceeds are the Green House Gas reduction Funds.
Utilities and Infrastructure Summary
Since the City of Oakland is largely built-out, the majority of new development consists of urban
infill and redevelopment of vacant and underutilized sites that were formerly used for commercial and
industrial purposes. The basic infrastructure for water supply, wastewater collection and treatment,
and roadways and transit systems are already in place. Aging infrastructure presents a potential
constraint for development. However, the City’s Standard Conditions of Approval include provisions
to address replacing deteriorated infrastructure upon the granting of development approvals for
individual projects.
Water Supply
Oakland’s water service provider, the East Bay Municipal Utility District, summarizes its water
services capacity in the Urban Water Management Plan (2010). According to the plan, EBMUD
anticipates higher densities of existing land uses through 2020, consistent with the projected site
analysis. The plan mentions implementation of water conservation and recycled water programs to
decrease impacts of development. Additionally, EBMUD can meet customer service demands (based
on ABAG population projections) through the year 2030 during normal year conditions. This
includes the projected Regional Housing Needs Allocation (14,765 housing units) Oakland is required
to plan for. However, during dry years, EBMUD would have to implement a Drought Management
Program focused on reducing water consumption. In the case of multiple dry years, in addition to
water consumption reduction programs, EBMUD’s water supply would have to be supplemented.
Wastewater Treatment and Collection
The City of Oakland owns and maintains approximately 1,000 miles of sewer collection pipelines and
7 pump stations. The EBMUD treats the City’s wastewater. The City has both collection and
treatment capacity to accommodate its share of the RHNA. Mitigation measures, such as replacing
LAND INVENTORY                                                                                        247

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
under-sized sewer pipes, will be developed for individual housing projects depending on the number
of units and square footage.
Beyond the issue of basic infrastructure availability, there can be issues and concerns about the local
impacts of additional housing development and population for traffic on nearby streets or for
enrollment in local schools, for example. Those issues are addressed and mitigation measures are
developed in the process of review and approval of individual development proposals.
248                                                                                    LAND INVENTORY
                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
5.         HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES
This chapter of the Housing Element presents information on funds available to support Oakland’s
housing programs. These programs encourage housing rehabilitation, assist first-time homebuyers,
support housing development, and provide miscellaneous housing services to low- and moderate-
income households.
A.         FORMER REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY FUNDING AND
           “BOOMERANG FUNDS”
The City of Oakland’s Redevelopment Agency was dissolved as of February 1, 2012. Given this
action there will be no future funding for the Low and Moderate Income Housing Fund from property
tax increment. Prior to the dissolution of redevelopment the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing
Fund was the main source of housing funds utilized to support the City’s housing programs. State
law required that the Redevelopment Agency deposit 20 percent of the gross tax increment revenues
from redevelopment project areas into the Low- and Moderate Income Housing Fund (LMIHF) to be
used exclusively for housing for persons of low and moderate income. In 2001, a formal policy to
deposit an additional five percent of tax increment into the LMIHF was adopted. In the years prior to
the Redevelopment Agency dissolution, up to approximately $23 million was available for affordable
housing development annually.
In 2011, prior to its dissolution, the Redevelopment Agency, issued a total of $40 million of tax
allocation bonds backed by the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Fund. Annual debt service on
these bonds will be paid by property tax increment as was originally imagined prior to the dissolution
of the Redevelopment Agency. Debt service on these bonds will require about $1.8 million annually
and is called an “enforceable obligation.” Those bond funds are designated to be used for two
affordable housing development projects: $24 million for a development in Brooklyn Basin and $16
million for a development at the MacArthur BART station.
The State statutes governing the dissolution of redevelopment agencies and the wind-down of
redevelopment activities provide for the distribution of former tax-increment funding to taxing
entities. Those taxing entities that will benefit from Oakland’s Redevelopment Agency dissolution
include AC Transit, Oakland Unified School District, City of Oakland, Alameda County, and Peralta
Community College. That distribution of property tax will be from the Redevelopment Property Tax
Trust Fund (RPTTF) and includes funds not needed by successor agencies to fulfill enforceable
obligations. Additionally, there will be distributions to taxing entities sales proceeds and other
revenues from the use or disposition of assets of what are now called “successor agencies” (former
redevelopment agencies). These funds are called “boomerang funds” and represent a windfall in
property tax revenue to the City of Oakland. In late 2013, the City of Oakland committed to setting
aside 25% of the funds distributed to the City as a taxing entity under the Redevelopment dissolution
and deposit them into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Starting in 2015, the Affordable Housing
Trust fund is estimated to receive the following boomerang funds on an annual basis. Following are
initial estimates of what those deposits will be.46
46
   City of Oakland Ordinance No. 13193 (October 1, 2013).
HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES                                                                           249

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                             Table 5-1
                     Estimates of Boomerang Funds Deposits
                                                       25% Affordable Housing
                    Fiscal Year
                                                       Trust Fund Allocation
                    2015-16                                           $4,290,102
                    2016-17                                           $4,623,733
                    2017-18                                           $5,170,416
B.        OTHER FINANCIAL RESOURCES
In addition to boomerang funds, the City also receives Federal HOME and CDBG funds that are
allocated for housing. HOME funds are used primarily for housing development projects. In recent
years this funding source has been cut dramatically. In FY 2013-14, the City received approximately
$2.2 million in HOME funds. (This is less than half of what was received at the height of HOME
funding, $4.9 million in Fiscal Year 2011-12.) Ninety percent of these funds are used for housing
development activities; ten percent is used for planning, administration and monitoring activities.
The City currently receives about $7 million annually from the federal Community Development
Block Grant (CDBG). In recent years, program income from loan repayments has generated an
approximately $800,000 per year additionally. The City anticipates allocating approximately $3.2
million for housing activities including loans for rehabilitation of owner-occupied housing, capital
and operating costs of shelter and housing for the homeless, housing counseling and fair housing
services.
The City also receives approximately $600,000 in federal Emergency Shelter Grant funds for support
of shelter and services for the homeless.
In addition to the HOME and CDBG Programs, affordable housing developers in Oakland routinely
apply for low-income housing tax credits.
C.        OTHER NON-FINANCIAL RESOURCES
The City of Oakland’s Department of Housing and Community Development Agency (DHCD)
operates the City’s housing programs. DHCD staff routinely assists affordable housing developers.
Thus, one of the crucial non-financial resources that the City provides is its housing staff.
D.        HOUSING PROGRAMS
The City of Oakland’s housing programs support and fund housing rehabilitation, provide assistance
to first time homebuyers, help fund housing development, and provide other miscellaneous housing
services for low- and moderate-income households. A brief description of each program is presented
below. A more detailed Directory of Housing Programs is included in Appendix D.
250                                                                     HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Housing Rehabilitation
There are nine Housing Rehabilitation Programs. These include the following:
   •    Access Improvement Program – Provides grants for accessibility modifications for both
        rental and owner-occupied properties. The property must be located in one of the seven
        Community Development Districts.
   •    Emergency Home Repair – Provides loans for major home repairs that require immediate
        attention due to a citation issued by a Fire Marshall, Health Officer or Code Enforcement
        Officer. Loans are made to low- and moderate income owner occupants of one to four unit
        dwellings located in the City of Oakland.
   •    HMIP Deferred Payment Loan – Provides rehabilitation resources to low-income
        homeowners unable to qualify for conventional mortgage loans. The property needs to be
        located in one of the seven Community Development Districts.
   •    Lead Safe Housing and Paint Program – Provides free risk assessment for lead hazards and
        contracted painting services (exterior and limited interior painting) to qualified owner-
        occupied low and moderate income households.
   •    Minor Home Repair Program – Provides small grants to low-income senior homeowners or
        homeowners with a disability who live in one of the seven Community Development
        Districts. The program is operated under contract with Alameda County.
   •    Neighborhood Housing Revitalization Program – Provides financial assistance to owners
        of vacant and blighted residential properties with one-to-four units or single family dwellings
        that are in need of repair to correct code violations and to eliminate safety and health hazards.
   •    Rental Rehabilitation Program – Provides rehabilitation financing for privately owned
        residential properties. The maximum loan amount will be 50% of the construction costs. The
        maximum loan amount will be determined after a needs assessment is completed. Loan
        interest rates will be linked to the market. Affordability requirements will be set to balance
        anti-displacement interests with property owner’s incentives to participate in this rental unit
        improvement program.
   •    Residential Receivership Program – Not yet under way, this program is designed to
        facilitate the rehabilitation of vacant and/or blighted substandard properties. A third party
        “receiver” is appointed by the courts to obtain the financing and to provide design
        construction services necessary to rehabilitate blighted properties throughout the City of
        Oakland.
   •    Weatherization and Energy Retrofit Loan Program – Provides loans to owner-occupied
        low- and moderate-income households to provide weatherization and baseline energy
        efficiency upgrades.
HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES                                                                             251

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
First Time Homebuyers
There are four First Time Homebuyer Programs. None have geographic targeting.
    •   Mortgage Assistance Program (MAP) for First Time Homebuyers – This program is still
        in place but does not have a dedicated source of funding. City staff will administer loans
        under this program as program income becomes available. This program provides deferred
        interest loans of up to $75,000 to low-income, owner-occupant, first time homebuyers; and
        up to $50,000 to moderate-income, owner-occupant, first time homebuyers.
    •   Down Payment Assistance Program (DAP) for Public Safety Officers and Oakland
        Unified School District Teachers – This program is still in place but does not have a
        dedicated source of funding. City staff will administer loans under this program as program
        income becomes available. Loans will be up to $50,000 to sworn police and fire services
        officers and Oakland Unified School District teachers, earning incomes that are at or below
        120 percent of the median income level.
    •   First Time Homebuyer CalHome Program – A California State grant funded program that
        provides assistance to first time homebuyer via deferred loans for up to $60,000. This
        program is still in place but does not currently have any grant funding. City staff will apply
        for funds the next time grants become available. City staff will administer loans under this
        program as program income becomes available.
    •   First-time Homebuyer Shared Appreciation Mortgage (SAM) Program of the Local
        Housing Trust Fund – A California State grant funded program that provides funds to local
        jurisdictions that have a local housing trust fund. The program provides assistance to first
        time homebuyers via deferred loans for up to $60,000. This program is still in place but does
        not currently have any grant funding. City staff will apply for funds the next time grants
        become available. City staff will administer loans under this program as program income
        becomes available.
Foreclosure Related Abatement-, Acquisition and Rehabilitation-,
and Ownership Preservation Loan-Programs
    •   Community Buying Program – A program designed to transform abandoned and/or
        foreclosed properties into new affordable ownership or rental housing.
    •   Foreclosed Properties Blight Abatement – Enforce proactive maintenance requirements on
        lenders of foreclosed properties and City registration requirements.
    •   Home Preservation Loan Program – Provide up to $50,000 in forgivable loan funds for
        distressed homeowners.
    •   Investor-Owned Properties Program – Enforce City ordinance requiring investors who
        purchase properties with foreclosure history to register and allow for City interior inspection
        to address habitability issues.
    •   ROOT Loan Fund (Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP) Program Income) – A
        foreclosure mitigation pilot loan program that provides assistance to eligible homeowners to
        preserve ownership of homes in foreclosure.
252                                                                    HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES

                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Housing Development
The City of Oakland operates several Housing Development Programs. These are discussed briefly
below.
    •  Affordable Housing New Construction and Substantial Rehabilitation Program –
       Provides funds to entities with demonstrated experience and capacity in the development and
       management of affordable rental or ownership housing at a below-market interest rate for the
       construction of low- and moderate-income housing. Loan terms range from 55 years for
       rental housing to permanently affordable for homeownership units.
    •  Affordable Housing Rehabilitation and Preservation – Provides funds to facilitate
       emergency repairs and capital improvements to strengthen the financial and physical
       condition of existing affordable rental housing regulated by the City of Oakland.
    •  Predevelopment Loan Program - Provides predevelopment loans to non-profit housing
       developers. These funds can be used to prepare applications for project financing. At least
       40 percent of the units need to be earmarked for low-income persons.
Emergency Shelters and Services for the Homeless Population
The City operates a number of programs that provide assistance to the homeless population in
Oakland. These programs include the following:
    •  Code enforcement relocation Program – Provides assistance to tenants mandated to move
       due to City enforcement of housing and building code problems.
    •  HEARTH Emergency Solutions Grant Program – Provides housing services that lead to
       permanent access to housing (rapid rehousing services, homelessness prevention, support
       services in housing, outreach, shelter, and housing resources).
    •  Matilda Cleveland Transitional Housing Program - Provides temporary housing for
       homeless families attempting to stabilize their lives in order to help them obtain permanent
       housing. Approximately fifteen families can be assisted at this transitional facility.
    •  Supportive Housing Program/Homeless Families Support Network – Provides a
       continuum of services, shelter and transitional housing (54 units) to assist homeless families.
    •  Transitional Housing Program – Provides temporary housing (9-12 families) for homeless
       families attempting to stabilize their lives in order to obtain permanent housing.
    •  Oakland Homeless Youth Collaborative – Provides 24-29 transitional housing beds for
       homeless youth.
    •  East Oakland Community Project/Crossroads – Provides temporary shelter in a state-of-
       the-art emergency shelter facility with 125 beds and comprehensive support services for
       homeless people.
    •  Homeless Facilities Construction and/or Rehabilitation – Provides funding for
       construction or rehabilitation of emergency, transitional or permanent housing with
       supportive services for homeless persons.
HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES                                                                           253

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Miscellaneous Housing Services
Non-profit service providers are funded by the City of Oakland to assist Oakland residents in a
variety of housing related activities. These non-profit service providers may also receive funds from
other organizations and agencies. Housing services include the following:
    •   Door-to-Door Foreclosure Prevention Outreach – Door-to-door outreach on foreclosure
        prevention and other housing assistance services.
    •   Foreclosure Counseling and Prevention – Provides housing counseling and legal services
        for homeowners in foreclosure.
    •   Housing Assistance Center – Provides one-stop housing services and referrals, including
        accessing affordable housing and homeless shelter placements.
    •   Pre- and Post- Purchase Counseling – Provide informational mailings, outreach and
        counseling services to first-time and re-entry homebuyers, as well as homeowners facing
        possible foreclosure.
    •   Rental Assistance Fund – Provide up to $5,000 in rental assistance grants to distressed
        tenants.
    •   Housing search assistance, counseling, and referrals for people with a disability.
    •   Fair housing and landlord-tenant counseling.
    •   Rent adjustment board.
254                                                                    HOUSING PROGRAM RESOURCES

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
6.       ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO
         HOUSING
A.       GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Governmental policies and regulations can have both positive and negative effects on the availability
and affordability of housing and supportive services. This chapter of the Housing Element describes
the policies and strategies that provide incentives for housing in Oakland that have resulted in
significant contributions to the City’s housing stock.
This chapter also analyzes City policies and regulations that could potentially constrain the City’s
abilities to achieve its housing objectives. Constraints to housing can include land use controls,
development standards, infrastructure requirements, residential development fees, and development
approval processes, along with non-governmental constraints such as financing. A brief discussion of
the City’s policy and regulatory context is presented below. Since 1998, the City of Oakland has
undertaken actions to reduce the impact of local government regulations and fees on the cost and
availability of housing. Beginning with the General Plan update in 1998, the City has:
    •    increased residential densities,
    •    created new mixed-use housing opportunities along major transportation corridors and in the
         downtown,
    •    reduced open space requirements in high density residential zones in the Downtown and in
         the Transit Oriented Development Zone (S-15),
    •    streamlined the environmental review process for downtown projects,
    •    adopted a Density Bonus Ordinance,
    •    adopted a secondary unit ordinance and streamlined the process for approval,
    •    created new fast-track and streamlined permit processes, and
    •    adopted Standard Conditions of Approval to, in part, streamline the CEQA review process.
Land Use Policies and Regulations
Discretionary land use control in Oakland is exercised by the Planning Commission and the City
Council, and administered by the Planning and Building Department, Bureau of Planning. The City
has not identified any specific constraints to the approval of housing resulting from the application of
the General Plan policies or current zoning.
General Plan Land Use and Transportation Element
The City of Oakland revised the Land Use and Transportation Element of its General Plan (LUTE) in
March 1998 and made LUTE map corrections in 2011. The LUTE outlines the vision for Oakland,
establishing an agenda to encourage sustainable economic development, ensure and build on the
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING                                                                    255

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
transportation network, increase residential and commercial development in downtown, reclaim the
waterfront for open space and mixed uses, and protect existing neighborhoods while concentrating
new development in key areas. The LUTE includes a wide variety of land use classifications to
encourage the development of an adequate supply of housing for a variety of residents, as well as
many policies to encourage the development of affordable housing.
Among the significant changes in the LUTE was the designation of land within the central city area,
along transportation corridors, and within targeted redevelopment areas for higher-density residential
and mixed-use development. These changes to the General Plan implemented the City’s 10K
Initiative, the Sustainable Oakland Development Initiative, encouraged the prospective development
of transit villages at Fruitvale, MacArthur and Coliseum BART stations, and other strategies intended
to encourage more housing in the City near job centers with access to transportation and other
services. The LUTE also supports the protection and improvement of single-family neighborhoods.
The changes to the General Plan provide strong incentives and encouragement, not constraints, for
the production and improvement of housing for all segments of the population. The General Plan
clearly sets forth areas of the City that are appropriate for additional housing development and
increases densities in the downtown area and along transportation corridors, up to as much as 125
dwelling units per acre.
Other General Plan Elements
In addition to the Land Use and Transportation Element described above, the Oakland General Plan is
comprised of seven other chapters, known as Elements, and two Plans which are a part of LUTE:
      • The Estuary Policy Plan, adopted in 1998, text amended 1999, 2005 and 2013
      • Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element (OSCAR), adopted in 1996, amended
          2006
      • Housing Element, last adopted in 2010
      • Historic Preservation Element, adopted in 1995, amended 1998 and 2007
      • Noise Element, adopted in 2005
      • Safety Element, adopted in 2004, amended in 2012
      • Scenic Highways, adopted in 1974
      • Bicycle Master Plan, part of the LUTE, adopted in 2007
      • Pedestrian Master Plan, part of the LUTE, adopted in 2002
Planning Code
The City of Oakland revised its Planning Code to make it consistent with the LUTE. Revisions to the
industrial zones were completed in July 2008, and creation of new commercial and residential zoning
districts in the Planning Code and accompanying maps were completed in 2011. The amendments to
the Planning Code’s industrial, commercial and residential zoning districts brought the City’s zoning
regulations into conformance with the general plan designations, creating a more predictable
development framework.
Since January 2014, 61 dwelling units have been completed, approximately 4,400 dwelling units have
been approved, and over 3,500 dwelling units are in proposed projects under review by the City.
Approximately 400 of the dwelling units approved or planned will be affordable to very low- and
low-income households. This new housing production suggests that the updated residential and
commercial zoning districts, in combination with targeted investments by the City, have had the
desired impact of stimulating housing production in Oakland, including affordable housing.
256                                                              ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Summary of Development Standards
Development standards under the Planning Code permit great flexibility in the types of housing
permitted and the density of residential units. See Table 6-1 for a summary of the permitted and
conditional uses in residential zones. In addition to the provisions of its residential zones, the City
further facilitates the production of affordable housing through density bonuses, broad provisions for
secondary (or “in-law”) units, planned unit development overlay zones, and permits a wide variety of
housing types in commercial zones. Because permitted residential densities are fairly high in
Oakland, density bonuses are rarely necessary as an incentive to produce affordable housing;
however, where applicable, the City is committed to using density bonuses and other regulatory tools
to increase the supply of housing affordable to all income levels. The density bonus regulations were
updated in 2014 and are codified in Section 17.107 of the Oakland Planning Code. Developers may
apply for incentives or concessions for the reduction in development standards including, but not
limited to: (1) Required off-street parking; (2) required setbacks; (3) Maximum building height; (4)
required open space; (5) maximum floor area ration; (6) minimum lot area; and (7) minimum
courtyards to facilitate the development of affordable housing.
Development standards in the Planning Code include:
     •   Permitted lot coverage is generally 40 percent in single-family districts. In the higher density
         residential zones (RU-1 through RU-5) there are no lot coverage requirements.
     •   Minimum lot sizes ranging from one acre to 5,000 square feet in single-family zones, to
         4,000 square feet in medium and high density zones.
     •   Minimum lot areas per dwelling unit in multifamily zones ranging from 450 to 90 square feet,
         the equivalent of approximately 50 to nearly 300 dwelling units per gross acre.
     •   A height limit up to 30 feet in single-family and lower-density multifamily zones (RH, RD,
         and RM zones), 40 to 60 feet in medium density multifamily zones (RU-1 through RU-5),
         and no height limit in the core of the Central Business District.
     •   Relatively low yard and setback requirements. In the highest density multifamily zones, there
         are no side-yard requirements.
     •   Special zoning provisions for small lots in lower density residential zones, including reduced
         setback requirements.
     •   Manufactured housing is permitted, as long as it meets Planning and Building Codes.
     •   Required parking per dwelling unit of two spaces in single-family zones (plus one additional
         space for second units), 1.5 spaces per unit in low- and medium-density multifamily zones,
         one space in higher-density multifamily zones, and half a space in the two Transit-Oriented
         zones at the Fruitvale and West Oakland BART Stations. Some zones in the downtown and
         other commercial areas have no parking requirements. While some consider the residential
         parking and commercial parking standards of the City a constraint to new housing, the City
         routinely offers parking waivers, permits mechanical and stacked parking where feasible,
         encourages shared parking in mixed-use buildings and allows for “unbundling”—separating
         the cost of a new residential unit from the cost of a parking space.
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING                                                                      257

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
The Planning Code provides additional and generous opportunities for housing in commercial zones.
Residential uses are permitted or conditionally permitted in the following zones: Neighborhood
Center, Community Commercial, and Central Business District. The density requirements are
dependent on a separate height map. For Neighborhood Center and Community Commercial zones,
the density ranges from 550 to 225 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. For the Central Business
District, the density ranges from 300 to 90 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. Floor Area Ratio
provisions generally do not apply to residential development. See Table 6-2 for a summary of the
permitted and conditional residential uses and facilities in commercial zones.
In summary, the development standards in the current Planning Code allow generous lot coverage,
unit densities, maximum building heights which are appropriately scaled to permitted unit density,
relatively small yard and set-back requirements, and relatively low parking requirements. In addition,
the commercial zones allow a wide variety of residential densities. Constraints posed by parking
standards are regularly mitigated through variances and innovative parking systems. The City does
not consider the development standards in the Planning Code to be a constraint to the production or
rehabilitation of housing. See Table 6-3 for a summary of the residential development standards.
258                                                             ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING
                                                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                               Table 6-1
                      Permitted and Conditional Facilities and Activities in Residential Zones
                                 RH-1    RH-2     RH-3      RH-4   RD-1 RD-2        RM-1 RM-2 RM-3 RM-4 RU-1  RU-2  RU-3  RU-4  RU-5
    Residential Facility Types
    One-Family Dwelling            P       P        P        P       P       P        P   P    P    P    P     P     P     -     -
    One-Family Dwelling
                                   P       P        P        P       P       P        P   P    P    P    P     P     P     -     -
    with Secondary Unit1
    Two-Family Dwelling             -       -        -        -      -       C        C   P    P    P    P     P     P     P     P
    Multifamily Dwelling            -       -        -        -      -       -        -   C    C    C    P     P     P     P     P
    Rooming House                   -       -        -        -      -       -        -   -    -    -    -     C     C     P     P
    Mobile Home                     -       -        -        -      -       -        -   -    -    -    -     -     -     -     -
     Residential Activity
    Classifications
    Permanent                      P       P        P        P       P       P        P   P    P    P    P     P     P     P     P
    Residential Care                -       -        -        -      -       C        C   C    C    C    C     C     C     C     C
    Service-Enriched
                                    -       -        -        -      -       C        C   C    C    C    C     C     C     C     C
    Permanent Housing
    Transitional Housing            -       -        -        -      -       C        C   C    C    C    C     C     C     C     C
    Emergency Shelter               -       -        -        -      -       -        -   -    -    -    C     C     C     C     C
    Semi-Transient                  -       -        -        -      -       -        -   -    -    -    -     -     -     C     C
Note: See Oakland Planning Code for complete standards including applicable limitations
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING                                                                                                   259
  CITY OF O AKL AND
  HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
                                                                                 Table 6-2
              Permitted and Conditional Residential Facilities and Activities in Commercial Zones
                                  CC-1     CC-2       CC-3       CN-1        CN-2       CN-3 CN-4 CR-1 CBD-R CBD-P CBD-C CBD-X C-40 C-45
Residential Facility Types
One-Family Dwelling                 -         -          -         -           -         -    -    -     -     -     -     -    P
One-Family Dwelling with
                                    -         -          -         -           -         -    -    -     P     -     -     -    P
Secondary Unit
Two-Family Dwelling                 P        P           -         P          P          P    P    -     P     -     -     -    P
Multi-Family Dwelling               P        P           -         P          P          P    P    -     P     P     P     P    P
Rooming House                       P        P           -         P          P          P    P    -     P     P     P     P    P
Mobile Home                         -         -          -         -           -         -    -    -     -     -     -     -     -
Residential Activities
Permanent                           P        P          C          P          P          P    P    -     P     P     P     P    P     P
Residential Care                    P        P          C          P          P          P    P    -     P     P     P     P    P     P
Service—Enriched Permanent
                                    C        C          C          C          C          C    C    -     C     C     C     C    C     C
Housing
Transitional Housing                C        C          C          C          C          C    C    C     C     C     C     C    C     C
Emergency Shelters                  C        C          C          C          C          C    C    C     C     C     C     C    C     C
Semi-Transient                      -         -          -         -           -         -    -    C     C     C     C     C    P     P
Note: See Oakland Planning Code for complete standards including applicable limitations
  ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING                                                                                                260

                                                                                                                                                                                        CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                                       Table 6-3
                                      Permitted Facility Types and Development Standards in Residential Zones
                                                                                                                                                          Max      Max                    Required Setbacks
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1, 2,*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Min.
                                   Permitted          Conditionally   Min.                              Conditionally                                    Wall    Pitched                                             Open
       Description in                Facility           Permitted      Lot        Permitted                Permitted                       Lot           Heigh    Roof        Min                 Interior           Space/
Zone            Code                  Types          Facility Types    Size         Density                  Density                 Coverage              t*    Height*  Parking          Front    Side     Rear     Unit
                                                                                                                                       For 1-2 units:
                                                                                                                                     <12,000 sf = 40%
                                                                                                                                         >12,000 -
                                                                                                                                      < 25,000 = 30%      25 ft.   30 ft.        2
                                  single-family;                                                                                         > 25,000 -
     Single-family homes on one   single-family with                                                                                  < 43,560 = 20%
RH-1 acre or more                 secondary unit     N/A            43,560 sf                                                         > 43,560 = 15%                                        25 ft  6 ft/15%   35 ft
                                                                                 1 primary unit per
                                  single-family;                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                lot plus a secondary              N/A                                                                                                  N/A
     Single-family homes on lots  single-family with                                                                                   See RH-1 rule      25 ft.   30 ft.
                                                                                          unit
RH-2 of at least 25,000 sq. ft.   secondary unit     N/A            25,000 sf                                                                                                               25 ft  6 ft/15%   35 ft
                                  single-family;                                                                                                                                 2
     Single-family homes on lots  single-family with                                                                                   See RH-1 rule      25 ft.   30 ft.
RH-3 of at least 12,000 sq. ft.   secondary unit     N/A            12,000 sf                                                                                                               20 ft  6 ft/10%   25 ft
                                  single-family;                                                                                                                                 2
     Single-family homes on lots  single-family with                6,500 sf or                                                        See RH-1 rule      25 ft.   30 ft.
RH-4 of 6,500 - 8,000 sq. ft.     secondary unit     N/A            8,000 sf                                                                                                                20 ft  5 ft/10%   20 ft
                                  single-family;
     Detached, single-family      single-family with                                                              N/A                  See RH-1 rule      25 ft.   30 ft.        1                                     N/A
RD-1                                                                             1 primary unit per
     homes                        secondary unit     N/A            5,000 sf                                                                                                                20 ft  5 ft/10%   20 ft
                                                                                lot plus a secondary
     Detached, single-family      single-family;                                          unit         2 units on lots 6,000 sf or
     with allowances for two-     single-family with                                                                                   See RH-1 rule      25 ft.   30 ft.       1.5                                   100 sf
                                                                                                                   greater
RD-2 family structures            secondary unit     duplex         5,000 sf                                                                                                                20 ft     5 ft    15 ft
                                  single-family;                                 1 primary unit per
                                                                                                       2 units on lots 4,000 sf or
     Mix of single-family homes   single-family with                            lot plus a secondary                                   See RH-1 rule      25 ft.   30 ft.       1.5                                   100 sf
                                                                                                                   greater
RM-1 and duplexes                 secondary unit     duplex         5,000 sf              unit                                                                                              20 ft     5 ft    15 ft
                                                                                 1 primary unit plus
                                  single-family;                                a secondary unit on    lots > 4,000 sf, 3 or more     See RH-1 rule;                      1.5 (1 for lots
     Mix of single-family,        single-family with                               lots <4,000 sf; 2                units,         for 3 or more units =  25 ft.   30 ft.  <4,000 sf or                               100 sf
     duplexes, townhouses &       secondary unit;                                   units on lots >          1 unit per 2,500 sf            40%                           45 ft in width)
RM-2 small multi-unit buildings   duplex             multi-family   5,000 sf            4,000 sf                                                                                            20 ft     5 ft    15 ft
                                                                                 1 primary unit plus
     Mix of single-family homes,  single-family;                                a secondary unit on    lots > 4,000 sf, 3 or more     See RH-1 rule;
     duplexes, townhouses,        single-family with                               lots <4,000 sf; 2                units,         for 3 or more units =                                                              85 sf
     higher density small multi-  secondary unit;                                   units on lots >          1 unit per 1,500 sf            50%
RM-3 unit buildings               duplex             multi-family   4,000 sf            4,000 sf                                                          30 ft     30 ft         1         15 ft     4 ft    15 ft
                                                                                 1 primary unit plus
                                                                                a secondary unit on
                                                                                                       lots > 4,000 sf, 5 or more
     Mix of single-family homes,  single-family;                                 lots <4,000 sf; for
                                                                                                                    units,             See RH-1 rule                                                                  70 sf
     townhouses, small multi-     single-family with                            1 -4 units, 1 unit per
                                                                                                             1 unit per 1,100 sf
     unit buildings, located near secondary unit;                                 1,100 sf on lots >
RM-4 major arterials              duplex             multi-family   4,000 sf            4,000 sf                                                          35 ft     35 ft         1         15 ft     4 ft    15 ft
                                  single-family;                                                                                                                                  1
                                  single-family with
                                  secondary unit;                                1 unit per 1,100 sf              N/A                       N/A                                                                       50 sf
     Multi-unit, low-rise         duplex; multi-
RU-1 buildings                    family             N/A            4,000 sf                                                                              40 ft     40 ft                   15 ft     4 ft    15 ft
                                  single-family;                                                                                                                                  1
                                  single-family with
                                                                                  1 unit or rooming
                                  secondary unit;                                                                 N/A                       N/A                                                                       30 sf
                                                                                    unit per 800 sf
     Multi-unit, low-rise or mid- duplex; multi-
RU-2    rise buildings            family             rooming house  4,000 sf                                                                              50 ft     50 ft                   10 ft     4 ft    15 ft
            ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING                                                                                                                                                              261
                        CITY OF O AKL AND
                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
                                                   single-family;                                                                                                                                           1
                                                   single-family with
                                                                                                                             1 unit or rooming
                 Multi-unit, low-rise or mid-      secondary unit;                                                                                         N/A          N/A                                                           30 sf
                                                                                                                               unit per 450 sf
                 rise buildings at higher          duplex; multi-
   RU-3          densities than RU-2               family                    rooming house                4,000 sf                                                            60 ft               60 ft       10 ft 0 ft   15 ft
                                                   single-family;            N/A                                                                                                                                                 Depends on
                                                                                                                            Depends on height
                                                   single-family with                                                                                                                                                             height (ht)
                                                                                                                                  (ht) area:
                                                   secondary unit;                                                                                                                                                                    area:
                                                                                                                             35 ft. ht area: 550           N/A          N/A
                 Multi-unit, mid-rise, and         duplex; multi-                                                                                                                                           1                       35 ft. ht
                                                                                                                                      sf                                    Depends on height (ht) area:
                 high-rise buildings on major      family; rooming                                                                                                                                                        0/10/1 area: 150 sf
                                                                                                                             45 ft. ht area: 450                             35 ft. ht area: min ht. 0 ft.
   RU-4          corridors                         house                                                  4,000 sf
                                                                                                                                      sf                                     45 ft. ht area: min ht. 0 ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               5 ft 0 ft    5 ft    45 ft. ht
                                                                             N/A                                                                                                                                                 area: 150 sf
                                                                                                                             60 ft. ht area: 375                             60 ft. ht area: min ht. 35 ft
                                                   single-family;                                                                                                                                                                   60 ft. ht
                                                                                                                                      sf                                     75 ft. ht area: min ht. 35 ft.
                                                   single-family with                                                                                                                                                            area: 150 sf
                                                                                                                             75 ft. ht area: 275                             90 ft. ht area: min ht. 35 ft.
                 Multi-unit, mid-rise, and         secondary unit;                                                                                         N/A          N/A                                                         75 ft. ht
                                                                                                                                      sf                                                    .               1
                 high rise buildings and           duplex; multi-                                                                                                                                                                area: 150 sf
                                                                                                                             90 ft. ht area: 225
                 ground floor businesses on        family; rooming                                                                                                                                                        0/10/1    90 ft. ht
                                                                                                                                      sf
   RU-5          major corridors                   house                                                  4,000 sf                                                                                             0 ft 0 ft    5 ft area: 100 sf
                                                                                        N/A                                                                                                                                         Without
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 private open
                                                                                                                                one unit per
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     space:
                                                                                                                             300 sf of lot area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  150 sf/reg
                                                                                                                            one efficiency unit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      unit
                                                                                                                                     per         50% bonus for projects
                                                       one-family;                                                                                                                                                               100/efficien
                                                                                                                              200 sq. ft. of lot    more than 4 stories
                   High-rise apartment living      single-family with                                                                                                                                                                  cy
                                                                                                                                     area           tall; or 50% bonus      none, but
                 areas near major shopping &         secondary unit;                                                                                                                                        1                    75/rooming
   R-80             community centers and              two-family;
                                                                                                             4000 sf         One rooming unit         with transfer of  N/A max. FAR              N/A         10 ft 0 ft   10 ft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  With max.
                                                                                                                                     per            development rights        3.50
                      rapid transit stations          multi-family;                                                                                                                                                              substitution
                                                                                                                                    150 sf           from nearby lots
                                                     rooming house                                                                                                                                                                 of private
                                                                                                                            10% bonus if on a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 open space:
                                                                                                                             corner lot or next
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  All public
                                                                                                                             to a park (20% if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  space may
                                                                                                                                    both)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  substituted
1
  Additional reduced side, and rear setbacks for smaller lots apply; 2 additional setback required when facing required living room window;
*additional caveats exist; see Oakland Planning Code for current exact standards
                        ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING                                                                                                                                                               262
                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Alternative Housing and Emergency Shelter
Oakland’s General Plan policies and Planning Code provide great latitude to developers of alternative
housing types (such as rooming houses, group homes and residential care facilities, single-room
occupancy units, transitional housing, and emergency shelters) for populations with special housing
needs.
Single-room occupancy (SRO) housing and rooming houses are permitted or conditionally permitted
in the high-density residential zones and in the Neighborhood Center and Community Commercial
commercial zones and in the Central Business District. Residential care facilities for six or fewer
persons are permitted in all residential zones and in residential units in commercial zones.
Residential care facilities for seven or more persons and transitional housing are conditionally
permitted in small-lot single-family, multifamily, and commercial zones. The City also allows
transitional housing and service-enriched permanent housing with supportive services as conditional
uses in these same zones. Emergency shelter for homeless individuals and families is permitted in
eight areas throughout the City by-right, subject to objective development and location standards,
which are codified in the Oakland Planning Code Section 17.103. Additionally, emergency shelters
are conditionally permitted in high-density residential zones and several commercial zones. See
Table 6-4 and Appendix F for further details about these locations.
                                               Table 6-4
                            Locations for Emergency Shelter
  Area     Name                            Acres     Zoning                         Primary Land Use
  1        MLK Jr Way North                    20    RM-2, RU-3, CN-3, S-1          High density
                                                                                    residential &
                                                                                    commercial
  2        San Pablo (53rd to 67th St.)        42     CC-2, CN-3                    High density
                                                                                    residential &
                                                                                    commercial
  3        Pill Hill                           36    S-1, CC-2, D-BV-4              Commercial
  4        San Pablo (Grand Ave to      I-     34    RU-5, CC-2                     High density
           580)                                                                     residential &
                                                                                    commercial
  5        3rd St Corridor                     80    CIX-1A, CIX-1B, CIX-1C, IG, M- Industrial
                                                     30, C-40
  6        12th St Corridor                    37     CIX-2, CIX-2/ S-19, HBX-2     Industrial
  7        MacArthur (Fruitvale to High        68    RM-3, RM-4, RU-4, RU-5, CN-    High density
           St.)                                      1, CN-2                        residential &
                                                                                    commercial
  8        Coliseum Way Area                  227    CIX-2, IG                      Industrial
The eight areas where emergency shelters are permitted by-right, as well as the conditional use permit
process (in O.M.C. 17.134 and 17.103.010) is intended to provide a relatively expeditious processing
of conditional use requests, from several weeks to six months, depending on the type of conditional
use and the zone in which it is located. Conditions are applied to ensure consistency of the use and
compliance with development standards for the applicable zone. However, where there is significant
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                 263

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
neighborhood opposition, the conditional use permit process can be used to stop a proposed
development.
Conditionally permitting alternative housing in all high density residential zones and most
commercial zones further increases housing opportunities and the feasibility of accommodating
affordable housing in Oakland. Historically, the conditional use permit process and conditions
imposed have not created significant constraints to locating residential uses for special need groups in
residential or commercial zones; rather it is the absence of a dependable source of funds for the social
services agencies who provide the services in these housing developments which constrains the
housing from being built.
Incentives for Shelter Facilities for the Homeless
As noted above, emergency shelters are permitted by-right in eight segments throughout the City and
conditionally permitted in both high-density residential areas and in commercial zones (See Appendix
F). Development of shelter facilities is further facilitated by a relaxation of parking standards well
below those required for ordinary residential facilities, in recognition of the fact that most homeless
persons do not have vehicles and thus a requirement for parking would be an unnecessary constraint.
The City requires one parking space for each three employees on site during the shift that has
maximum staffing, plus one space for each facility vehicle.
Construction Codes and Enforcement
The Building Services Bureau of the Planning and Building Department administers building,
construction and housing maintenance codes. The Oakland Fire Department’s Fire Prevention
Division administers the Oakland Fire Code. These enforcement activities are part of the city’s role
in protecting the public’s health, safety, and welfare. The City’s enforcement of construction codes
provides sufficient flexibility to address special considerations that arise in the rehabilitation of older
structures, the conversion of structures for residential use, and the modification of structures to meet
the needs of persons with disabilities. The City’s code enforcement practices have, historically,
allowed a range of supportive housing services in residential structures and developments. Through
its interpretation and enforcement of building and housing codes, the City ensures that reasonable
accommodations for persons with disabilities can be designed or retrofitted into new and existing
buildings and that converted buildings can also be specially designed to serve special needs
populations with disabilities.
The City has a number of amendments (itemized in Chapter 15.04 of the Oakland Municipal Code),
both administrative and non-administrative (technical), to the California Building Code, California
Electrical Code, California Mechanical Code, and California Plumbing Code. As of April, 2014, no
analysis of these amendments for impacts on the cost and supply of housing had been performed,
however, the City regularly surveys its costs of construction and building fees, to keep them aligned
with the costs of delivering building services to the residents of the City.
Building and Fire Codes
The principal regulations governing building construction and maintenance in Oakland are the
Oakland Building, and Housing Codes, which are based on the 2013 California Model Codes. These
Codes are administered by the Building Services Bureau of the Planning and Building Department,
264                                                              ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
which is comprised of all operations related to permit processing, building plan review, construction
inspection, and code enforcement.
The Oakland Fire Code is administered by the Oakland Fire Department’s Fire Prevention Division,
headed by the Fire Marshal, and is intended to ensure that all buildings meet minimum fire safety
requirements.
Previous regulations in the Oakland Dangerous Buildings Code were rewritten and included in the
Oakland Building Maintenance Code, formerly the “Housing Code”, which is generally more
comprehensive than the Oakland Dangerous Building Code. The Buildings Maintenance Code is
used for the abatement of unsafe conditions in residential and non-residential structures. Buildings
that are insanitary, unsafe and/or hazardous may be ordered vacated, and either rehabilitated or
demolished by the Building Official. Actions under the Building Maintenance Code are limited to
vacation and demolition of buildings determined to be hazardous. Code violations that are not
hazardous are also abated under the Oakland Building Maintenance Code. The City applies these
codes to address non-habitable conditions in residential structures. The City does not apply these
codes in a manner that complicates the efforts of property owners to renovate, remodel, or rehabilitate
their dwelling units (see below).
Building Maintenance Code and the Oakland Blight Ordinance
The Code Enforcement Section of the Building Services Bureau of the Planning and Building
Department is responsible for the enforcement of OMC Chapters 15.04, Building Construction Code,
15.08, Building Maintenance Code, and OMC 8.24, the Blight Ordinance. The Building Maintenance
Code regulates the habitability of residential and maintenance of non-residential occupancies. The
purpose of the Blight Ordinance is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
by requiring a level of exterior property maintenance to protect the public from the health and safety
hazards and the impairment of property values which results from the neglect and deterioration of
property.
The activity/use of a property is regulated by the Zoning Regulations. There may be the use of an
undocumented unit, the creation of additional space, or the alteration of existing space. Violations of
this nature are investigated by Code Enforcement. Work without benefit of approvals, permits, and
inspections is in violation of the Building and Fire Codes.
The Code Enforcement Section responds to complaints from a number of sources. The sources may
be a tenant, a referral from another City agency, a neighbor, a sighting by an inspector or staff
member, as well as anonymous sources. An inspection of the property is conducted to verify the
existence of violations.
When a violation is confirmed, a Notice to Abate is sent to the property owner. This notice will cite
the Ordinance that has been violated and prescribe corrective actions to be taken. Failure to comply
with the order will result in the assessment of fees and liens and may also require a third party
contract to effect the abatement. Corrective action may be to clean and secure the property or, in the
event of a hazardous property that has been declared as a Public Nuisance, corrective action may
entail demolition. The rehabilitation of the property is the priority in most cases.
Hazardous conditions must be abated immediately. Non-hazardous conditions may be abated under a
scheduled compliance process. Rehabilitation of properties and the elimination of blighting
conditions will improve the equity of a property and improve property values of the surrounding
neighborhood. Prospective purchasers/developers are encouraged to enter into a contractual
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                  265

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
agreement with the City to provide adequate time to abate all violations, without the need for the
assessment of fees.
Oakland Amendments to California Codes
Chapter 15.04 of the Oakland Municipal Code provides for local amendments to the California
Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing codes. Significant amendments to these codes include
the following:
    1. Amendments to the C.B.C. which change administrative procedures, such as:
            15.04.130 O.M.C.: In Section 105.7 of Appendix Chapter 1 of the California Building
            Code, replace the sentence in its entirety with the following: "In addition to the building
            permit and the Inspection Record Card, it shall be the duty of the person requesting any
            inspections to have available, at the time of inspection, the following information (as
            applicable):
            1. The approved plans and specifications, including copies of approvals of any changes.
            2. Copies of all previous Correction Notices.
            3. Land use approvals (variances, Conditional Use Permits, Design Review, etc.).
            4. Other permits as may be required by the scope of work (excavation, encroachment,
            sidewalk, sewer, grading, etc.).
            5. Any other documents as may be necessary for the performance of the inspection
            (Special Inspection Reports, equipment and appliance installation instructions, payment
            of accrued fees, etc.)."
    2. Amendments to the C.B.C. which codify rules specific to Oakland building types, such as:
            15.04.697 O.M.C.: “Add the following new Chapter 3B for Joint Living and Work
            Quarters:
            USE AND OCCUPANCY Requirements for Joint Living and Work Quarters: The
            purpose of this division is to provide alternative building standards and minimum
            standards of safety for commercially/industrially-oriented and residentially-oriented Joint
            Living and Work Quarters (JLWQ) purposes pursuant to California State Health and
            Safety Code Section 17958.11…
            Section 3B.1.3 Applicability of City Planning and other Criteria for Joint Living and
            Work Quarters. As provided in California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.11 and
            the Oakland Planning Code, the residential occupancy of joint living and work quarters is
            an accessory use to its primary use as a place of work. Accordingly, the provisions of this
            division shall apply only to buildings or portions of buildings that meet the following
            criteria:
            1. The minimum floor area of an individual JLWQ shall be 660 square feet.
            2. A minimum of 67% of the floor area of an individual JLWQ shall be designated as
            work area and the remainder shall be designated as residential area pursuant to paragraph
            3 below. Up to 25% of the designated work area may be used for dual purposes such as
            telephoning, drawing, accounting, reading, planning, development of work projects, and
            sanitary facilities.
266                                                             ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
             3. The areas of an individual JLWQ used for living, sleeping, eating, and cooking
             (habitable space) shall be designated as residential area. The residential area shall be
             secondary to the work area and shall not exceed 33% of the floor area of the individual
             JLWQ.
             4. In an individual JLWQ, a designated residential area of up to 300 square feet may
             provide residence for no more than two persons. An additional resident can be
             accommodated for each additional 150 square feet of designated residential area. No
             individual JLWQ shall accommodate more than 10 persons regardless of the size of the
             designated residential area.
    3. Amendments to the California Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, and Plumbing Code, which
    are specific to the particular trade, such as:
             15.04.905 O.M.C. “In Section 505.5 of the California Plumbing Code, add the following
             sentence at the end of the paragraph:
             "When approved by the Building Official to discharge into a sanitary sewer system, water
             temperature shall not exceed 160° F.”
             A full list of amendments to the codes is available in section 15.04 of the Oakland
             Municipal Code at the website found
             at www.municode.com/resources/ClientCode_List.asp?cn=Oakland&sid=5&cid=3637
On and Off-Site Improvement Requirements
On and off-site improvements include streets, sidewalks, sanitary and storm water sewers, rainwater
pollutant mitigations (“C3”), potable water and fire hydrant mains, and street lighting. The City’s on
and off-site improvements are fairly standard compared to other cities in the Bay Area and do not
constitute a significant development constraint. Most of the housing opportunity sites designated by
the City are infill and redevelopment sites that already have infrastructure and services in place and
are located along fully developed streets. Higher density developments may require larger sized
water, sewer, and utility lines to provide adequate services. Development in some older parts of the
City may require the replacement of aged utility lines and other infrastructure. These costs are
unavoidable; however, the City attempts to mitigate the impact on affordable housing through the use
of regulatory incentives, funding assistance, and other strategies.
When new development is proposed a Subdivision map is reviewed by the City Engineer, who
determines the extent of public improvements required. Such improvements may include, but are not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, curbs, gutters, and street lighting. These
on and off-site improvements required by the City are standard when compared with other cities in
the Bay Area and do not pose a development constraint.
The City requires street, sidewalk, water and sewer connections and improvements. Fees can vary
within the City based on the location and type (single or multifamily) of the development. These fees
are shown in Table 6-5.
Permit and Development Fees
The City of Oakland and other public agencies charge a number of planning, building, and
engineering fees to cover the cost of processing development requests, and providing public facilities
and services to new development. Payment of these fees can have an impact on the cost of housing,
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                    267

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
particularly affordable housing. Fees are limited by state law, which requires that “a public agency
may not charge applicants a fee that exceeds the amount reasonably necessary” to provide basic permit
processing services (California GC Sec. 65943 (e)).
Although fees in Oakland are comparable to other jurisdictions, they can still represent a significant
cost to affordable housing development. Because revenue is necessary for operation of planning and
building functions, the City does not waive fees, even for affordable housing developers; however,
the City provides financial assistance to affordable housing by paying fees from one or more housing
fund sources (such as CDBG funds, HOME program funds, or possibly Low/Mod Housing Asset or
Trust funds). Permit and other development fees are eligible costs that can be funded through these
sources.
Unlike most surrounding jurisdictions, Oakland does not currently charge impact fees for residential
development. Fees for water and sewer services are charged by the East Bay Municipal Utility
District, while school impacts fees are charged by the Oakland Unified School District. Although the
City has no direct responsibility for the fees or services provided, Oakland does work with these
agencies through its development review processes to ensure that fees are reasonable, are related to
the impacts created by new development, and that new development can be served by these agencies.
Planning permit fees, excluding building permits, typically range from $12,000 for planning permits
for a new single-family home to $42,000 for planning permits for a new 40 unit condominium
development). Development impact fees charged by East Bay Municipal Utility District and the
Oakland Unified School District also have an impact on the cost of housing (approximately $24,000
per dwelling unit). Building permit fees range from approximately $32,000 for a 40 unit
condominium development to $38,000 for a single-family dwelling. When compared to the market
cost of producing housing in Oakland (land and site preparation, construction, financing, etc.), permit
and impact fees, while a cost factor, are not as significant as other cost factors in the production of
affordable housing (such as the market cost of land and State requirements to pay prevailing wages on
construction labor for housing development assisted with public funds).
Total Fees
Two developments from Table 6-5 illustrate the total cost of City fees for planning, building and
infrastructure:
          • a 1,500-square-foot, low-rise town home, with a 400-square-foot garage, a per square
             foot cost of $300 and with an assumed market price of $540,000: all development fees for
             this property would be approximately $50,000; representing 9% of the market price.
          •   a 1,125-square-foot condominium unit in a mid-rise, 40-unit development with a per
             square foot cost of $390, and with an assumed market price of $525,000 per unit: the total
             development fees for this project would be approximately $74,000; this unit’s share of
             the entire project’s development fees would be approximately $1,850 per unit ($74K/40
             units) representing 0.3% of the market price.
Table 6-5 below summarizes the major local permit costs that a developer would have to bear in
undertaking a new residential development in the City of Oakland (This is not a complete list of all
fees).
268                                                           ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table 6-5
                               Permit and Development Impact Fees
                                                                                Fee Amount
              Fee Type                                    Single Family                          Multiple Family
Scenario                                  1,500 sq. ft. town home with a 400 sq. ft.  1,125 sq. ft. condominium in a 40-unit
                                          garage; market value of $540,000            subdivision; market
                                                                                      value of $525,000
Planning Application Processing Fees
Subdivisions
Tentative Parcel Map (1–4 lots)           $6,313 (No Environmental
                                          Review)
Tentative Tract Map (5 or more lots)                                                  $13,679
Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
Preliminary PUD                           N/A                                         $10,532 (ER exempt non-
                                                                                      infill)
Final PUD                                 N/A                                         $9,065 (ER exempt, non-infill)
Conditional Use Permits1
 (Minor)                                  $5,261 (ER exempt, non-infill)              N/A
 (Major)                                  N/A                                         $9,018 (ER exempt, non-infill)
                             1
Environmental Initial Study               $1,703*                                     $11,860**
*or 25% of consultant fee (case specific); fee not included in total fee calculation
**or 28% of consultant fee (case specific); fee not included in total fee calculation
Building Plan Check, Permit &
Inspection Fees
Inspection Fee2                                                          $3,705                               $3,619
Processing and Plan Check                                                $3,333                               $3,256
(90 percent of inspection fee)
Permit Application Fee                                                      $71                                  $71
Records Management                                                       $1,657                               $1,502
(9.5% of subtotal of all fees)
Site Plan Review                                                           $917                                $917
State Energy/Access Regulations                                          $1,222                               $1,194
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                                   269

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
                                                                  Table 6-5
                                    Permit and Development Impact Fees
                                                                                        Fee Amount
                 Fee Type                                        Single Family                                 Multiple Family
(33% of inspection fee)
State Strong Motion Instrumentation                                                 $54                                           $53
Program (.01% of valuation)
Bedroom Fee ($100 per bedroom)                                                     $400                                         $200
Infrastructure, Impact & District
Fees
Oakland USD – School Impact Fee                                                  $3,492                                        $4,854
EBMUD – Water Meter Connection                                                   $3,906                                        $4,202
EBMUD – Acct Establishment Fee                                                $38/meter                                     $38/meter
EBMUD – System Capacity Charge                                             $15,580/unit                                   $9,070/unit
EBMUD – Wastewater Capacity Fee                                             $1,385/unit                                   $1,385/unit
City – Sewer Lateral Permit Fee                                                 $978.52                                       $978.52
(assumes no grading)
City – Sewer Connection Fee                                                        $782                                         $782
Total                                                                           $49,094                                       $74,415
Source: City of Oakland
1
  Assumes Environmental Review--Initial Study required; Initial Study fee is additional.
2
  Inspection fees are based on a sliding scale of construction valuation. See 2013 Master Fee Schedule, Page N-9 for details.
PERMIT PROCEDURES
Permit Requirements
Some types of development proposals require discretionary actions by several adjudicatory bodies,
including the Parks Commission and Landmarks Preservation Advisory Board, but primarily the
Planning Commission. Such actions include issuance of variances, conditional use permits, lot
reduction permits, special development permits, exceptions, and mobile home certificates of
compliance (which are “legal lot” determinations made by the City Engineer). The City of Oakland
administers the permit process through the Planning Building Department. The most common
discretionary actions are described below, but are not necessarily considered to be constraints to the
production of new housing.
Conditional Use Permits
The Planning Code allows two types of uses in each zoning district: permitted uses; and conditional
uses. The Conditional Use Permit (CUP) process allows the City the flexibility to determine if a
specified use (called an “activity” in the Planning Code) proposed at a certain location is compatible
with its surrounding neighborhood and if special conditions of approval are needed. Conditional use
permits ensure the proper integration of uses, which, because of their special nature, and/or potential
for becoming nuisances, may be suitable only in certain locations or zoning districts and then only
when such uses can be controlled or designed in a particular manner. Details regarding permitted and
270                                                                                  ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
conditional residential uses for each zone are provided in Table 6-2, and development standards
within these zones are indicated in Table 6-3. Potential concerns addressed by the use permit include
factors such as noise, dust, dirt, litter, fumes, odors, vibrations, and traffic congestion. Conditional
uses are those that need special review to determine their compatibility with the surrounding area, and
to establish special conditions to maintain harmony with the neighborhood.
The Planning Code has further regulations, in addition to general conditional use permit requirements,
for residential care facilities, service-enriched permanent housing, and transitional housing, and
emergency shelters. These activities must comply with the following conditions:
         1. Staffing of the facility must comply with state licensing requirements.
         2. For properties in residential zones:
             •   the operation of buses or vans to transport residents must not generate vehicular
                 traffic substantially greater than that normally generated by residential activities in
                 the surrounding area.
             •   on-street parking demand due to visitors must not be substantially greater than that
                 normally generated by the surrounding residential activities, and
             •   the delivery of goods must occur within hours that are compatible with and will not
                 adversely affect the livability of the surrounding properties.
         3. The facility’s program does not generate noise at levels that will adversely affect the
             livability of the surrounding properties.
         4. No such facility shall be located closer than 300 feet from any other such activity or
             facility.
Additionally, in July, 2014, the City adopted development standards applicable
to Emergency shelters permitted by-right, as follows: Where permitted by-right,
Emergency shelters shall comply with the development standards of the underlying zone and be in
accordance with the following additional criteria:
             1. Compliance with required licenses, permits, and approvals. An emergency
                 shelter shall obtain and maintain in good standing required licenses, permits, and
                 approvals from city, county and state agencies or departments and demonstrate
                 compliance with applicable building and fire codes. An emergency shelter residential
                 facility shall comply with all county and state health and safety requirements for
                 food, medical and other supportive services provided on-site.
             2. Number of beds. A maximum of number of 100 beds or persons are permitted to be
                 served nightly by the facility.
             3. Off Street Parking. See Sections 17.116.060(B) and 17.103.010(A) for parking-
                 related requirements for emergency shelters.
             4. Size and location of exterior onsite waiting and client intake areas. Exterior
                 waiting areas must comply with the Small Project Design Review Checklist Criteria
                 for Facilities with 3 or More Dwelling Units.
             5. Restriction on overconcentration of Emergency Shelter Residential Activities.
                 See Section 17.103.010(B) for overconcentration standards for Emergency Shelter
                 Residential Activities.
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                      271

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
             6. Length of stay. No individual or family shall reside in an emergency shelter for
                 more than 180 consecutive days.
             7. External Lighting and Security. Satisfactory completion of the City of Oakland’s
                 “Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) Checklist for
                 Residential Projects” is required for all emergency shelters permitted by-right.
             8. Additional Requirements. For City of Oakland funded shelters refer to the current
                 “Standard Contract – Service Agreement” that governs the disposition of funds from
                 the City of Oakland, through the Department of Human Services, to a shelter
                 operator.
Planned Unit Development (PUD)
The planned unit development (PUD) procedure encourages design flexibility and offers varying
special bonuses for worthwhile projects. This process is used to review a large integrated
development that is appropriately designed for a single tract of land or contiguous parcels when there
is one common owner. Rezoning is the first stage in the process. The Planned Unit Development
process applies to all rezone proposals, changes to the text of the Subdivision Ordinance, revisions to
development control maps, or proposals affecting designated landmark or landmark site.
Variances
A variance is permission, by the Planning Commission, to waive or reduce a zoning district’s specific
development standards or prohibitions of uses. Variances provide the flexibility to resolve difficulties
or hardships when the strict application of regulations may be inappropriate due to special or
extraordinary physical or topographic circumstances that occur on the property. The variance allows
the property to be used in a manner consistent with the regulation and zoning district with minor
variations so as to not adversely affect neighbors, adjacent properties, nor be contrary to adopted
plans or development policy.
Variances from the development standards can be granted due to special circumstances peculiar to the
subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, design constraints, or surroundings; or
because of the location of Heritage or Landmark Trees, the strict application of the requirements of
the Planning Code would deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the
vicinity and under identical zone classifications.
General Plan Amendment
A change to the text and/or designation of an area or parcel on the General Plan map requires a
General Plan Amendment. The proposed legislative amendment must meet criteria specified in the
General Plan for the City Council to approve a General Plan Amendment.
Zoning Amendment
A proposed change in zoning classification requires an amendment to the City’s Development
Control Maps (zoning maps). The process begins with an application to the Planning Department for
a zone change. A public hearing before the Planning Commission is required to approve a zone
272                                                             ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
change. That hearing is conducted within 60 days after a completed application is submitted to the
City. A change that could affect the status of a designated landmark also requires review by the
Landmarks Preservation Board. A proposed rezone from open space to another use requires review
by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission. If the Planning Commission denies the rezone
request, the applicant may appeal the decision to the City Council, which must take action on the
appeal within 30 days. If the Planning Commission approves the rezone request, the recommendation
is forwarded to the City Council for a final decision.
Tentative Parcel and Tract Map
A tentative parcel map is a proposal to subdivide one piece of land into a maximum of four parcels or
condominium units. A tentative tract map is a proposal to subdivide land into five or more parcels or
condominium units. Each of these must comply with the Oakland Planning Code, the Subdivision
Map Act and Zoning Regulations.
Design Review
On December 19, 2006, the Oakland City Council adopted Design Review-related amendments to the
Oakland Planning Code (Title 17) which made the citywide permit review procedures more effective,
streamlined, and consistent throughout the City. City staff considers the design review procedures as
removing constraints to housing production.
The new design review framework reduces the number of different review procedures and uniformly
applies those procedures citywide. Construction of new dwelling units, other than a secondary unit,
now requires Regular Design Review citywide. Secondary Units of up to 500 square feet that meet all
applicable zoning standards for parking, minimum pavement width, prohibition along dead-end
streets, and architectural compatibility are exempt from design review; whereas Secondary Units
between 500 and 900 square feet that meet the same applicable zoning standards require Small
Project Design Review. Design review is intended to address the compatibility of new construction
and additions with surrounding development and preserve the architectural quality of Oakland’s
housing stock. Staff considers site characteristics, topography, neighborhood, scale, bulk,
architectural context, height, material, texture, and overall character. There is now one unified
residential design review program: Regular Design Review, Small Project Design Review, and
Design Review Exemption. Applications for design review are processed concurrently with other
planning permits.
The majority of residential addition projects are reviewed under a revised version of Oakland’s Small
Project Design Review program, which originally applied only to nonresidential projects - such as
changes to storefronts, signs, and awnings. Small Project Design Review (SPDR) applies to all
additions citywide of more than 10 percent, but not more than 1000 square feet or 100 percent of the
total floor area or footprint on site, whichever is less.
Small Project Design Review has been designed to have a quicker turnaround time than other types of
zoning permits, including Regular Design Review. A final decision on an application is usually made
at the zoning counter, unless the proposal involves an upper-story addition of more than 250 square
feet. For Small Project Design Review proposals involving an upper-story addition of more than 250
square feet, applicants are required to provide public notice of the project by displaying a large notice
poster at the project site and by mailing notice along with a copy of the plans to all adjacent neighbors
and properties directly across the street. There is no appeal of the Small Project Design Review
decision.
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                   273

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
Regular Design Review is a full review process that involves notification to all owners of property
within 300 feet of the proposed project. By state law, the City has 30 days to render a determination
of completeness on an application. Unlike the Small Project Design Review program, which includes
no appeal process, the decision on a Regular Design Review application can be appealed to the City
Planning Commission or its Residential Appeals Committee. Projects are reviewed against a set of
adopted residential design criteria as well as special design review findings of the individual zoning
districts.
Projects that involve designated historic properties are reviewed by the Landmarks Preservation
Advisory Board. Design review of these properties is conducted concurrently with one of the design
review procedures described above.
Historic Preservation
Oakland has a program for officially designating select Landmarks and Preservation Districts.
Oakland also has a wealth of historic buildings and neighborhoods that the City considers cultural and
environmental assets with or without formal designation. The Historic Preservation Element of the
General Plan sets forth a graduated system of ratings, designation programs, regulations, and
incentives proportioned to each property’s importance. The Preservation Element establishes design
review findings for work affecting historic buildings (Policy 2.4 for designated landmarks and
districts, Policy 3.5 for other historic properties). Policies 3.2 and 3.6 of the Preservation Element set
forth preservation responsibilities for City-owned properties and City-assisted projects.
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires review of impacts on major historic
resources. Demolition of a CEQA-level historic resource requires the preparation of an
environmental impact review document. The City’s requirements are consistent with State law.
Many housing development projects use Federal funds and require Section 106/NHPA review to
avoid adverse effects on historic resources.
The Landmarks Preservation Advisory Board or its staff reviews changes to any designated properties
(about 160 individual landmarks and 1500 buildings in districts out of 100,000 properties Citywide).
The Board also advises on projects involving other historic properties. Design review for any
modifications to these structures is conducted concurrently with the regular project review but may
need to take into account the Board’s monthly meeting schedule. A project that respects the historic
character of the resource, e.g. by following the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
Rehabilitation, will have a faster and smoother review process. Design review fees are waived for
Designated Historic Properties.
The Historic Preservation Element of the Oakland General Plan notes “Cost effective preservation of
affordable housing” among the benefits of preservation (Goals and Objectives, p. 2-7). Adaptive
reuse of historic commercial, industrial, and institutional buildings as market-rate and affordable
housing continues to be a major development opportunity in Oakland.
The State Historical Building Code, administered by the City building official, can facilitate cost-
effective rehabilitation and reuse of qualified historical buildings.
The City’s Mills Act program (adopted in 2007) can reduce property taxes for selected historic
properties in exchange for a long-term contract to repair and maintain the property. Annually, there
are at least 10 slots available, and income is not a criterion for selection.
274                                                               ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Other programs can assist with preservation though they are not restricted to historic properties. For
homes in the Community Development Districts, several City and County grant and loan programs
assist with access improvements, lead abatement, and emergency repairs. In addition, the City is
authorized to offer financial assistance for seismic strengthening of existing residential buildings. See
Chapter 7, Policy 4.1 “Housing Rehabilitation Loan Programs.”
Residential Rent Regulations
Rent regulations do not apply to new construction in Oakland, and are not a constraint to the
provision of new housing in the City. For more details about the City’s program, and how it
continues to keep older rental property affordable by limiting annual rent increases, see Chapter 7 --
Policy 5.3 “Rent Adjustment Program.”
Approval Process
The Planning and Zoning Division is responsible for processing development permits and carrying
out the City’s long-range planning efforts. The basic steps in the approval process are described
below.
Pre-Application Meeting
Proposals may involve multiple permit approvals depending on the complexity of the land use issues
and the location of the proposed project. The initial step is usually a Pre-Application meeting, which
involves the review of preliminary plans and photographs of a proposed project. At this time, staff
will evaluate the proposal, review compliance with the General Plan and Planning Code, determine
appropriate applications and fees, offer comments on the proposal to meet the General Plan objectives
and Planning Code development standards, identify related non-planning issues, and describe the
permit process and timeline.
Application for Development Review and Development Agreement
The Basic Application for Development Review is an application form filed to accompany all zoning
permit applications, and is submitted along with site plans and/or other data to the Planning and
Building Department. Significant discretionary actions are the subject of a public hearing before one
of several hearing bodies, depending on the specific action. An application for a development
agreement is heard by the City Planning Commission at a public hearing. The hearing is noticed at
least ten days before the hearing date, in accordance with state law. The Commission forwards its
recommendations to the City Council within ten days. The City Council reviews the recommendation
of the Planning Commission and may approve or disapprove the proposed development agreement, or
approve it with changes and/or conditions. The decision of the Council is final.
Conditional Use Permit
An application for a major conditional use permit is also considered by the Planning Commission at a
noticed public hearing. The Commission decides whether the proposal is consistent with general use
permit criteria, and has the authority to grant or deny the application. This decision can be appealed
to the City Council within ten calendar days. In order to grant a use permit, the Planning Commission
must make specific findings that the project is:
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                    275

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
           •  compatible with the neighborhood,
           •  an asset for the neighborhood,
           •  enhances the area,
           •  meets design review standards, and
           •  complies with the General Plan and other adopted city plans.
An application for a minor conditional use permit is normally considered by the Director of Planning
and Zoning. However, the Director can refer this decision to the Planning Commission at his or her
discretion.
Planned Unit Development (PUD)
A planned unit development (PUD) permit application is reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission at a noticed public hearing. A decision of the Planning Commission can be appealed to
the City Council.
Permit Processing Times
The City of Oakland meets state-required timelines for the approval of development permits, as
shown below in Table 6-6. An expedited permit review could provide an additional level of certainty
that the amount of time required for project approval will not adversely affect the developer’s ability
to access funding.
276                                                           ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                           Table 6-6
                               Application Processing Times
                 Application                                      Timeframe
General Plan Amendment                  Up to 1 year
Rezone                                  6 months to 1 year
Tentative Subdivision Maps              Planning Commission – 50 days maximum (if no Environmental
                                        Impact Report)
Parcel Map                              50 days maximum – from completed application
Final Subdivision Map                   Within 30 days
Major Conditional Use Permit            Planning Commission – 4 to 6 months (including public review)
Minor Conditional Use Permit            Zoning Administrator – 6 weeks to 3 months
Variance--Major                         Planning Commission – 17 days public notice, plus up to 3
                                        months for planner review and supervisor approval
Variance--Minor                         Zoning Administrator – 17 days public notice, plus up to 8 weeks
                                        for planner review and supervisor approval.
Building Permit                         1 to 6 weeks
Residential Design Review               Up to 8 weeks
Boundary Line Adjustment                3 weeks
Source: City of Oakland, 2014.
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                   277

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
The majority of actual processing time for a use permit and/or a special development permit typically
takes place during the planning staff initial project review. The planning staff works with the
applicant to achieve a completed application that conforms to the various procedural, design and
zoning requirements. Processing times vary depending on the size and complexity of the project, the
completeness of the application, the conformance of the project to the Planning Code requirements,
and the level of environmental review (e.g. Environmental Impact Report versus Negative
Declaration versus CEQA exemption). This process often takes place before the formal submittal of
an application and review period begins.
Factors Affecting the Development Approval Process and Efforts to
Expedite
The Planning and Building Department administers the permit process through the Bureau of
Building and the Bureau of Planning. Although the approval process for a development project often
includes multiple permits, the City has made substantial efforts to prevent its permit processes from
being a constraint to development. Depending on the number and type of approvals required,
developments can typically be entitled in six weeks to six months. The City believes that the time
required to approve most projects does not present a significant time or cost constraint to the
development of housing in Oakland.
Factors that most affect the City’s current ability to process development approvals in a timely
manner include:
             •   staff shortages due to fiscal constraints
             •   the volume of applications and concurrent special projects requiring staff time
             •   the number of general inquires (phone, front counter, correspondence)
             •   minimum timelines for public notice (state law and zoning code)
             •   additional time and extent of noticing desired by some members of the community
             •   subjective review issues (quality of building and site design, for example)
             •   review by the Design Review Committee or Landmarks Preservation Advisory Board
             •   environmental review
             •   level of community involvement and interest in a project
             •   the number of discretionary approvals
Efforts to expedite permit approvals include:
             •   Major Projects process manual
             •   third party peer review of innovative structural and fire suppression designs
             •   web site assistance with comprehensive permit information
278                                                             ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
             •   a permitting center to provide one-stop permitting and assistance for applicants
             •   pre-application meeting to identify issues and potential resolutions to expedite an
                 applicant’s development proposal
             •   concurrent processing of multiple permit applications (for example, conditional use
                 permit, design review, and a tentative subdivision map), which are required for a
                 single development proposal
             •   expedited Planning Commission and Design Review Committee consideration for
                 high priority residential projects (including affordable housing projects)
             •   a “rapid check” review of building plans
The majority of actual processing time for a use permit and/or other discretionary approvals typically
takes place during the planning staff initial project review. Staff works with the applicant to achieve
a completed application that conforms to the various procedural, design, and zoning requirements.
Processing times vary depending on the size and complexity of the project, the completeness of the
application and the conformance of the project to the Planning Code requirements. Other variables
which can effect processing time include the CEQA process when it results in an Environmental
Impact Report, and appeals of approvals. However, every effort is made by the City to maintain an
efficient process.
Accessibility for Persons with Disabilities
Persons with disabilities have a number of housing needs related to accessibility of dwelling units,
access to transportation, employment, commercial services and alternative living arrangements that
include on-site or nearby supportive living services. It is the policy of the City to comply with all
applicable provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), protecting the civil
rights of persons with disabilities, and ensuring that all of its programs, activities and services, when
viewed in their entirety, are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. The City
ensures that new construction and alterations to City of Oakland buildings and facilities are in
conformance with Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, and all other applicable State and
federal accessibility regulations.
The City of Oakland has a policy to provide individuals with disabilities with equal opportunity to
participate in and benefit from all City programs, activities and services; and to provide for these in
an integrated setting unless separate or different measures are necessary to guarantee equal
opportunity. Furthermore, the City will reasonably modify policies, practices, or procedures for
qualified persons with disabilities upon request, including requesting special accommodations or
variances from the requirements of City zoning or building codes.
The City has implemented a number of policies, procedures and services to address the needs of
persons with disabilities in regard to residential housing, emergency shelter facilities, and community
accessibility.
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                     279

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
Zoning, Permit Processing, and Building Codes
The City implements and enforces Chapter 11 A and B of the 2013 California Building Code, which
is very similar to the ADA. The City provides information to applicants or those inquiring of City
regulations regarding accommodations in zoning, permit processes, and application of building codes
for persons with disabilities.
Access Improvement Program
The Access Improvement Program (AIP) aims to improve residential access by providing grants for
accessibility modifications on a matching fund basis to properties located in one of seven of the
City’s Community Development Districts. Details of the program are in Chapter 7, Policy 4.3
“Housing Preservation and Rehabilitation.”
Residential Disabled Parking Zone Program
The City’s Residential Disabled Parking Zone (RDPZ) Program is intended to assist drivers with
mobility impairments who need residential accommodation for on-street parking, and who cannot
otherwise gain ready access to their residences. The City may provide a RDPZ where there is a
demonstrated need for parking space designation for persons with disabilities on residential streets.
From 2011 through 2013, the City received 445 calls with questions regarding Residential Disabled
Parking Zones. Of these inquiries, 236 resulted in action by the City. The City processed work
orders to install 145 new zones, repaint 4 locations, and remove 22 zones. 65 requests were denied.
Mayor’s Commission on Persons with Disabilities
The Mayor’s Commission on Persons with Disabilities (MCPD) acts as the City’s designated
advisory body for ADA compliance, and seeks to remove constraints to housing for residents with
disabilities by providing educational and networking opportunities in the areas of accessible
affordable housing and emergency preparedness. Established by city ordinance in 1980 to represent
and address the issues faced by people with disabilities, this commission is committed to promoting
the total integration of persons with disabilities into all aspects of the community. Since 1990, the
MCPD acts by advising the Mayor and City Council on matters affecting the disability community;
reviewing and commenting on City policies, programs, and actions; providing advice and assistance
to other City boards and commissions; and participating at the local, state, and national levels in the
advancement of disability rights. The Commission’s monthly proceedings are open to the public and
serve as a venue through which persons with disabilities within the community can comment and
provide recommendations on City policy and planning documents.
Efforts to Remove Regulatory Constraints for Persons with Disabilities
The State of California has removed any City discretion for review of small group home projects (six
or fewer residents). The City does not impose additional zoning, building code, or permitting
procedures other than those allowed by state law. For example, the definition of “Family” in the
Planning Code is: “one person, or a group of people living together as a single housekeeping unit,
together with incidental domestic servants and temporary nonpaying guests.” This does not prove to
be a constraint to housing for persons with disabilities, because “Family” is only used in the Planning
Code to describe a facility type—such as, “one-family dwelling,” it is not used to limit the ability of
unrelated individuals to live together, as in a residential care facility.
280                                                               ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Another example is the restriction on overconcentration in the Planning Code (section 17.103.010),
which requires a 300 foot separation between any of four facilities types which can be used to house
people with disabilities—“residential care,” “service-enriched permanent housing,” “transitional
housing,” and “emergency shelter.” This overconcentration restriction is similar to restrictions found
in state law, moreover, the City does not consider this overconcentration restriction to be a constraint
to housing for the people with disabilities population, and relies on the Mayor’s Commission on
Persons with Disabilities (see above) to make proposals to amend any section of the Planning Code
which could be a constraint for housing that population. City staff believe that there are enough sites
with adequate zoning in Oakland such that this finding is not a constraint to reputable providers of
this type of housing.
Zoning and Other Land Use Regulations
In reviewing the City’s zoning laws, policies, and practices for compliance with fair housing law, the
City has not identified zoning or other land use regulatory practices that could discriminate against
persons with disabilities and impede the availability of such housing for these individuals. Oakland’s
Planning Code allows many of the housing use types and supportive services that persons with
disabilities require. The 1998 General Plan policies encourage special needs housing with supportive
services to be located near transportation and other areas with access to services.
Building Codes
As described above, the City provides reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities in the
enforcement of building codes and the issuance of building permits through its flexible approaches to
retrofitting or converting existing buildings and construction of new buildings that meet the shelter
needs of persons with disabilities. The City has not made amendments to the Code that would
diminish the ability to accommodate persons with disabilities. Oakland also recognizes the State
Historic Building Code as a way to allow greater flexibility in the rehabilitation of historic buildings
in association with accommodating persons with disabilities.
Universal Design
The City has not adopted a universal design ordinance governing construction or modification of
homes using design principles that allow individuals to remain in those homes as their physical needs
and capabilities change. However, all City funded developments must meet requirements as stated by
ADA and fair housing act standards, along with any applicable local or state laws. For federally
funded projects, architects are required by the NOFA to comply with the Uniform Federal
Accessibility Standards.
Procedures for Ensuring Reasonable Accommodations
The City ensures that reasonable accommodations are made for persons with disabilities, through
several means:
     • Persons with disabilities can request special accommodation for exceptions to the Planning
         Code through the recently adopted Reasonable Accommodations Ordinance. Chapter 17.131
         of the Oakland Planning Code contains the Reasonable Accommodations Policy and
         Procedure including defining types of reasonable accommodations requests, the application
         submittal requirements, and the method of appeal. Additionally, a form has been developed
         for clarifying the submittal and review process.
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                    281

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
     • Information is available through the City’s website, and through the MCPD, regarding
        programs and procedures that can assist persons with disabilities with access to city services,
        and, if need be, reasonable accommodation for exceptions to the Planning and Building
        Codes.
State Requirements
Although not within the City’s control, state laws and funding requirements impose significant
constraints on the City’s ability to achieve its housing objectives. There are many state requirements
that can constrain housing affordability and availability. Some of these requirements are:
 •       Prevailing wage requirements, which significantly increase labor costs on government-
         assisted housing projects.
 •       Limited availability of state funding for housing and supportive services programs. Nearly
         all state programs are significantly oversubscribed in relation to the need.
 •       Environmental review requirements under the California Environmental Quality Act
         (CEQA). CEQA provides opportunities for procedural delays and legal challenges of
         residential development approvals. The City has limited the potential of CEQA to create
         procedural delays by using exemptions permitted for infill and affordable housing projects,
         implementing environmental mitigation measures through the City’s Planning Code, and
         receiving legislative approval to streamline the environmental review process for certain
         downtown projects (AB 436).
 •       The mandates in SB 2 for emergency shelters could potentially conflict with other established
         homelessness policies and approaches, such as Alameda County’s “EveryOne Home”
         program, in which the City of Oakland is participating. The County’s program encourages
         supportive housing, not large bed emergency shelters, seeks to prevent homelessness before it
         starts, and advocates for the construction of up to 15,000 new units of housing for county
         residents with HIV/AIDS or mental illness in the next 15 years.
B.       NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
The production, availability, and cost of housing in Oakland are impacted by nongovernmental
factors associated with the higher costs and greater difficulties of producing housing through
redevelopment in an already-developed, central city such as Oakland. Broader market factors
applicable throughout the Bay Area region, increasingly affecting Oakland, also pose constraints to
housing in Oakland, particularly affordable housing.
Land Costs
Property Values and the Price of Land
Market prices for land are high in the desirable, high-cost San Francisco Bay Area and with the
exception of the bursting of the housing bubble and resulting economic downturn in recent years,
values have mostly recovered in 2013. As evidenced in Chapter 3, rents and median sales prices rose
282                                                             ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
slowly during much of the 1990s, price increases accelerated in the late 1990s and continued to
increase rapidly until 2007. From 2008 to approximately 2012 prices declined dramatically as the
housing bubble burst and the foreclosure crisis ensued. In 2013 housing costs (both market rents and
home sales prices) have had significant increases with prices in some zip codes reaching heights close
to those at the peak of the housing bubble. Long term, however, the desirability and acceptability of
locations in Oakland and other inner cities has increased within the region. Demand is increasing for
housing close to employment centers such as Oakland and San Francisco and is likely to continue to
be relatively strong given the demand for locations near urban centers. This demand is fueled by
increases in auto fuel costs and resultant increase in commute costs. Oakland is at the center of a
region with good transportation accessibility throughout the Bay Area. Additionally, Oakland’s urban
character and relatively lower costs have made the City an increasingly desirable alternative to
higher-cost areas nearby, particularly to San Francisco across the Bay. Finally, there are efforts by the
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), the regional planning agency, to encourage in-fill
development in cities such as Oakland.
Before continuing with a discussion of land prices it is important to note that there are significant
variations in the price of land within Oakland. The City has some of the highest residential land
values in the Bay region (such as in the Oakland hills with views of San Francisco Bay) and some of
the lowest as well (such as in older, working-class neighborhoods in the vicinity of the I-880 freeway
and older industrial areas).
Examples of land acquisition costs for the development of affordable housing in Oakland (examples
used were from developments for housing affordable to moderate-, low-, and very low-income
households) provide an indication of minimum prices for land suitable for residential use. The
examples are for infill sites purchased in various areas of the City. The examples range from $13 to
$47 per square foot (2014 values), as summarized in Table 6-7, below. On average, this reflects a
slight decrease in land costs compared to those reported in Oakland’s last Housing Element that
ranged from $17 to $105 per square foot. This may reflect affordable housing developer’s ability to
purchase property in what was a down land value market in recent years. Data obtained for this
report is based on actual affordable housing developments supported by the City’s Housing and
Community Development Department and represents budgeted or actual expenditures in 2013-14.
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                   283

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
                                                       Table 6-7
              Land Costs for Affordable Housing Sites in Oakland
                                                          (2014)
                             Single-family
                             Attached
                             Residential                   Multi-family               Multifamily
         Housing             Townhouses,                   Residential,               Residential,
         Type                Low Density                   High-Density               Higher-Density
         Site Area               .73 acres                    2.49 acres                 1.60 acres
         Land
         Acquisition             $421,500                     $5,150,003                 $1,225,000
         Cost
         Land per
                                 $13.27                       $47.47                     $17.63
          sq. ft.
         Density of
                                 16 units/acre                29 units/acre              37 units/acre
         Development
         Number of
                                 12                           71                         59
         Units
         Land
         Acquisition             $35,125                      $72,535                    $20,763
         Cost per Unit
         Affordability           Very Low- and                Very Low to                Very Low-Income
         level                   Low- Income                  Low Income                 Households
                                 Households                   Households
                                                              (30%-80% AMI)              (30%-50% AMI)
                                 (30-80% AMI)
         Source: City of Oakland, Department of Housing and Community Development, 2014
If land costs remain at current levels or continue to increase, the City can do little to directly affect the
cost of land other than continue to provide opportunities for increased residential densities, housing
on under-utilized sites and locations with potential for mixed-use development, and housing on infill
properties. In response to high land prices and increasing land values in the past, the City of Oakland
created an Affordable Housing Site Acquisition Program that provided funds to developers of
affordable housing for site acquisition and associated costs. The City will consider funding land
acquisition for future use in the development of affordable housing.
Costs for Urban Infill
Since Oakland is an already-developed, central city, new housing development largely requires the
reuse of underutilized properties with older, existing uses on them. It also can include development
of currently vacant sites formerly passed over for development because of higher development costs
or lower revenue potentials, due to odd-sized or small parcels, contamination issues, and other
factors. There are a variety of uncertainties, difficulties, and additional costs associated with
development of these types of sites that pose constraints for new housing development. However,
Oakland does not have large, vacant, unconstrained parcels, and must rely on infill development
strategies to accommodate the bulk of its ABAG-assigned regional housing allocation.
284                                                                        ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING
                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
The total cost of “land” for developing infill sites or redeveloping under-used sites includes not only
land acquisition, but also additional costs of demolishing existing structures and site clean-up. Costs
for relocating existing uses and/or compensating existing users are also frequently a required expense
in the calculation of the total cost of land development in Oakland. Thus, total “land” costs for urban
infill development are generally greater than the land/site acquisition costs alone.
Further, infill sites are generally smaller parcels that can be difficult to develop (including those that
might be irregularly shaped) and that are more costly to develop (as the costs of the approval process
and other planning efforts would be spread over a relatively small number of new units).
Development on smaller, infill sites is more difficult and more costly than larger-scale development
on vacant land, and can provide less return to the developer. However, there also can be offsetting
advantages of infill development in that much of the infrastructure to serve the new development is
already in place, in most cases.
Environmental Hazards
The redevelopment of sites in urban areas also can involve costs to remediate contaminated soil or
groundwater, or to demolish buildings containing hazardous materials. In Oakland, many of the
larger development sites that remain were formerly used for industrial purposes. These often require
some level of remediation and/or hazardous materials removal, resulting in additional costs that can
be substantial and that can pose constraints on development. Such costs can render private sector
redevelopment infeasible in situations where market prices and rents for the new uses are not high
enough to amortize the costs of cleanup. In other situations, such costs can reduce the return from
development of market-rate projects, making them less attractive to potential developers. In all cases,
such costs increase the levels of subsidies required for affordable housing projects. The City is trying
to address the problems associated with environmental hazards, helping to fund Phase I assessments
and actual cleanup activities in some cases pursuant to the Polanco Redevelopment Act (Section
33459, California Health and Safety Code).
Land Availability
There are adequate sites for developing housing to meet Oakland’s housing needs, as described in
Chapter 4, Land Inventory. The availability of sites for development, however, can be constrained by
the need to assemble smaller parcels into larger development sites and/or by landowners seeking high
prices for their properties. The latter is particularly the case for older properties formerly in
commercial or industrial uses that are being held as long-term investments by owners hoping to reap
the rewards of an improving local market.
The City continues to assist in identifying and assembling sites, undertaking project planning, and
negotiating agreements to facilitate Infill and Transit Oriented Developments underway and in the
planning stages in Oakland. The City also had a program for assisting nonprofit housing developers in
acquiring sites for affordable housing. This program is no longer active but could be revisited if
necessary.
Construction Costs
The costs of constructing housing in the Bay Area are generally, and in Oakland in particular, high.
Market factors resulting in high construction costs are further compounded for affordable housing
providers because they must pay “prevailing wages.” Construction costs are typically broken down
by either a per unit cost or per square foot cost. Further, construction costs can be separated into land
costs, “hard” costs or “soft costs.” Hard costs include construction line items such as labor,
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINT S TO HOUSING                                                                     285

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
demolition, building materials and installed components. Soft costs include items such as
architectural and engineering, planning approvals and permits, taxes and insurance, financing and
carrying costs, and marketing costs. The hard construction costs typically represent about 50 to 60
percent of total development costs. Thus, they have a significant effect on development feasibility.
Land and soft costs can represent another 40 to 50 percent of the total cost of building housing.
For the 2015-2023 Housing Element, the hard costs (labor, building materials, installed components,
etc.) for an average-quality wood-frame construction for multi-unit apartment buildings ranged from
$378 to $404 per square foot, with costs at the higher end of the range applicable for four- and five-
story construction over structured, above-grade parking
Construction costs for higher-rise concrete and steel-frame multi-unit buildings are higher than for
wood-frame construction. In fact, the higher costs for steel- and concrete-frame construction are a
significant factor limiting the feasibility of high-density housing development in Oakland. This
continues to be the case for Oakland as concrete and steel-frame buildings are only being built in
Oakland at locations that can attract the highest housing prices and rents (such as on the shores of
Lake Merritt, Jack London District, and most recently new tower construction is being explored by
developers in the Broadway Valdez area, north of downtown). There are also a few examples of
concrete and steel-frame construction for more affordable, higher density senior housing. For all
types of construction, underground parking would result in still higher construction costs.
To bring the analysis to more recent market-rate construction costs, Table 6-8 47 summarizes
development costs as identified by AECOM, in a November 2013 report for the City of Oakland,
Downtown Oakland Development Feasibility Study.48 For the Study, the City selected three vacant or
underdeveloped sites in downtown Oakland, and AECOM analyzed the financial pro-formas of 14
different building scenarios (low rise wood-framed construction -- with or without parking -- and
high-rise tower construction, with or without parking). Except for one scenario, all pro formas
assumed market-rate rental housing was built (a single scenario envisioned low-rise condominium
building). In all cases, land was assumed to cost $50 a square foot, for analysis purposes (in an actual
real estate market transaction, land costs can vary widely from this amount). Table 6-8 includes
specific addresses from the Development Feasibility study, and shows the building type studied for
that address, and their associated hard costs, and soft costs.
48
   AECOM, Downtown Oakland Development Feasibility Study, November 25, 2013. See report at
http://www2.oaklandnet.com/oakca1/groups/ceda/documents/report/oak043663.pdf
286                                                                 ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING
                                                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2007-2014
                                                                                        Table 6-8
                                    Market Rate Housing Development Costs in Oakland (2014)
                                                                                                                                              High-rise
                                                              Low-rise                     Low-rise                   Low -rise                                       High-rise
                                                                                                                                                 (2100
                                                       (2100 Telegraph)                  (226 13th St)              (301 19th St)                                   (301 19th St)
                                                                                                                                             Telegraph)
                                                                  (9)                          (1a)                       (3a)                                            (4a)
                  Housing Type                                                                                                                    (2a)
        Size per unit                                                 990 sf                 1,017 sf                   1,054 sf                1,010 sf                1,036 sf
        Numbers of units                                          330 units                  200 units                 175 units                365 units               246 units
        Type of Construction & Parking                Wood over concrete              Wood over                    Wood over                Tower                 Tower
                                                      podium, (70 feet);              concrete podium,             concrete podium          construction;         construction (175
                                                      parking half below              (70 feet); parking           (70 feet); parking       (270 feet);           feet); parking half
                                                      grade.                          half below grade.            half below grade.        parking half          below grade and
                                                                                                                                            below grade,          in garage
                                                                                                                                            and in garage
        Hard costs, Construction,
        Demolition, and Parking                                 $98,174,000                $59,410,000               $53,215,000             $110,270,500            $75,035,000
        Soft Costs1                                             $38,884,427                $21,349,415               $18,768,728              $52,416,526            $30,623,868
        Land acquisition and site costs                          $4,696,870                  $3,001,985               $2,909,925                $3,001,985             $2,925,925
        Total Costs                                           $141,755,297                 $83,761,400               $74,893,653             $165,689,011           $108,584,793
        Total cost per Unit                                        $429,562                    $418,807                 $427,964                  $453,942               $441,402
        Total Costs per building sq. ft.
        (not including parking sf)                                      $404                        $378                       $378                     $428                 $404
        Hard Costs per building sq. ft.
        (not including parking sf)                                      $280                        $268                       $268                     $285                 $279
         Source: “Downtown Oakland Development Feasibility Study”, November 25th 2013, AECOM and City of Oakland
         1. Includes costs for architecture and engineering, planning and approval, fees and permits, taxes and insurance, financing and carrying costs, and marketing.
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING                                                                                                                                                    287

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table 6-9
               Affordable Housing Development Costs in Oakland
                                                               (2014)
                                                                       Multi-family                 Multi-family
                                                                       Residential                  Residential
                                         Single-family                 Rental                       Rental
                                         Detached                      Apartments for               Apartments for
          Housing Type                   Residential                   Families                     Families
          Density                        Low-density                   High-density                 Higher-density
                                         16 units/acre                 29 units/acre                37 units/acre
          Number of Units                12 units                      71 units                     59 units
          Building Sq. Ft.               31,767 sq. ft.                108,500 sq. ft.              69,500 sq. ft.
          Type of                        2-story wood frame            5-story wood frame           4-story on-grade
          Construction and               single family homes           construction over            wood frame
          Parking                                                      podium parking               construction
                                                                 Costs
          Hard Costs,                          $3,160,360                 $23,671,799                   $17,574,370
          Construction, Units
          and Parking                                (63%)                       (64%)                         (59%)
          Soft Costs1                          $1,429,438                     $370,189                   $4,102,522
                                                     (28%)                          (1%)                       (14%)
          Land Acquisition                       $411,500                   $5,150,003                   $1,225,000
          and
          Site-related Costs                          (9%)                       (14%)                           (4%)
          Total Cost                           $5,053,808                 $37,100,251                   $29,573,003
          Total Cost per Unit                    $421,151                     $522,539                     $501,237
          Total Cost per Sq.
                                                      $159                          $342                         $426
          Ft.
          Hard Costs per Sq.
                                                        $99                         $218                         $253
          Ft.
          Sources: City of Oakland, Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD).
          1
            Includes costs for architecture and engineering, planning and approval, fees and permits, taxes and insurance,
          financing and carrying costs, and marketing.
Since there has not been much development of single-family affordable homeownership housing
there is not significant data on construction and total costs. For the one active project in the City’s
Department of Housing and Community Development pipeline, this data might be skewed. The
organization that is developing these affordable homeownership units uses sweat equity and secures
significant donations in time and materials for their developments. Regardless, the development costs
are $99 per square foot for hard cost and with a total development cost of $159 per square foot. This
translates to a total per unit cost of $421,151. See Table 6-9 for details.
288                                                                               ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                              2015-2023
For costs of affordable housing rental development, the City has relied on examples of recent
construction costs and total development costs in City-financed developments also shown in Table 6-
9. The hard construction costs for the multifamily, affordable housing developments range from $218
to $253 per square foot, while total costs (including construction costs, soft costs, and land) range
from $342 to $426 per square foot. These translate into per-unit total costs of $501,237 to $522,539.
The construction costs and total costs of developing housing in Oakland are high and present serious
constraints to the availability of housing, particularly housing affordable to very low-, low-, and
median-income households. To address these constraints, there are a number of housing programs in
Oakland to support affordable housing development, including loans and grants to developers of low-
and moderate-income housing. Examples are mentioned herein and described in other chapters of
this Housing Element (see Chapter 5, Housing Program Resources, in particular).
Financing
The availability and cost of financing have an effect on housing in Oakland. Both financing for real
estate development and financing for homeownership are relevant considerations. In the current
Housing Element planning period, this section observes both opportunities and obstacles to financing
real estate development and ownership in the City.
Financing For Real Estate Development
Among other things, the Housing Element Annual Performance Report tracks housing starts in an
attempt to understand the pace of residential development in light of the area’s anticipated
demographic demand as illustrated by the Regional Housing Need Allocation. As reported in Chapter
2, from 2007 to 2013 Oakland had a total of 3,852 housing starts. In contrast, neighboring City of
Berkeley had 1,400 units under construction during the summer 2014. This is over one-third of the
City of Oakland’s seven year total pipeline under construction at one point in time. This illustrates
how, as stated in the prior Housing Element, residential real estate developers may have difficulties
obtaining the real estate financing necessary to develop in Oakland.
In a survey of a number of Oakland and area residential market-rate real estate developers conducted
for this Housing Element, some stated that institutional lenders and outside investors continue to be
cautious in providing financial backing in most Oakland neighborhoods for new residential
development. They found that, in trying to attract large-scale institutional investors to the City, that
there was a general misperception of Oakland’s livability and desirability. Additionally, small-scale
developers attracted to projects in historically under-invested areas are often smaller entities with
limited records of achievement or with limited financial resources to invest, compounding the
difficulties involved in obtaining financing.
While investment in residential housing still struggles to increase, the City’s efforts in the last decade
to revitalize and invest in the central city through its Redevelopment and specific and area planning
efforts have spurred a renaissance that is starting to be noticed by large-scale institutional lenders.
Market factors and conditions, including dramatic demand for Bay Area housing and a lack of urban
developable land options in proximity to San Francisco and Silicon Valley have increased the
acceptability of Oakland neighborhoods that have formerly been passed over for residential
development. Oakland rents are showing dramatic increases and there is a high demand for housing
as evidenced in Chapter 3. This bodes well for future residential investment in the City especially
given its strategic location near job centers and transit. The challenge will be to increase residential
development to meet the housing demand while at the same time not displacing long-standing City
residents.
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING                                                                      289

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Financing for Homeownership
The cost of borrowing money to buy a home is another factor affecting the cost of housing and
overall housing affordability. The higher the interest rate and other financing costs charged for
borrowing money to purchase a home, the higher the total cost of the home and the higher the
household income required to pay that cost.
In general, the effect of financing costs on housing costs is demonstrated by examining monthly
mortgage payments (principal and interest) on a 30-year $347,200 loan using a sales price of
$434,000 as the average Oakland citywide median (as stated in Chapter 3) with a 20% down
payment. The cost of the loan increases with higher interest rates. The household income required to
make those payments also increases with higher interest rates. Table 6-10 provides an example of the
impact of financing costs on housing cost.
                                                      Table 6-10
                       Financing Costs for a Mortgage of $347,200
                                   Required Monthly Mortgage Payment                    Required Household
                                                                                                      1
      Interest Rate                                (30-year term)                            Income
             3%                                        $1,464                                  $58,552
             4%                                        $1,658                                  $66,303
             5%                                        $1,864                                  $74,554
             6%                                        $2,082                                  $83,266
             7%                                        $2,310                                  $92,397
             8%                                        $2,548                                 $101,905
             9%                                        $2,794                                 $111,746
            10%                                        $3,047                                 $121,877
            11%                                        $3,306                                 $132,259
Source: City of Oakland, Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD).
1
 Assumes 30% of income is spent for mortgage payment.
As shown in Table 6-10, monthly payments increase by about $194 to $260 for every one point
increase in interest rates, in the range of three percent to eleven percent. As monthly payments
increase, the income required to cover those payments also increases from about $59,000 to $132,000
(assuming 30 percent of income allocated for housing expenditures). If, instead, household income
was held constant, the share of income spent on housing would have to increase from 24 percent to 53
percent, as the interest rate increases from three percent to eleven percent.
From the perspective of a buyer with a given household income, the higher the financing costs, the
lower the mortgage amount that the household income can support and, thus, the lower the housing
price that the household can afford. The effect of financing costs on housing affordability can be
demonstrated by showing how the mortgage amount (and housing price) that a household can afford
based on its household income declines with higher interest rates. Table 6-11 shows the effect that
290                                                                        ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING
                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                      2015-2023
interest rates have on the amount for which a household can qualify, assuming a median income of
$80,300 for a household of three persons 49.
                                                       Table 6-11
                Effect of Interest Rates on Qualifying Loan Amount
         (Assuming 2013 Area Median Income of $80,300 for a Three-Person Household)
      Affordable Monthly Mortgage                                                     Maximum Qualifying Loan
                               1
                    Payment                              Interest Rate                       Amount
                      $2,008                                    3%                           $476,158
                      $2,008                                    4%                           $420,493
                      $2,008                                    5%                           $373,960
                      $2,008                                    6%                           $334,834
                      $2,008                                    7%                           $301,742
                      $2,008                                    8%                           $273,589
                      $2,008                                    9%                           $249,496
                      $2,008                                   10%                           $228,756
                      $2,008                                   11%                           $210,800
Source: City of Oakland, Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD).
1
  Assumes 30% of income is spent for mortgage payment.
The mortgage amount that a household with income at the current median level for the City of
Oakland can afford mortgage amounts from $210,800 to $476,158 as the interest rate increases from
three percent to eleven percent. That change makes a substantial difference in the price of housing
that the household can afford to buy. It also increases the amount of public subsidy required to
provide affordable homeownership opportunities to median-income households.
For the last several years, interest rates have been at relatively low levels. Nevertheless, financing
costs are still significant, and many households have difficulty purchasing a home. To address these
costs, Oakland has four first-time homebuyer programs (though they currently only operating on
program income). The First-time Homebuyer Mortgage Assistance Program provides deferred
interest loans of up to $75,000 to low-income (80% area median income level), owner-occupants.
The Public Safety/Officers/Teacher Program provides loans of up to $50,000 to public personnel with
incomes at or below 120 percent of the area median income level. The First-Time Homebuyer
CalHome Program provides assistance to first time homebuyers via deferred loans of up to $60,000.
The First-Time Homebuyer Shared Appreciation Mortgage (SAM) Program of the Local Housing
Trust Funds is a California State grant funded program that provides assistance to first time
homebuyers via deferred loans of up to $60,000.
As noted in Chapter 3, predatory home mortgage lending practices in Oakland resulted in dramatic
rates of foreclosures beginning in early 2007 and continuing through the time of writing this Housing
Element. Those predatory lending practices included charging excessive fees, high interest rates, and
other techniques used by mortgage lenders to take advantage of borrowers, especially low-income
49
   For this analysis, HUD’s income limits for Oakland, California effective 2013 are used.
ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING                                                                            291

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
borrowers. In 2001, the City of Oakland enacted an Anti-Predatory Lending Ordinance to stop these
practices, but it was invalidated by the California State Supreme Court. In retrospect, the easy
availability of non-traditional mortgage products, which appeared to provide greater access to
homeownership, has proven to be disastrous for many households.
As a caveat to any analysis of financing for homeownership, the limitations of mortgage lending due
to the current credit crisis impacts this analysis. In the prior Housing Element reporting period, there
was a dramatic increase in mortgage lending. As stated in Chapter 3, much of this lending was high-
risk loans including adjustable rates and balloon payments.
In the wake of the foreclosure crisis in housing prices, underwriting criteria have been tightened and
higher-risk loans are no longer available. While an increase in down payment requirements actually
reduces monthly housing costs by reducing mortgage costs, this is offset by the need for higher rates
of savings that are beyond the means of many families. At the same time, the shift away from
adjustable rate, interest only, and other alternative loan types makes mortgage financing less
affordable, as has stricter credit requirements.
Neighborhood Sentiment
Neighborhood concerns and opposition to higher-density developments and to affordable housing
developments continue to hamper efforts to construct new housing in Oakland especially against
affordable housing development. As in many cities, there can be resistance to change in familiar
environments. While there is general agreement that housing should be available to all income levels,
there can be resistance to specific affordable housing proposals, particularly rental housing projects,
based on a lack of information or misinformation, a poor image or past history of such developments,
and/or concerns that an area already has a disproportionately large number of lower-income units.
The City of Oakland is trying to address these concerns, by working with developers and providing
information for use at public meetings. The General Plan directs and encourages new moderate- and
higher-density housing along the City’s major corridors, in the areas near transit stations, in
downtown, and along the waterfront. Public comment received as part of the Specific Planning
efforts underway have generally been supportive of promoting housing affordable to Oakland
residents, given the rising costs of rent in the City. Additionally, the completion and occupancy of
several attractive and affordable housing developments, and the rebuilding and rehabilitation of older
public housing projects continue to improve the quality, image, and acceptability of affordable
housing in Oakland. Successful, new low-income housing developments now enhance many Oakland
neighborhoods and blend unnoticed into others.
292                                                              ANALYSIS OF CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING

                                                        CITY OF O AKL AND HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                             2015-2023
7. GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
This chapter of the Housing Element describes the City’s strategy for the period 2015-2023 for
meeting the housing needs of all Oakland residents.
A.       CONTEXT FOR THE CITY’S GOALS AND POLICIES
The goals and actions described in the Housing Element are organized to comply with the
requirements of State law and guidelines; however, the City has been developing its housing strategy
on an ongoing basis, and the policies contained in the Housing Element are part of a broad effort
guided by the following four major strategic planning initiatives:
     •   The City’s General Plan Land Use and Transportation Element
     •   Focus on the City’s Priority Development Areas
     •   Implementation of the Recently Adopted Specific Plans
     •   Promotion of Sustainable Development Policies and Practices
     •   Affordable Housing Strategy
General Plan Land Use and Transportation Element (LUTE)
Oakland’s current General Plan Land Use and Transportation Element (LUTE) was adopted in 1998.
The LUTE defines the long-range goals and intentions of the community regarding the nature and
direction of future development within the City of Oakland. A major overall theme of the LUTE is to
encourage the growth of new residential development in Oakland and to direct it to the City’s major
corridors, to downtown Oakland, to transit-oriented districts near the City’s BART stations, along the
waterfront, and to infill projects that are consistent with the character of surrounding areas.
The land use and transportation strategies contained in the current LUTE are being implemented by
the City on an ongoing basis as exemplified by the housing projects already approved and in the
predevelopment process in Oakland. The City’s overall residential land use strategy, as described in
the LUTE, underlies the analysis of potential densities on sites suitable for housing development
presented in Chapter 4 of the Housing Element, as well as many of the goals and actions described in
this chapter. However, new policy direction is needed to guide the City of Oakland for the next 20
years.
The Planning Bureau has identified the need for a General Plan LUTE update to refresh the City’s
vision and policy guidance reflecting changing demographics and market forces. Many of the new
policies in this Housing Element chapter will provide important guidance for the next LUTE update.
As of 2014, the City is beginning discussions around identifying potential funding sources for the
next LUTE update, as well as prioritizing this planning process as part of its strategic planning
workload.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                         293

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Priority Development Areas
In 2008, California Senate Bill 375, the Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act (SB
375), was adopted, which strengthened coordination between regional housing allocation and
transportation planning. Under SB 375, the Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) is
required to incorporate a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS) into the Regional Transportation
Plan (RTP). The SCS is intended to achieve greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions. To that end,
regional housing allocation planning should be designed to achieve GHG emission reduction goals by
developing efficient land-use strategies such as infill, mixed-use, and/or downtown revitalization
strategies, promote and incentivize a variety of housing types affordable to the workforce and
households with lower incomes, and address climate change by reducing vehicle trips. In an effort to
meet overlapping objectives of SB 375 and Housing Element law, the Association of Bay Area
Governments adopted “Plan Bay Area” with the following objectives:
     •    Increase supply, diversity and affordability of housing
     •    Promote infill development and more efficient land use patterns
     •    Promote intraregional relationship between jobs and housing
     •    Protect environmental resources
     •    Promote socioeconomic equity
     •    Plan Bay Area Framework: Priority Development Areas (PDAs)
The Bay Area’s sustainable growth framework known as Plan Bay Area is built around the concept of
“Priority Development Areas” (PDAs). Priority Development Areas are existing neighborhoods near
transit, nominated by jurisdictions as appropriate locations for future growth. In 2010, the Oakland
City Council adopted Resolution No. 82526 designating six established transit-oriented development
centers in Oakland as PDAs. Oakland designated PDAs at the area surrounding the Eastmont Transit
Center (73rd Avenue and MacArthur Blvd), and the areas around the following BART stations:
12th/19th Streets (downtown), MacArthur, West Oakland, Fruitvale, and Airport/Coliseum.
PDAs are intended to designate growth areas. Most of the opportunity sites identified in the Housing
Element fall within the City of Oakland’s PDAs. PDAs are eligible for funding from MTC and other
Bay Area agencies for infrastructure, transportation and housing funding necessary to support
development in those areas. Therefore, Oakland has positioned itself through the identification of
opportunity sites within PDAs to accommodate future growth in a sustainable manner that achieves
regional objectives of enhancing existing neighborhoods, reducing congestion and protecting natural
resources.
Beyond the requirements specified in State Housing Element law and SB 375, the comprehensive
Plan Bay Area effort will support housing allocations under the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
(RHNA) through targeted transportation investments funded under the One Bay Area Grant (OBAG).
The funding criteria for OBAG takes into account local jurisdictions’ past housing production and the
2014-2022 RHNA, for both total units and affordable units. The OBAG program also emphasizes the
importance of planning for housing by requiring that jurisdictions have a Housing Element certified
by the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) to be eligible for
funding.
294                                                                      GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                             2015-2023
Implementation of the Recently Adopted Specific Plans
The City’s Strategic Planning Division initiated five (5) Specific Plans and one (1) Area Plan during
the 2007-2014 Housing Element period, which identify housing policies specific to their study areas:
Lake Merritt Station Area (Specific) Plan, Broadway Valdez Specific Plan, West Oakland Specific
Plan, Coliseum Area Specific Plan, and Central Estuary Area Plan. Each Plan included extensive
community outreach processes and has resulted in specific zoning proposals. These Specific and
Area Plans will facilitate the construction of nearly 17,000 new housing units in the City of Oakland.
The completion of the Specific and Area Plans will provide these substantial housing gains in two
respects: environmental clearance and community buy-in for future housing projects. Each planning
process involved extensive community participation which culminated with significant community
buy-in to the policies and development framework outlined in the plans, thus minimizing possible
community opposition to future housing development projects.
Sustainable Oakland
The City of Oakland is committed to becoming a model sustainable community, in which all people
have the opportunity to live safe, healthy and fulfilling lives. Protecting a clean and ecologically
healthy environment; growing a strong economy; maintaining quality housing affordable and
accessible to Oakland residents; and fostering a safe, equitable and vibrant community are all critical
components of this vision.
The Sustainable Oakland program, launched by the Oakland City Council as the Sustainable
Community Development Initiative in 1998, works to advance Oakland’s vision of sustainability
through innovative programs and practices addressing social equity, improved environmental quality,
and sustainable economic development. Program activities include: fostering inter-agency
cooperation to address key sustainability problems and opportunities and improve performance;
tracking and reporting on sustainability performance; promoting Oakland’s sustainability story;
advising on opportunities to improve sustainability performance; performing community outreach;
fostering communication between Citywide stakeholders; and seeking innovative ways to finance
sustainability improvements.
In recognition of the leadership and actions of the Oakland community, SustainLane.com ranked
Oakland 9th among the largest 50 U.S. cities in 2008 in overall sustainability performance 50. The
City of Oakland has adopted a range of significant policies and implemented a number of programs
and projects that help to reduce climate pollution, green the city and move us toward our goal of
becoming a model sustainable city. Individual choices, resourceful collaborations, and the
tremendous dedication and efforts of community members all contribute to help conserve energy,
curb global climate change, reduce our dependence on oil and polluting vehicles, create green jobs,
grow green businesses, reduce waste, enhance our built environment, restore creeks, and green the
natural environment in which we live.
 Affordable Housing Strategies
Affordable housing is a major policy priority for the City of Oakland. The City has had an active
housing development program for over 30 years, and has assisted in the development of thousands of
units of newly constructed and substantially rehabilitated housing for very low, low and moderate
income families, seniors and people with special needs. The City has also devoted substantial
50
   See Sustainlane, http://www.sustainlane.com/us-city-rankings/
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                          295

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
resources to preservation of the existing housing stock, including homes owned by low income
families, and to expanding opportunities for low income renters to become homeowners.
The City’s affordable housing strategy is outlined in the Consolidated Plan for Housing and
Community Development prepared in May 2010 (and to be updated for submittal to HUD in 2015).
The Consolidated Plan – which is required as part of the City’s federally-funded housing and
community development programs – sets forth the City’s needs, market conditions, strategies, and
actions for addressing the housing needs of very low and low income households. The plan is
designed to achieve the following goals:
                 •    Increase and maintain the supply of affordable supportive housing for low-
                      income and special needs populations, including the homeless;
                 •    Create a suitable living environment through neighborhood revitalization and
                      improvements in public facilities and services; and
                 •    Expand economic opportunities for lower income households.
Key components of this strategy are outlined below.
Expand the supply of affordable rental housing (Rental Housing Production).
The City provides funding to nonprofit and for profit developers to develop affordable rental housing
through new construction and substantial rehabilitation. Major funding sources include the federal
HOME program and property tax “boomerang funds” (formerly Redevelopment tax increment). The
City also provides funding to nonprofit developers for certain predevelopment expenses.
The City is also engaging in new innovative strategies to transform its abandoned properties into new
affordable rental housing through the Community Buying Program that was launched in 2014.
Preserve the supply of affordable rental housing.
The City provides funding to nonprofit and for profit developers to preserve existing affordable
housing at risk of converting to market-rate housing. Funding will be provided from HOME funds.
Use restrictions are extended for the maximum feasible period, and owners will be required to
commit to renew project-based rental assistance contracts so long as renewals are offered. The City
supports efforts to secure Federal, State and private funding for these projects.
Expand the supply of affordable ownership housing (Ownership Housing Production).
The City provides funding to nonprofit and for profit developers to develop affordable
homeownership units. Major funding sources include the federal HOME program and
Redevelopment “boomerang funds.” The City generally seeks to make such housing permanently
affordable by imposing recorded resale controls. It is possible that the specific affordability
mechanisms will be modified to respond to changing market conditions and to balance long term
affordability with the objective of allowing homebuyers to retain sufficient equity to move up in the
housing market at a future date, thus making the assisted units available to more first-time
homebuyers. Regardless of the specific mechanisms, the City will strive to ensure that new
ownership housing remains affordable for at least 45 years.
296                                                                      GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                       CITY OF O AKL AND HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                           2015-2023
The City is also engaging in new innovative strategies to transform its abandoned properties into new
affordable ownership housing through the Community Buying Program that was launched in 2014.
Expand ownership opportunities for first time homebuyers (Homebuyer Assistance).
The City is engaged in a variety of efforts to provide opportunities for first-time homebuyers to
purchase homes. The City’s Mortgage Assistance Program provides deferred payment second
mortgages to low and very low income homebuyers. Other programs provided by the City and by
organizations with whom the City has developed partnerships include counseling and education for
first-time homebuyers, and efforts to provide new and innovative mortgage products.
Improve existing housing stock (Housing Rehabilitation).
Much of Oakland’s housing stock is old and in need of repair and renovation. The City uses
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and HOME funds to assist moderate, low and
extremely low income homeowners to rehabilitate their homes. Funds are targeted to the City’s
Community Development Districts to stimulate revitalization of low and moderate income
neighborhoods. The City’s Housing Rehabilitation includes programs to correct major code
deficiencies, make emergency and minor repairs, and abate lead-based paint hazards.
Provide rental assistance for extremely and very low income families (Rental
Assistance).
For extremely low and very low income households, especially those with incomes less than 30
percent of median income, capital subsidies alone are insufficient. The City actively supports efforts
by the Oakland Housing Authority to obtain additional Section 8 vouchers, and to find new ways to
make those vouchers more effective, including the provision of project-based assistance.
Develop housing with supportive services for seniors and persons with special
needs.
The City provides financial assistance (with HOME and Redevelopment “boomerang funds”) to
develop new affordable housing with appropriate supportive services for seniors and for people with
disabilities. The City also administers Federal grant funds such as CDBG-funded Access
Improvement Program and for the Oakland metropolitan area under the Housing Opportunities for
Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) program.
Prevent Foreclosures and Stabilize Neighborhoods
In contrast to the height of the subprime mortgage crisis in about 2008, the majority of Oakland’s
homeowners who face foreclosures today have owned their homes for over 6 years, including many
who have owned for several decades. In partnership with community groups and financial
institutions, the City has been engaging in new innovative strategies to prevent foreclosures including
the development of a comprehensive model integrating door-to-door outreach with housing
counseling and legal services with advocacy and bank escalation. The City partnership also developed
a new loan fund to reset mortgages to today’s current market value, as well as new funds to help
homeowners and renters with affordability gap needs.
Additionally, the City’s new Housing Assistance Center assists vulnerable Oakland residents through
a one-stop model program. In 2014, the City launched a new one-stop housing services center that
provides referrals for residents regarding their housing needs as well as dedicated and private rooms
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                          297

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
for City staff to meet with residents regarding available housing services. This one-stop model allows
vulnerable residents to go to one place to address their housing needs and questions.
Remove impediments to fair housing (Fair Housing).
The City provides financial support to organizations that provide residents with counseling,
information, and legal advice and referrals. The City’s Fair Housing programs are targeted to low and
extremely low income residents. As a part of this effort, investigation of fair housing complaints and
enforcement of fair housing laws will continue to be funded as part of the effort to expand fair
housing choices. Fair Housing programs support minorities, persons with disabilities, seniors,
families with children and other protected classes.
Implement a “Housing First” homeless strategy via Oakland’s Permanent Access To
Housing (PATH) Plan.
The City’s Permanent Access To Housing (PATH) program is run in parallel to an Alameda County-
wide program called the EveryOne Home plan. Both EveryOne Home and PATH are based on a
“Housing First” model that emphasizes rapid client access to permanent housing rather than
prolonged stays in shelters and transitional housing. What differentiates a Housing First approach is
that the immediate and primary focus is on helping individuals and families quickly access and
sustain permanent housing. The City of Oakland uses a combination of Federal, State and local funds
for PATH Plan implementation.
Housing Equity Road Map
The City’s Department of Housing and Community Development staff, along with Urban Strategies
Council and Policy Link, are developing a Housing Equity Roadmap to provide a concrete set of
policy and program recommendations for City implementation in the next 5 to 10 years. The Housing
Equity Roadmap will include information about demographic changes, including at a neighborhood
level, that are critical to policy development, as well as best practice research of effective efforts from
other jurisdictions. The housing problems that will be addressed through the Housing Equity
Roadmap include the following:
     •   Housing habitability,
     •   New affordable housing production,
     •   Preservation of existing non-subsidized affordable housing stock,
     •   Transforming abandoned properties into new affordable housing.
Resource Constraints
The analysis contained in previous Housing Element chapters has shown the tremendous magnitude
of unmet housing needs in Oakland and the gap between the market cost of housing and the ability of
low- and moderate-income households to pay for housing. The Housing Element is intended to
complement the strategies in the City’s Consolidated Plan, which focuses on the needs of very low-
and low-income households and other City initiatives, such as the Downtown and Major Corridors
housing program and the Oakland Sustainable Community Development Initiative, the staff of which
prepared an Energy and Climate Action Plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in Oakland.
298                                                                        GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                       CITY OF O AKL AND HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                           2015-2023
As noted in Chapter 4 of the Housing Element, the City has limited resources with which to address
these needs and only a small fraction can be addressed during the time frame of this Housing
Element. The amount of assistance required per household is much higher for those with the lowest
incomes. This is particularly true for housing programs that produce housing that will remain
affordable for many years. The City attempts to maximize the impact of these resources by
leveraging other funds wherever possible, particularly from private sources and other public sources.
To the extent possible, the City also provides local resources to address housing needs.
The City focuses its limited financial resources on programs that assist households with the greatest
needs. In addition, most of the funding sources for the City’s programs carry restrictions on who can
be assisted. This means that very low-income and low-income households receive the highest priority
for most housing assistance programs. Seniors, persons with disabilities, large families, and
immigrant populations also have particularly high priority needs for which special programs and
funding sources are targeted.
On the other hand, the City uses a variety of planning and regulatory tools to promote housing for all
economic levels and household types. While some of these tools are designed specifically to
encourage affordable housing, others are intended to promote the development of housing for
moderate and above-moderate income households, too. The City’s zoning update process is intended
to craft regulations which encourage the construction of new housing near transit and along the major
commercial corridors. The policies outlined below contain a mix of financial and regulatory tools.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                         299

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
B.     GOALS AND POLICIES
Goal 1:        Provide Adequate Sites Suitable for Housing for All
               Income Groups
Policy 1.1     PRIORITY DEVELOPMENT AREAS HOUSING PROGRAM
       The City will target development and marketing resources in Priority Development Areas
       (PDAs), and in areas for which Specific Plans have been completed or are underway. (See
       also Policy 7.3.)
       Action 1.1.1      Site Identification
       Conduct an inventory of vacant and underutilized land within the City’s PDAs including the
       MacArthur BART Station Area, West Oakland, Downtown/ Jack London Square Area,
       Fruitvale/Dimond Area, Eastmont Town Center Area, and the Coliseum BART Station Area,
       identify sites suitable for housing, including estimates of the number of housing units that
       those sites can accommodate, and make that information available to developers through a
       variety of media.
       Action 1.1.2      Expedited Review
       Continue to expedite the permit and entitlement process for housing developments with more
       than 50 units in the Downtown by assigning them to specialized planners, for priority permit
       processing, management tracking of applications, and scheduling of public hearings for
       completed applications.
       Action 1.1.3      Streamline Environmental Review
       Advocate for new strategies to streamline the environmental review process under the
       California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
       Action 1.1.4      International Boulevard Community Revitalization Without Displacement
                         Initiative
       An inter-departmental City team is working with residents, businesses, community groups,
       the County and other public agencies, foundations, private industry and other partners to
       improve International Blvd. Corridor’s housing, economic development, health,
       transportation, and public safety conditions, as well as to develop strategies to prevent the
       displacement of long-time residents and small businesses. Key parts from the City’s award-
       wining International Boulevard Transit Oriented Development Plan will be implemented.
       Action 1.1.5      Consider expanding the existing Micro-living quarters pilot program to the
                         entire Downtown and Jack London Square PDA.
       Micro-living quarters are defined in the Oakland Planning Code as “a multiple-tenant
       building with an average net-floor area of 175 square feet but a minimum size of 150 square
       feet. Bathroom facilities are included within each living quarter but cooking facilities are not
       allowed within each living quarter. A shared kitchen is required on each floor, the maximum
       number units are not prescribed but the size of the units and the FAR shall dictate the limits. ”
       Currently, these facilities may only be located in the Broadway Valdez Commercial Zone, D-
       BV-2 and a small area of the D-BV-3 south of Bay Place and are permitted upon the granting
       of a Conditional Use Permit.
300                                                                    GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Policy 1.2      AVAILABILITY OF LAND
       Maintain an adequate supply of land to meet the regional housing share under the ABAG
       Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA).
       Action 1.2.1     Land Inventory (Opportunity Sites)
       Develop a list of vacant and underutilized sites potentially suitable for higher density
       housing, particularly affordable housing, and distribute that list to developers and nonprofit
       housing providers upon request. The availability of the site inventory will be posted on the
       City’s website after the City Council adopts the Housing Element.
Policy 1.3      APPROPRIATE LOCATIONS AND DENSITIES FOR HOUSING
       The City’s Strategic Planning Division initiated five (5) Specific Plans and one (1) Area Plan
       during the 2007-2014 Housing Element period, which will further the housing location and
       density objectives contained in the recently completed residential and commercial zoning
       update. The Lake Merritt Station Area (Specific) Plan, Broadway Valdez Specific Plan, West
       Oakland Specific Plan, Coliseum Area Specific Plan, and Central Estuary Area Plan included
       extensive community outreach processes and have resulted in specific zoning proposals.
       These Specific and Area Plans will facilitate the construction of nearly 17,000 new housing
       units in the City of Oakland.
       The completion of the Specific and Area Plans will provide these substantial housing gains in
       two respects: environmental clearance and community buy-in for future housing projects.
       Each planning process involved extensive community participation which culminated with
       significant community buy-in to the policies and development framework outlined in the
       plans, thus minimizing possible community opposition to future housing development
       projects.
       Action 1.3.1     Broadway Valdez Specific Plan (BVSP)
       Track progress on the approval and completion of the 1,800 housing units included in the
       development program for the Broadway Valdez Specific Plan (BVSP).
       Action 1.3.2     Lake Merritt Station Area Plan (LMSAP)
       Track progress on the approval and completion of the 4,900 housing units included in the
       development program for the Lake Merritt Station Area (Specific) Plan (LMSAP).
       Action 1.3.3     West Oakland Specific Plan (WOSP)
       Track progress on the approval and completion of the 5,360 housing units included in the
       development program for the West Oakland Specific Plan (WOSP).
       Action 1.3.4     Coliseum Area Specific Plan (CASP)
       Track progress on the approval and completion of the 5,000 housing units included in the
       development program for the Coliseum Area Specific Plan (CASP).
       Action 1.3.5     Central Estuary Area Plan (CEAP)
       Track progress on the approval and completion of the 400 housing units included in the
       development program for the Central Estuary Area Plan (CEAP).
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                       301

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       Action 1.3.6     Promote new housing opportunities in the Estuary Area.
       With the resolution of the legal challenges to the Brooklyn Basin project (formerly Oak-to-
       Ninth), new housing is scheduled to be built in the timeframe of the 2015-2023 Housing
       Element where former industrial uses predominated.
Policy 1.4      SECONDARY UNITS
       Support the construction of secondary units in single-family zones and recognize these units
       as an important source of affordable housing.
       Action 1.4.1     Secondary Unit -Parking Solutions
       Explore parking solutions (tandem parking, compact parking spaces, etc.) for secondary units
       to enable more secondary units as part of a Planning Code update of the City’s parking
       regulations. Explore the option of eliminating the existing requirement for a separate non-
       tandem parking space.
       Action 1.4.2     Secondary Unit – Setback Solutions
       Explore relaxing the current prohibition on Secondary Units in the rear setback. If these
       zoning changes are implemented it will allow Secondary Units in the side and rear setback, as
       long as the structure doesn’t exceed existing size limits and can meet all the same standards
       that allow a garage or accessory structure in the same location.
Policy 1.5      MANUFACTURED HOUSING
       Provide for the inclusion of manufactured housing in appropriate locations.
       Action 1.5.1     Factory-Built Housing
       Continue to implement City-adopted regulations that allow manufactured housing in single-
       family residential districts.
Policy 1.6      ADAPTIVE REUSE
       Encourage the re-use of industrial and commercial buildings for joint living quarters and
       working spaces.
       Action 1.6.1     Live/Work Conversions
       Allow the conversion of existing industrial and commercial buildings to joint live/work units
       in specific commercial and industrial locations while considering the impacts on nearby
       viable businesses.
Policy 1.7      REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS
       The City of Oakland will strive to meet its fair share of housing needed in the Bay Area
       region.
       Action 1.7.1     Accommodate at Least 14,765 New Housing Units
       Designate sufficient sites, use the City’s regulatory powers, and provide financial assistance
       to accommodate at least 14,765 new dwelling units between January 2014 and June 2023.
       This sum represents the City’s share of the Bay Area region’s housing needs as estimated by
       the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG). The City will encourage the
       construction of at least 6,919 units for very low-, low-, and moderate-income households.
302                                                                    GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Goal 2:         Promote the Development of Adequate Housing for Low-
                and Moderate-Income Households
Policy 2.1      AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
       Provide financing for the development of affordable housing for low- and moderate-income
       households. The City’s financing programs will promote a mix of housing types, including
       homeownership, multifamily rental housing, and housing for seniors and persons with special
       needs.
       Action 2.1.1      New Construction and Substantial Rehabilitation Housing Development
                         Program
       Issue annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) for the competitive allocation of
       affordable housing funds. Points will be assigned for addressing City priorities to ensure that
       funds are used to further policy objectives.
       Action 2.1.2      Housing Predevelopment Loan and Grant Program
       Provide loans to nonprofit housing organizations for predevelopment expenses such as
       preparation of applications for outside funding.
       Action 2.1.3      Utilize Public Housing Resources for New Development
       Work with the Oakland Housing Authority to increase housing choices for low-income
       families by utilizing Making Transitions Work voucher flexibilities toward the development
       of new affordable housing for extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate income
       households.
Policy 2.2      AFFORDABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP OPPORTUNITIES
       Develop and promote programs and mechanisms to expand opportunities for lower-income
       households to become homeowners.
       Action 2.2.1      First Time Homebuyer Programs
       Continue to operate a First Time Homebuyer Program as funding is available (either through
       State funding or through program-related income).
       Action 2.2.2      Scattered-Site Single Family Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program
       City staff and non-profit partners have developed the Oakland Community Buying Program
       that will address vacant or abandoned housing due to foreclosures or property tax liens. Start-
       up funds for this program have been identified. Funding will be used to provide long term
       affordability of new housing developed. The final housing products will be single family
       homes for re-sale, lease-to-own, or for rent and if financially viable and operational capacity
       exists, will partner with community land trusts or otherwise incorporate resale restrictions to
       preserve affordability for Oakland residents (see also Action 4.3.4).
       Action 2.2.3      Foreclosure Mitigation Pilot Loan Program
       Given that the City’s foreclosure crisis is currently impacting long-time Oakland
       homeowners, the City has been engaging in new innovative strategies, such as launching a
       comprehensive program connecting door-to-door outreach with legal and housing counseling
       services, City escalation with bank officials, and the development of new loan fund programs.
       In addition, the City has been working on the development of a distressed mortgage notes
       program in order to purchase delinquent mortgage notes, modify loans of qualified
       homeowners, assist homeowners who are not able to receive modifications with alternative
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                       303

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       housing solutions, and then dispose of vacant properties to result in new affordable
       homeownership opportunities.
       Action 2.2.4     Community Buying Program
       The Community Buying Program seeks to assist Oakland residents (either those people who
       have lost their homes to foreclosure or tenants residing in foreclosed properties or who have
       been unable to compete with all cash investors on the open market) to purchase properties
       from the Scattered-Site Single Family Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program (Action 2.2.2
       above) or other similar foreclosed housing. Should public funds be utilized, the city would
       assure the long-term affordability of these properties through the use of effective resale
       restrictions in partnership with nonprofit organizations with sufficient operational capacity,
       including possibly local community land trusts. Assistance to Oakland residents could
       include the use of loan products such as the Federal Housing Authority 203K loan or other
       funds available to the City, such as housing rehabilitation or down-payment assistance funds.
       In addition, the program will build upon the National Community Stabilization Trust’s First
       Look program.
       Action 2.2.5      Home Preservation Loan Fund
       The Home Preservation Loan Fund Program will provide up to $50,000 in forgivable loan
       funds for distressed homeowners.
Policy 2.3      DENSITY BONUS PROGRAM
       Continue to refine and implement programs to permit projects to exceed the maximum
       allowable density set by zoning, if they include units set aside for occupancy by very low-,
       low-, and moderate-income households and/or seniors.
       Action 2.3.1     Density Bonus Ordinance
       Continue to implement the City’s density bonus ordinance. The City permits density bonuses
       not exceeding 35 percent for projects that provide at least:
       1. Ten percent (10%) of the total Dwelling Units of a Residential Housing Development for
       Lower Income Households; or
       2. Five percent (5%) of the total Dwelling Units of a Residential Housing Development for
       Very Low Income Households; or
       3. A Senior Citizen Housing Development; or
       4. Ten percent (10%) of the total Dwelling Units in a common interest development as
       defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code, for persons and families of Moderate
       Income, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase.
Policy 2.4      PERMANENTLY AFFORDABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP
       Develop mechanisms for ensuring that assisted homeownership developments remain
       permanently affordable to lower-income households to promote a mix of incomes.
       Action 2.4.1     Community Land Trust Program
       Continue support of existing Community Land Trust Programs. Support expansion of land
       trusts if land values make it financially feasible. Ownership of the land by a community-
       based land trust ensures that the housing remains permanently affordable.
304                                                                    GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
          Action 2.4.2         Resale Controls
          Continue to utilize financing agreements for City-assisted ownership development projects to
          ensure that units remain permanently affordable through covenants running with the land.
Policy 2.5          SENIORS AND OTHER PERSONS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
          Assist and promote the development of housing with appropriate supportive services for
          seniors and other persons with special needs 51.
          Action 2.5.1         Housing Development Program
          Provide financial assistance to developers of housing for seniors and persons with special
          needs.
          Action 2.5.2         Housing for Persons with HIV/AIDS
          Provide housing and associated supportive services for persons with HIV/AIDS through a
          combination of development of new housing, project-based assistance in existing affordable
          housing developments; and tenant-based assistance to allow households to find their own
          housing in the private market. Enhance outcomes via housing first model under the Alameda
          County EveryOne Home Plan.
          Action 2.5.3         Accessible Units in New Federally-Assisted Housing
          All housing assisted with Federal funds (such as HOME and CDBG) must comply with
          HUD’s accessibility requirements, which require that five percent of all units be made
          accessible for persons with mobility limitations, and an additional two percent be made
          accessible for persons with sensory limitations (sight, hearing). The City will ensure that
          these requirements are met in all projects that receive Federal funds from the City as part of
          project review and funding approval.
Policy 2.6          LARGE FAMILIES
          Encourage the development of affordable rental and ownership housing units that can
          accommodate large families.
          Action 2.6.1         Housing Development Program
          Provide points in competitive funding allocations for projects that include a higher proportion
          of units with three (3) or more bedrooms. The City will award points in the ranking process
          for projects with an average number of bedrooms exceeding the minimum specified in the
          program guidelines.
Policy 2.7          EXPAND LOCAL RESOURCES FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
          Increase local resources to support affordable housing development and develop new sources
          of funding.
          Action 2.7.1         Jobs/Housing Impact Fee
          Continue to implement the City’s existing Jobs/Housing Impact Fee by collecting fees from
          new office and warehouse/distribution facilities.
51
   "Special needs units" are defined as units reserved for populations including the following: developmentally disabled,
survivors of physical abuse, persons with chronic illness including HIV/AIDS or mental illness, displaced teenage parents
(or expectant teenage parents), individuals exiting from institutional settings, youth exiting foster care, chronic substance
abusers, or another specific group as approved by the City of Oakland. (City of Oakland 2014 Housing Development NOFA
Program Description, page 33.)
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                                             305

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
      Action 2.7.2     Consider Implementing Mandatory and/or Voluntary Options for Developer
                       Contributions to Affordable Housing Development by Conducting a Nexus
                       Study and Economic Feasibility Study for Affordable Housing (among other
                       areas studied—see Policy Action 3.3.2)
      The City is committed to equitable development Citywide—with a focus on Specific Plan
      Areas, Priority Development Areas (PDAs) and large development projects—that provides
      housing for a range of economic levels to ensure the development of thriving, vibrant and
      complete communities.
      The Nexus Study and Economic Feasibility Study will provide documentation of what level
      of development impact fees are supportable, if at all, by quantifying the impacts of
      development and establishing whether there is a reasonable relationship between the amount
      of the fees to be imposed on new developments and the impact created by the new
      developments. Mandatory options for developer contributions will include the study of a
      housing impact fee or affordable housing set-asides for newly constructed ownership
      housing. Voluntary options for developer contributions will include the study of bonuses and
      incentives such as Housing Overlay Zones. The RFP released July 8, 2014 requires that the
      contractor do an analysis of residential development costs and the market for both rental and
      owner-occupied housing in Oakland.
      Action 2.7.3     Sale of City-Owned Property for Housing
      Solicit Requests for Proposals (RFPs) from interested developers to construct housing on
      City-owned sites. RFPs will be posted on the City’s website and distributed directly to
      developers, including nonprofit housing providers. In disposing of City-owned surplus
      properties, the City will give first consideration to affordable housing developers per the
      California Surplus Lands Act, Government Code 54220 et seq. If the City does not agree to
      price and terms with an affordable housing developer and disposes of the surplus land to an
      entity that develops 10 or more residential units on the property, the City shall require the
      entity to provide at least 15 percent of the developed units at an affordable housing cost or
      affordable rent to specified income groups, as required by Government Code Section
      54233. For those sites that are sold without affordable housing requirements, the City should
      consider depositing 25% of the proceeds of such sales to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
      Action 2.7.4     Utilize 25% of the funds distributed to the City as a taxing entity under the
                       Redevelopment dissolution and deposit them into the Affordable Housing
                       Trust Fund (aka “Boomerang Funds”)
      The State statutes governing the dissolution of redevelopment agencies and the wind-down of
      redevelopment activities provide for the distribution of former tax-increment funding to
      taxing entities. The City of Oakland is one of a number of taxing entities that will benefit
      from Oakland’s Redevelopment Agency dissolution. The distribution of property tax will be
      from the Redevelopment Property Tax Trust Fund (RPTTF) and includes funds not needed by
      successor agencies to fulfill enforceable obligations. Additionally, there will be distributions
      to taxing entities sales proceeds and other revenues from the use or disposition of assets of
      what are now called “successor agencies” (former redevelopment agencies). These funds are
      called “boomerang funds” and represent a windfall in property tax revenue to the City of
      Oakland. In late 2013, the City of Oakland committed to setting aside 25% of the funds
      distributed to the City as a taxing entity under the Redevelopment dissolution and deposit
306                                                                  GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       them into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Starting in 2015, the Affordable Housing
       Trust fund will begin to receive boomerang funds on an annual basis.
Policy 2.8      RENTAL ASSISTANCE
       Increase the availability of rental assistance for very low-income households.
       Action 2.8.1: Expansion of Section 8 Vouchers
       Work with the Oakland Housing Authority to obtain additional funding from the federal
       government for more Section 8 rental assistance for very low-income renters through
       documentation of need for additional housing vouchers and contacting decision-makers at
       HUD if appropriate.
       Action 2.8.2     City of Oakland Rental Assistance Fund
       Support a continued partnership between the City of Oakland and a non-profit agency to
       provide up to $5,000 in rental assistance grants to distressed tenants impacted by the
       foreclosure crisis.
Policy 2.9      PATH PLAN FOR THE HOMELESS
       Expand the City’s Permanent Access to Housing (PATH) Plan to prevent and end
       homelessness and increase housing opportunities to the homeless through acquisition,
       rehabilitation and construction of housing, master leasing and short-term financial assistance.
       Action 2.9.1     Provide outreach programs to those who are homeless or in danger of
                        becoming homeless
       The City will continue to provide the Homeless Mobile Outreach Program (HMOP), which
       provides outreach services to people living in homeless encampments. In addition to
       providing food and survival supplies, counseling and case management, the HMOP strives to
       encourage those living in these encampments to access available programs for housing and
       other necessary assistance to aid in attaining more stable living situations. The City will also
       continue to encourage outreach as part of the services of providers who are funded through
       City’s PATH Strategy to end homelessness.
       Action 2.9.2     Support programs that help prevent renters from becoming homeless.
       The City will support organizations that operate programs that prevent homelessness by
       providing emergency loans or grants for first and last month’s rent for renters, security
       deposits, counseling, legal assistance, advocacy and other prevention services for those
       dealing with default and delinquency rental housing issues. Prevention services and
       programs will be funded under the City’s adopted PATH Strategy to end homelessness.
       The City will investigate the possibility of establishing a funding source for an expanded
       rapid rehousing program both as a means to keep individuals and families at risk of falling
       into homelessness, as well as to improve the City’s ability to rapidly rehouse those who do
       fall into homelessness; this could include short term and medium term rental subsidies.
       Action 2.9.3     Provide shelter programs to the homeless and special needs populations
       The City will continue to fund programs that are in line with the City’s PATH Strategy to end
       homelessness. These agencies will provide housing and/or housing services that result in an
       outcome of obtaining and maintaining stable permanent housing for the homeless and near
       homeless population of Oakland. PATH is inclusive of the special needs populations such as
       those with HIV/AIDS, mental illness, and victims of domestic violence.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                        307

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       Action 2.9.4     Provide transitional housing programs to those who are ready to transition
                        to independent living
       The City will continue to fund and support as part of its PATH Strategy, transitional housing
       programs with services to homeless singles, families and homeless youth. By providing
       housing with services for up to 24 months, the program’s tenants are prepared for more stable
       and permanent housing. Services provided assist the tenants with issues that prevent them
       from obtaining or returning to self-sufficiency.
       Action 2.9.5     Support development of permanent housing affordable to extremely low
                        income households
       The City will continue to seek ways to provide permanent housing affordable to extremely
       low income households, by supporting funding from the state and federal levels. The City
       will also take actions to address barriers to the development of such housing. The City will
       continue to participate in the Alameda County-wide efforts that have evolved from a County-
       Wide Continuum of Care Council to the Alameda County EveryOne Home Plan, a road map
       for ending homelessness.
       Action 2.9.6     Coordinate actions and policies that affect the extremely low income
                        population of Alameda County
       The City will continue to participate in the Alameda County-wide efforts that have evolved
       from a County-wide Continuum of Care Council to the Alameda County EveryOne Home
       Plan. The EveryOne Home Plan is a coordinated regional response seeking to streamline use
       of the county’s resources and build capacity to attract funding from federal, state and
       philanthropic sources. The City will also participate in the County-Wide system redesign
       process.
       Action 2.9.7     Advocate for policies beneficial to the extremely low income and homeless
                        populations of Oakland
       The City continues to advocate for an expansion of Federal funding for the Section 8 program
       “Moving to Work” as implemented by the Housing Authority under the title “Making
       Transitions Work” Program (both with the same acronym MTW). The City is an active
       partner in the implementation of a county-wide housing and services plan (EveryOne Home
       Plan) for extremely low income and homeless persons
       Action 2.9.8     Sponsor Based Housing Assistance Program
       Work with the Oakland Housing Authority to assist households that otherwise might not
       qualify for or be successful in the traditional Public Housing and/or Section 8 programs by
       partnering with agencies to provide service enriched housing options that increase housing
       choice for special needs populations.
Policy 2.10     PROMOTE AN EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION OF AFFORDABLE
                HOUSING THROUGHOUT THE COMMUNITY
       The City will undertake a number of efforts to distribute assisted housing widely throughout
       the community and avoid the over-concentration of assisted housing in any particular
       neighborhood, in order to provide a more equitable distribution of households by income and
       by race and ethnicity.
308                                                                  GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       Action 2.10.1     Provide incentives for location of City-assisted developments in areas of low
                         concentration of poverty
       In its annual competitions for the award of housing development funds, the City will give
       preference to projects in areas with low concentrations of poverty.
Policy 2.11     AFFORDABLE HOUSING                       PREFERENCE             FOR      OAKLAND
                RESIDENTS AND WORKERS
       Implement the policy enacted by the City Council in 2008 granting a preference to Oakland
       residents and Oakland workers to buy or rent affordable housing units assisted by City of
       Oakland funds provided through its annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) process.
       Action 2.11.1 Oakland Resident and Worker Housing Preference Policy Resolution
       Continue to give first preference to households with at least one member who qualifies as a
       City of Oakland resident or worker. All other households will get second preference. There is
       no minimum length or residency or employment in Oakland to qualify for the resident or
       worker preference. The owner, developer, or leasing agent of each housing development will
       be required to verify residency and/or employment by collecting a Certification of Eligibility
       with the required documentation. The preference policy will be applied only if and to the
       extent that other funding sources for the housing project permit such a policy.
Goal 3:         Remove Constraints to the Availability and Affordability
                of Housing for All Income Groups
       Governmental Constraints
Policy 3.1      EXPEDITE AND SIMPLIFY PERMIT PROCESSES
       Continue to implement permit processes that facilitate the provision of housing and annually
       review and revise permit approval processes.
       Action 3.1.1: Allow Multifamily Housing
       Continue to allow multifamily housing by right (no conditional use permit required) in
       specified residential zones and by conditional use permit in specified commercial zones.
       Action 3.1.2: Special Needs Housing
       Pursuant to Government Code Section 65583(a)(5), transitional and supportive housing must
       be considered a residential use of property and must be subject only to those restrictions that
       apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. The City of Oakland
       amended its Planning Code in July 2014 to comply with this provision. The City’s Planning
       Code will be evaluated and amended as appropriate for consistency with these requirements.
       Pursuant to Government Code Section 65583 and 65589.5, City of Oakland will allow
       emergency shelters by-right as indicated in the Oakland Planning Code Section 17.103.015.
       Action 3.1.3: Discretionary Permits
       Continue to implement discretionary permit processes (design review, conditional use
       permits, etc.) in a manner that includes explicit approval criteria and approval procedures that
       facilitate the development of multifamily and special needs housing in appropriate areas of
       the City.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                        309

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       Action 3.1.4: “One-Stop” Permit Process
       Continue the “one-stop” permit process that provides coordinated, comprehensive, and
       accurate review of residential development applications. Ensure coordination between
       different City departments, provide for parallel review of different permits associated with
       projects, and provide project coordinator services to expedite project review when needed.
       Action 3.1.5: Assign Priority to Affordable Housing
       Continue to assign priority to the review of affordable housing projects through an expedited
       review process and other techniques.
       Action 3.1.6: Expedite Environmental Review
       Reduce the time and cost of environmental review by using CEQA exemptions, the City’s
       Standard Conditions of Approval, and focused and tiered Environmental Impact Reports, as
       appropriate.
       Action 3.1.7: Secondary Units
       Continue to encourage the construction of new secondary units and the legalization of
       existing non-conforming secondary units to bring those units into compliance with current
       zoning and building standards.
Policy 3.2      FLEXIBLE ZONING STANDARDS
       Allow flexibility in the application of zoning, building, and other regulations.
       Action 3.2.1      Alternative Building Code Standards
       Continue the use of alternative accommodations and equivalent facilitation of the California
       Building Codes to address the special housing needs of persons with disabilities and to
       facilitate the rehabilitation of older dwelling units. (See Actions 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 for housing
       rehabilitation actions and Action 6.2.1 for reasonable accommodations for persons with
       disabilities).
       Action 3.2.2      Planned Unit Development Zoning
       Maintain the provisions in the Planning Code for planned unit developments on sites where
       the strict application of zoning standards could make development less feasible. Consider
       reducing the minimum lot area requirement for residential planned unit developments (PUD).
       Action 3.2.3      Flexible Parking Standards.
       Study and consider implementing reductions in the parking standards in any future Planning
       Code revisions. Consider expanding the reduced open space requirements as stated in the
       Broadway Valdez District zoning regulations (codified in Planning Code Section
       17.116.110D) citywide.
       Action 3.2.4 Reduced Open Space Requirements
       Consider expanding the reduced open space requirements as stated in the Broadway Valdez
       District zoning regulations (codified in Planning Code Section 17.101C.050B) citywide.
Policy 3.3      DEVELOPMENT                  FEES        AND         SITE         IMPROVEMENT
                REQUIREMENTS
       Reduce the cost of development through reasonable and predictable fees, and improvement of
       project review standards.
310                                                                    GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       Action 3.3.1: Project Review Process and Development Agreements
       Continue to require only those on- and off-site improvements necessary to meet the needs of
       projects and to mitigate significant on- and off-site environmental impacts.
       Action 3.3.2: Development Impact Fees
       Consider transportation, capital improvement and housing impact fees to mitigate impacts on
       City infrastructure and services while balancing the costs to support new development. The
       City will be issuing a Request for Proposals (RFP) during the Housing Element planning
       period for an impact fee study that will consider transportation, infrastructure, and affordable
       housing. The RFP released July 8, 2014 requires that the contractor do an analysis of
       residential development costs and the market for both rental and owner-occupied housing in
       Oakland. (See also Action 2.7.2.)
Policy 3.4      INTERGOVERNMENTAL COORDINATION
       Promote intergovernmental coordination in review and approval of residential development
       proposals when more than one governmental agency has jurisdiction.
       Action 3.4.1: Multiple Agency Reviews
       Continue to coordinate multiple agency reviews of residential development proposals when
       more than one level of government is required for project review.
       Action 3.4.2: Allocations of Project Based Section 8 Voucher Units
       Reduce costs and achieve greater cost effectiveness by allocating project-based vouchers,
       when possible, using an existing competitive process initiated by the City of Oakland, as
       funding and other program consideration allows.
       Non-Governmental Constraints
Policy 3.5      FINANCING COSTS
       Reduce financing costs for affordable housing development.
       Action 3.5.1: Access to Low-Cost Financing for Development
       Continue to assist affordable housing developers in obtaining financing for their projects.
       (See actions under Policy 2.1.)
       Action 3.5.2: Access to Low-Cost Financing for Home Purchase
       Continue to implement homebuyer assistance programs for low- and moderate-income
       households. (See Action 2.2.1.)
Policy 3.6      ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
       Explore programs and funding sources to assist with the remediation of soil contamination on
       sites that maybe redeveloped for housing.
       Action 3.6.1     Remediation of Soil Contamination
       Explore possible funding sources and other ways to assist prospective housing developers in
       addressing soil contamination on potential housing sites. If appropriate funding can be
       identified, develop and implement a remediation assistance program.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                        311
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Policy 3.7       COMMUNITY OUTREACH AND EDUCATION
       Increase public acceptance and understanding of affordable development and related issues
       through community outreach.
       Action 3.7.1      Community Outreach Program
       Continue to periodically meet with housing advocacy groups and neighborhood organizations
       to educate the public on affordable housing and reduce community opposition to affordable
       housing developments.
Goal 4:          Conserve            and        Improve            Older        Housing           and
                 Neighborhoods
Policy 4.1       HOUSING REHABILITATION LOAN PROGRAMS
       Provide a variety of loan programs to assist with the rehabilitation of owner-occupied and
       rental housing for very low and low-income households.
       Action 4.1.1      Rehabilitation Loan Programs for Owner-Occupied Housing
       Provide loans for correction of code violations, repair to major building systems in danger of
       failure, abatement of lead-based paint hazards, minor home repairs for seniors, and
       emergency repairs, using the following programs:
       •         HMIP Deferred Loan Program
       •         Alameda County Minor Home Repair Grant Program
       •         Emergency Home Repair Program
       •         Lead Hazard Control and Paint Program
       •         Neighborhood Housing Rehabilitation Program
       •         Access Improvement Program
       •         Weatherization and Energy Retrofit Loan Program
       Action 4.1.2      Rehabilitation Loans for Owner-Occupied Buildings with 2 to 4 Units
       Use the City’s HMIP Loan Program for owner-occupied buildings of 1-4 units. In structures
       with 2 to 4 units, the rental units may also be rehabilitated using funds from this program.
Policy 4.2       BLIGHT ABATEMENT
       To improve housing and neighborhood conditions, the City should abate blighting conditions
       through a combination of code enforcement, financial assistance, and public investment.
       Action 4.2.1      Anti-Blight Programs
       Implement a variety of programs to reduce blighting conditions that can lead to disinvestment
       and deterioration of the housing stock. These include enforcement of blight regulations,
       graffiti abatement, boarding up of vacant buildings, and a Clean Oakland Program.
312                                                                      GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       Action 4.2.2      Housing Code Enforcement
       Enforce housing codes to ensure decent, safe, and sanitary housing conditions. Orders to
       abate will be followed up with additional actions. The City may correct deficiencies itself
       and then place a lien against the property for the cost of the repairs.
       Action 4.2.3      Problem Properties Program
       City Staff will resolve public nuisance housing through joint enforcement actions of Code
       Enforcement, Police, Fire, and Alameda County Department of Environmental Health.
       Enforcement actions will include financial penalties and incentives.
       Action 4.2.4      Foreclosed and Defaulted Residential Property Registration, and Abatement
                         Program
       The City of Oakland’s Foreclosed and Defaulted Residential Property Registration, and
       Abatement Program (O.M.C. 8.54) requires owners or the beneficiary and/or trustee pursuing
       property foreclosure and/or their agents to register, inspect, and potentially maintain their
       residential properties to protect the health and safety, livability, appearance and social fabric
       of our neighborhoods. Code Enforcement pro-actively monitors registered properties for
       trespassers, blight, pollutants, and vectors. Enforcement actions include financial penalties for
       un-maintained properties or registration violations.
       Action 4.2.5      Tax Default Properties Program
       City staff will continue to work with the Alameda County Tax Collector, to auction properties
       that are both tax defaulted and that have extensive Code Enforcement liens. The program
       takes advantage of the City’s right of first refusal to purchase such properties. This program
       allows for City to leverage its investment of Code Enforcement dollars by targeting third
       party purchases to small local developers of vacant problem properties. The goal of this
       program is to quickly rehabilitate housing stock for resale to affordable housing qualified
       applicants.
       Action 4.2.6      Investor-owned Property Registration, Inspection and Maintenance Program
       The City of Oakland’s Investor-owned Residential Property Registration, Inspection and
       Rehabilitation Program (O.M.C. 8.58). In order to address the decline of neighborhood
       livability and health and safety problems that have arisen from high levels of foreclosure
       activity in Oakland, the Oakland City Council passed an ordinance designed to address issues
       of deferred maintenance or property neglect associated with properties in the foreclosure
       process. This program requires non-owner occupant buyers of properties that have a default
       or foreclosure history to register and arrange for an inspection by Building Services. A City
       inspector will then assess whether the property conditions meet the local building or housing
       codes or whether blight abatement or rehabilitation work is needed. If the property is found to
       be in violation of City code requirements, the inspector will work with the new owner on an
       abatement plan.
Policy 4.3      HOUSING PRESERVATION AND REHABILITATION
       Support the preservation and rehabilitation of existing housing stock with an emphasis on
       housing occupied by senior citizens, people with disabilities, and low-income populations.
       Encourage the relocation of structurally sound housing units scheduled for demolition to
       compatible neighborhoods when appropriate land can be found. Assist senior citizens and
       people with disabilities with housing rehabilitation so that they may remain in their homes.
       Continue to implement the Mills Act program.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                        313

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
      Action 4.3.1     Historic Residential Building Relocation
      Notify the public of the opportunity to purchase and relocate a residential building, prior to its
      demolition for a public improvement project.
      Action 4.3.2     Housing Repairs for Seniors and People with Disabilities
      Support home repair program offered by a local nonprofit organization to assist low-income
      seniors and people with disabilities to remain independent by rehabilitating their homes. City-
      wide services are contingent upon award of funding.
      Action 4.3.3     Access Improvement Program
      Provide grants to owners of rental and owner-occupied housing to make accessibility
      modifications to accommodate persons with disabilities.
      Action 4.3.4     Scattered-Site Single Family Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program
      City staff and non-profit partners have developed the Oakland Community Buying Program
      that will address vacant or abandoned housing due to foreclosures or property tax liens. Start-
      up funds for this program have been identified. Funding will be used to provide long term
      affordability of new housing developed. The final housing products will be single family
      homes for re-sale, lease-to-own, or for rent (see also Action 2.2.2).
      Action 4.3.5     Continuing Implementation of Mills Act contracts
      The City will continue to offer several Mills Act contracts a year to stimulate the restoration
      and maintenance of designated historic properties through property tax reductions, as
      authorized by State law.
      Action 4.3.6     Rehabilitating Public Housing
      Focus investment of Oakland Housing Authority’s Making Transitions Work funds into
      rehabilitating current public housing or project-based voucher units in order to increase
      housing options for low-income families, improve the quality of housing for families, and
      improve the neighborhoods and communities surrounding the housing.
      Action 4.3.7     Proactive Rental Inspection Policy
      Develop new policy to require registration and inspection of existing City market-rate rental
      units to confirm code compliance and habitability.
      Action 4.3.8     Mitigate Loss of Units Demolished by Public or Private Actions
      Consider developing a new policy to comply with the spirit of Government Code 65583(c)(4)
      that states: “Conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock,
      which may include addressing ways to mitigate the loss of dwelling units demolished by
      public or private action.”
      Action 4.3.9     Seismic Safety Retrofit Policy
      Develop and explore funding sources for a new seismic retrofit policy, coupled with tenant
      protections, to preserve about 14,000 soft story housing units in Oakland’s flatland
      neighborhoods at risk for destruction in a major earthquake. A low interest loan fund may be
      possible through combining available public monies with private capital or alternatively
      through issuing a new bond, which would require voter approval.
314                                                                   GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Policy 4.4      Anti-displacement of City of Oakland Residents
       The City will consider strengthening existing policies and introducing new policies or policy
       terms to current City policies to help prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and
       to preserve existing housing affordable to low income residents, including both publicly-
       assisted and non-assisted housing that currently has affordable rents.
       Action 4.4.1: Consider Developing a Standard City Tenant Relocation Policy and Fund City
                         Program Operations
       The City has a number of ordinances that have tenant relocation assistance requirements,
       including under code enforcement activities, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just Cause for
       evictions, and SRO conversions. City of Oakland will consider 1) establishing one standard
       policy across tenant relocation requirements, such as code enforcement, condo conversions,
       Ellis Act, Just Cause for evictions and SRO conversions, 2) explore new strategies to fund
       and recover relocation costs, and 3) allocate and fund adequate staffing to monitor relocation
       programs and recover costs from responsible landlords.
Goal 5:         Preserve Affordable Rental Housing
Policy 5.1      PRESERVATION OF AT-RISK HOUSING
       Seek to preserve the affordability of subsidized rental housing for lower-income households
       that may be at-risk of converting to market rate housing.
       Action 5.1.1      Monitoring and Preservation
       Monitor the status of federally assisted projects to identify those at-risk of converting to
       market rate housing. Monitoring will include analysis of HUD data, a survey of building
       owners and managers to determine the likelihood that a building will convert, and
       consultation with the California Housing Partnership Corporation. Under California State
       Law, owners must provide tenants and the City with 12 months advance notice of an intent to
       terminate use restrictions on assisted housing.
       Action 5.1.2      Contact with Owners of At-Risk Buildings
       Contact owners to advise them of notification requirements under State law, to offer to assist
       them in pursuing higher Section 8 rents from HUD, and to encourage them to work with the
       City to facilitate preservation purchases of their properties by interested parties.
       Action 5.1.3      Financial Assistance for Preservation Projects
       Award preference points under the City’s Housing Development Program for funding for
       projects that preserve existing rental housing that is at risk of loss to the affordable housing
       supply. Support applications for Federal, State and private funding for preservation.
       Action 5.1.4      Project Based Section 8 Assistance
       Collaborate with the Oakland Housing Authority to secure project-based Section 8 assistance
       to preserve at-risk housing both to enhance affordability and to provide additional income
       that can leverage private capital for repairs and improvements.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                        315

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       Action 5.1.5     Local Non-traditional Housing
       Oakland Housing Authority will use Making Transitions Work funds to provide the
       appropriate financial and other interventions necessary to preserve at-risk affordable housing
       and to expand the population of families served in local, non-traditional OHA programs.
Policy 5.2     SUPPORT FOR ASSISTED PROJECTS WITH CAPITAL NEEDS
       Work with owners of assisted projects that have substantial needs for capital improvements to
       maintain the use of the properties as decent affordable housing.
       Action 5.2.1     Advocacy for State and Federal Financing
       Actively work to identify and secure State and Federal funding to provide for capital needs of
       older assisted projects. The City will notify property owners of available state and federal
       funding options and provide technical assistance in applying for such funds.
       Action 5.2.2     Funding for Capital Needs--Preservation and Rehabilitation Programs for
                        Rental Housing (not owner-occupied, buildings)
       Provide loans through a competitive funding process for the rehabilitation of affordable rental
       housing for those buildings with existing City regulatory agreements. The goal of this
       program is to correct code deficiencies and ensure affordability for low-income households.
       The City will develop this for acquisition, rehabilitation, and preservation of rental housing.
       The rental housing eligible for this program will have City regulatory restrictions from
       funding sources such as CDBG and HOME Funds.
Policy 5.3     RENT ADJUSTMENT PROGRAM
       Continue to administer programs to protect existing tenants from unreasonable rent increases.
       Action 5.3.1     Rent Adjustment Ordinance
       Continue to implement the Rent Adjustment program (Chapter 8.22 of the Oakland
       Municipal Code) that limits rent increases on units covered by the Ordinance based on a
       formula tied to increases in the Consumer Price Index.
       Action 5.3.2     Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance
       Continue to implement the Just Cause for Eviction program (Chapter 8.22 of the Oakland
       Municipal Code) that limits evictions of residential tenants to specified causes and provides
       remedies.
       Action 5.3.3     Ellis Act Protections Ordinance
       Continue to implement the adopted tenant protections (Chapter 8.22 of the Oakland
       Municipal Code) when landlords remove residential rental units from the rental housing
       market pursuant to the Ellis Act (Cal. Gov’t Code. §7060, et seq.).
Policy 5.4     PRESERVATION OF SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY HOTELS
       Seek mechanisms for protecting and improving the existing stock of residential hotels, which
       provide housing of last resort for extremely low-income households.
       Action 5.4.1     Residential Hotel Conversion/Demolition Protections
       Continue to require, through the Planning Code, a Conditional Use Permit to convert a
       residential hotel facility to non-residential use (other than to a commercial hotel) or to
       demolish a residential hotel.
316                                                                   GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Policy 5.5      LIMITATIONS ON CONVERSION OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
                TO NON-RESIDENTIAL USE
       Continue to use regulatory controls to limit the loss of housing units due to their conversion
       to non-residential use.
       Action 5.5.1     Residential Property Conversion Ordinance
       Continue to require a Conditional Use Permit prior to converting a residential use to a non-
       residential use in a non-residential zone. The City will review existing conditional use permit
       requirements to determine if revisions to the process are needed to reduce the potential for
       conversion of residential uses.
Policy 5.6      LIMITATIONS ON CONVERSION OF RENTAL HOUSING TO
                CONDOMINIUMS
       Continue to use regulatory controls to limit the loss of rental housing units due to their
       conversion to condominiums.
       Action 5.6.1     Condominium Conversion Ordinance
       The City will review the existing Condominium Conversion Ordinance and consider changes
       that: 1) considers an annual conversion cap, 2) eliminates the exemption for 2-4 unit
       buildings in the non-Impact Areas, 3) creates opportunities for tenant purchase and affordable
       homeownership for low to moderate income households, and 4) has strong tenant protection
       measures. Changes to this ordinance may only be made if adopted by the City Council and
       following appropriate public notice and debate.
Policy 5.7      PRESERVE AND IMPROVE EXISTING OAKLAND HOUSING
                AUTHORITY-OWNED HOUSING
       Continue to preserve and improve existing Oakland Housing Authority-owned rental housing.
       Action 5.7.1     Rehabilitation of Public Housing Units
       Utilize funding flexibilities provided by the Making Transitions Work program to rehabilitate
       and modernize existing public housing or project-based voucher units in order to increase
       housing options for low-income families and to ensure that OHA provides upgraded, high-
       quality units that are comparable or better than the market rate properties surrounding them.
Goal 6:         Promote Equal Housing Opportunity
Policy 6.1      FAIR HOUSING ACTIONS
       Actively support efforts to provide education and counseling regarding housing
       discrimination, to investigate discrimination complaints, and to pursue enforcement when
       necessary. Provide a one-stop resource center to address all housing issues faced by Oakland
       residents.
       Action 6.1.1     Funding for Fair Housing Organizations
       Provide funding for organizations that provide outreach, counseling, education, and
       investigation of fair housing and anti-discrimination laws. Specific areas of focus will
       include race, ethnicity, family status, and disability. Fair housing organizations respond to
       inquiries from those who believe they may have been victims of discrimination, and
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                       317
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       disseminate information through billboard            campaigns,     workshops,   public    service
       announcements and other media.
       Action 6.1.2     Housing Search Assistance for People with Disabilities
       Seek to provide funding to organizations that assist persons with disabilities to locate
       accessible and affordable housing.
       Action 6.1.3     Affirmative Fair Marketing
       Require all recipients of funds for housing development to market their projects in
       accordance with written fair marketing guidelines, including measures to reach households
       otherwise unlikely to apply for housing due to its location or character.
       Action 6.1.4     Housing Assistance Center
       Continue to support the Housing Assistance Centers’ efforts to improve access to housing
       information and services for Oakland residents and small rental property owners and
       managers. The goal is to provide a one-stop housing services center that can assist with
       referrals, including accessing affordable housing and homeless shelter placements. The
       Housing Assistance Center is also partnering with other public and private agencies to
       improve access to additional housing resources and services available to Oakland residents.
Policy 6.2      REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS
       Provide reasonable accommodations to persons with disabilities in access to public facilities,
       programs, and services.
       Action 6.2.1     Incorporate Reasonable Accommodations into City Programs and Policies
       The City’s ADA Programs Division will continue to ensure that requirements for
       accessibility are met throughout the City’s programs.
       Action 6.2.2     Publicize and Implement Reasonable Accommodations Policy and
                        Procedures
       Implement the City’s Reasonable Accommodations policy and procedure for individuals with
       a disability, when flexibility is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities.
Policy 6.3      PROMOTE REGIONAL EFFORTS TO EXPAND HOUSING CHOICE
       Encourage future regional housing allocations by ABAG to avoid over-concentration of low-
       income housing in communities with high percentages of such housing.
       Action 6.3.1     Regional Housing Needs Allocation
       Actively participate in future Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) processes to
       promote an allocation plan that seeks to reduce concentrations of low-income people and
       low-income housing, and to provide a broader range of housing choices throughout the
       region.
Policy 6.4      FAIR LENDING
       Work to promote fair lending practices throughout the City to ensure that low-income and
       minority residents have fair access to capital resources needed to acquire and maintain
       housing.
318                                                                      GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       Action 6.4.1     Community Credit Needs Assessment
       Conduct regular assessments of community credit needs, including credit needs for housing.
       To conduct the assessment, the City will review reports from the federal government and
       nonprofit consumer organizations on lending patterns in Oakland and the availability of
       residential credit.
       Action 6.4.2     Community Reinvestment Activities Linked to Banking
       Actively support efforts to ensure that banks meet and exceed their responsibilities for
       community reinvestment. Limit a bank’s eligibility to participate in City-assisted lending
       programs to institutions that provide reasonable levels (fair share) of investment within
       Oakland, including home mortgages and financing for housing development.
       Action 6.4.3     Community Outreach and Predatory Lending Controls
       Discourage the practice of predatory lending which falls most heavily on low-income seniors
       and minorities, by financially supporting nonprofit organizations that investigate such
       practices, referring complaints to the appropriate legal authority, and providing consumer
       information on how to avoid predatory lending. Outreach efforts by non-profit organizations
       will include door-to-door outreach and funding legal services on foreclosure counseling and
       prevention.
Policy 6.5      ACCOUNTABILITY
       Work to promote accountability by City to the policies it has slated in the Housing Element.
       Action 6.5.1     Housing Element Annual Progress Report
       Submit, on an annual basis by April 1, a report to the California Department of Housing and
       Community Development on progress made by the City of Oakland on policies adopted in
       the 2015-2023 Housing Element (as required by state law). The City will also conduct annual
       public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council to review and consider the
       Annual Progress Report within 30 days of its submittal to the State of California, and will
       post copies of the report on the City’s website.
Goal 7:         Promote Sustainable Development and Sustainable
                Communities
Policy 7.1      SUSTAINABLE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
       In conjunction with the City’s adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan (ECAP), develop and
       promote programs to foster the incorporation of sustainable design principles, energy
       efficiency and smart growth principles into residential developments. Offer education and
       technical assistance regarding sustainable development to project applicants.
       Action 7.1.1     Promote Green Building Design for Private Development
       Continue to foster the design and building of durable, low-maintenance dwellings and make
       optimum use of existing infrastructure through an expanded physical and internet-based
       Green Building Resource Center. Design features, such as “green roofs”, tree planting, open
       space devoted to food production and electric vehicle charging stations, among others, are all
       supported by the ECAP for private housing development.
       Action 7.1.2     Green Building Standards
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                     319

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
          Continue to require all new residential construction, and single-family additions and
          alterations to demonstrate compliance with an approved green building standard. Consider
          revising the Green Building Ordinance for Private Development to include multi-family
          additions and alterations. Increase enforcement of green building and building energy
          codes 52.
          Action 7.1.3          Require Green Building Design requirements for City-funded Development
          All City-funded housing developments require certification under BuildItGreen.org’s
          GreenPoint Rated or LEED certifications systems.
Policy 7.2            MINIMIZE ENERGY AND WATER CONSUMPTION
          Encourage the incorporation of energy conservation design features in existing and future
          residential development beyond minimum standards required by State building code.
          Action 7.2.1          Energy-Efficiency and Weatherization Programs
          Pursue opportunities, in partnership with regional, state, and utility partners when
          appropriate, to augment existing or create new residential energy programs, and market these
          programs to minimize consumption of energy throughout the community, through
          conservation and efficiency. Such programs may include Property-Based Energy Financing,
          Right-sizing of Energy Equipment Guidelines, green building standards within existing
          housing rehabilitation programs, Weatherization and Energy Retrofit Loan Program, Renter-
          Occupied Residential Energy Program, Energy Upgrade California, and adoption of Energy
          Improvement at Time of Sale Ordinance.
          Action 7.2.2          Alternative Energy Production
          Continue to review plans for residential construction, taking into account building orientation,
          street layout, lot design, planting, and street tree configuration, with the intent of maximizing
          solar access and cooling opportunities. Assist the public to generate renewable energy by
          posting information on the City website that offers content created by the City and links to
          web pages hosted by other organizations. Examples of materials include: a solar energy
          generation calculator, and a guide about proper maintenance and disposal of solar and other
          renewable energy generation systems. Provide information about solar and renewable energy
          incentives and resources in conjunction with all residential rehabilitation projects. Continue
          to be a municipal policy leader by providing streamlined and advanced permitting processes,
          and by actively sharing Oakland’s solar permitting Best Practices with others.
          Action 7.2.3          Facilitate a community solar program 53.
          Encourage and collaborate with local partners to launch a community solar program, to
          increase local use of renewable energy, including solar-thermal energy to produce heat and
          hot water.
          Action 7.2.4          Technical Assistance
          Continue to educate applicants and residents about the advantages of energy conservation and
          provide technical assistance to help new construction or remodeling projects achieve superior
          levels of energy efficiency.
52
   This policy is in the City’s adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan (see actions BE-1, BE-2 and BE-3).
53
   This policy is in the City’s adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan (see action BE-28).
320                                                                                   GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                              HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
          Action 7.2.5 Promote Water Conservation and Efficiency
          Expand promotion of water conservation and efficiency practices such as water-efficient
          landscaping, irrigation, lawn replacement, rainwater collection, greywater systems, and the
          installation of water efficient fixtures and plumbing. In affordable housing developments, this
          will reduce utility bills, freeing up more resources to pay rent or a mortgage 54.
Policy 7.3            ENCOURAGE                DEVELOPMENT                   THAT        REDUCES            CARBON
                      EMISSIONS
          Continue to direct development toward existing communities and encourage infill
          development at densities that are higher than—but compatible with-- the surrounding
          communities. Encourage development in close proximity to transit, and with a mix of land
          uses in the same zoning district, or on the same site, so as to reduce the number and
          frequency of trips made by automobile.
          Action 7.3.1          Mixed Use Development Incentives
          Provide development incentives for construction projects that mix land uses, build compactly,
          and ensure safe and inviting pedestrian corridors. Allowing uses in close proximity to one
          another encourages walking and bicycling, instead of automotive trips.
          Action 7.3.2          Transit-Oriented Development
          Evaluate the existing S-15 Transit Oriented Development zone, and consider if its
          development standards for areas near transit stations or major transit nodes are allowing for
          higher density housing with commercial development in close proximity to BART in ways
          that improve neighborhood livability. Develop and require transit-oriented performance
          criteria for associated miles traveled and transportation mode share55.
          Action 7.3.3          Implement SB 375 provisions, direct new housing to be built in Priority
                                Development Areas.
          Implement the provisions of State Bill (SB) 375 and regional agency rule-making, following
          their adoption. The City will continue to encourage mixed-use, infill, and transit
          development in designated Priority Development Areas. (See also Policy 1.1.)
          Action 7.3.4 Integrate Land Use and Transportation Planning in Major Residential Projects
          Require the integration of land use and transportation planning and consideration of
          Greenhouse Gas (GHG) reduction opportunities in each planning, major development project,
          and planning effort undertaken by the City56.
          Action 7.3.5          Encourage New Housing at a Range of Prices
          Actively promote the construction of housing at a range of price levels near transit hubs and
          corridors in balance with local employment opportunities to meet the needs of Oakland’s
          workforce. Consider adoption of a transit-oriented development affordability policy,
          including preservation of existing affordability57.
54
   This policy is in the City’s adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan (see actions BE-33, BE-35, BE-26, BE-39).
55
   This policy is in the City’s adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan (see actions TLU-8 and TLU-11).
56
   This policy is in the City’s adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan (see action TLU-3).
57
   This policy is in the City’s adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan (see action TLU-9).
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                                     321

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Policy 7.4            MINIMIZE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS FROM NEW HOUSING
          Work with developers to encourage construction of new housing that, where feasible, reduces
          the footprint of the building and landscaping, preserves green spaces, and supports ecological
          systems.
          Action 7.4.1          Compact Building Design
          Work with developers to encourage, where feasible, buildings to grow vertically rather than
          horizontally and to incorporate structured parking rather than surface parking, to preserve and
          encourage ground-level open space.
          Action 7.4.2          Waste Reduction
          Continue to review and enforce adequate recycling allocation areas. Encourage, where
          feasible, multifamily developments to comply with the City’s Zero Waste Plan.
          Action 7.4.3          Foster Healthy Indoor Air Quality
          Encourage, where feasible, the use of zero-VOC materials to improve indoor air quality (e.g.,
          paints, adhesives). Require measures to reduce the impact of air pollution on new housing
          (e.g., air filters).
          Action 7.4.4          Recycled, Reclaimed or Renewable Content of Building Materials
          Encourage, where feasible, the use of environmentally preferable building materials.
          Encourage, where feasible, the re-use of building materials to reduce construction waste.
          Action 7.4.5          Re-Use and Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings
          Encourage the reuse and rehabilitation of the City’s historic building stock, using Policy D6.2
          of the Land Use and Transportation Element of the Oakland General Plan as a guide, to
          increase neighborhood character and to preserve the energy embodied in the building’s
          original construction.
          Action 7.4.6          Encourage Food Production
          Encourage the inclusion of food-producing gardens, including rooftop gardens, in private
          development, where appropriate, with consideration of Bay Friendly landscaping principles 58.
Policy 7.5            CLIMATE ADAPTATION AND NEIGHBORHOOD RESILIENCY
          Continue to study the potential local effects of climate change in collaboration with local and
          regional partners, such as BCDC. Identify potential adaptation strategies to improve
          community resilience to climate change, and integrate these strategies in new development,
          where appropriate.
          Action 7.5.1          Climate Change and the Planning process
          Consider qualitative and quantitative information regarding the potential effects of climate
          change during the project plan review process. Consider Oakland Planning Code amendments
          to limit certain vulnerable land uses (i.e. emergency, affordable, senior, or assisted living
          housing) in areas identified as vulnerable to climate change. Consider design review
          requirements for buildings to improve climate resiliency.
58
   This policy is in the City’s adopted Energy and Climate Action Plan (see action MW-20).
322                                                                                  GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
        Action 7.5.2    Climate Adaptation Strategies
        Communicate information about potential local climate impacts to neighborhoods and
        developers, and encourage participation in the development of climate adaptation strategies to
        improve project and neighborhood resiliency; consider including notification of climate-
        related vulnerabilities at time-of-sale for properties in especially vulnerable areas.
C.      IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
State law requires the Housing Element to include an implementation schedule that specifies
responsible agencies, potential funding sources, timeframes, and anticipated results (quantified
objectives).
Table 7-1 below provides an implementation schedule for each of the actions listed above under
Goals and Policies, and the divisions, departments and bureaus of the City responsible. The three-
part numbers (for example, 1.1.1) in Table 7-1 correspond to the numbered actions described above.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS                                                                      323
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table 7-1
                                                       Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                       Agency                       Approximate Timeframe                         Funding
  Goal 1: Provide Adequate Sites Suitable for Housing for All Income Groups
  Policy 1.1: Priority Development Areas - Housing Program
  1.1.1     Site Identification                 Bureau of Planning           Keep updated inventory on the City’s          Permit Fees
                                                                             website
  1.1.2     Expedited Review                    Bureau of Planning & Bureau  Ongoing, 2015-23                              Permit Fees
                                                of Building
  1.1.3     Streamline Environmental Review     Bureau of Planning           Ongoing, 2015-23                              Permit Fees
  1.1.4     International Blvd Community        Department of Housing &      Policy development starting 2014-15           CDBG, California
            Revitalization Without Displacement Community Development                                                      Sustainable Communities
            Incentive                           (DHCD) – Housing Assistance                                                Planning Grant, California
                                                Center/Strategic Initiatives                                               Endowment
  1.1.5     Consider expanding the existing     Bureau of Planning           2015-2017                                     TBD
            Micro-living quarters pilot program
            to the entire Downtown and Jack
            London Square PDA.
  Policy 1.2: Availability of Land
  1.2.1     Land Inventory (Opportunity Sites)  Bureau of Planning           Post to City’s website within 90 days of      Permit Fees
                                                                             adoption and final certification (by Cal HCD)
                                                                             of Housing Element (see also Table C-6).
  Policy 1.3: Appropriate Locations and Densities for Housing
  1.3.1     Broadway Valdez Specific Plan       Bureau of Planning           Ongoing, 2015-23                              Permit Fees
            (BVSP)
324                                                                                                                    GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                  Table 7-1
                                                     Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                      Agency                    Approximate Timeframe        Funding
  1.3.2     Lake Merritt Station Area Plan     Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23             Permit Fees
            (LMSAP)
  1.3.3     West Oakland Specific Plan (WOSP) Bureau of Planning         Ongoing, 2015-23             Permit Fees
  1.3.4     Coliseum Area Specific Plan (CASP) Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23             Permit Fees
  1.3.5     Central Estuary Area Plan          Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23             Permit Fees
            (CEAP)
  1.3.6     Promote new housing                Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23             Permit Fees
            opportunities in the Estuary Area.
  Policy 1.4: Secondary Units
  1.4.1     Secondary Unit- Parking Solutions  Bureau of Planning        2014-2017                    Permit Fees
  1.4.2     Secondary Unit – Setback Solutions Bureau of Planning        2014-2017                    TBD
  Policy 1.5: Manufactured Housing
  1.5.1     Factory Built Housing              Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23             Permit Fees
  Policy 1.6: Adaptive Reuse
  1.6.1     Live/Work Conversions              Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23             Permit Fees
  Policy 1.7: Regional Housing Needs
  1.7.1     Accommodate 14,765 New Housing     Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23             General Plan Surcharge
            Units                                                                                     Fee; Permit Fees
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                  325

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                      Table 7-1
                                                        Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                        Agency                       Approximate Timeframe                    Funding
  Goal 2: Promote the Development of Adequate Housing for Low- and Moderate-Income Households
  Policy 2.1: Affordable Housing Development Programs
  2.1.1     New Construction and Substantial     Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23                         HOME, HUD, CALHFA,
            Rehabilitation Housing Development Community Development                                                   County, misc.
            Program                              (DHCD) – Housing                                                      State/Federal housing
                                                 Development Services                                                  programs, AHP private
                                                                                                                       funds
  2.1.2     Housing Predevelopment Loan and      Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23                         Housing Bond Funds
            Grant Program                        Community Development
                                                 (DHCD) – Housing
                                                 Development Services
  2.1.3     Utilize Public Housing Resources for Oakland Housing Authority    Ongoing, 2015-23                         Section 8 Program
            New Development
  Policy 2.2: Affordable Homeownership Opportunities
  2.2.1     First Time Homebuyer Programs        Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23                         Mortgage Credit
                                                 Community Development                                                 Certificates, State Housing
                                                 (DHCD) – Housing                                                      Funds (CALHFA, HCD),
                                                 Development Services                                                  Private Lenders
  2.2.2     Scattered-Site Single Family         Department of Housing &      Program implementation beginning 2014-15 CDBG, Foreclosure
            Acquisition and Rehabilitation       Community Development                                                 Abatement Program
            Program                              (DHCD) – Housing Assistance                                           Funds, Program Income
                                                 Center/Strategic Initiatives
  2.2.3     Foreclosure Mitigation Pilot Loan    Department of Housing &      Program implementation beginning 2014-15 CDBG, Neighborhood
            Program                              Community Development                                                 Stabilization Program –
                                                 (DHCD) – Housing Assistance                                           Program Income
                                                 Center/Strategic Initiatives
326                                                                                                                GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                Table 7-1
                                                  Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                  Agency                       Approximate Timeframe                    Funding
  2.2.4     Community Buying Program       Department of Housing &      Program implementation beginning 2014-15 CDBG, Wells Fargo Bank
                                           Community Development                                                 National Fair Housing
                                           (DHCD) – Housing Assistance                                           Alliance Settlement
                                           Center/Strategic Initiatives                                          Agreement Funds,
                                                                                                                 Enterprise Community
                                                                                                                 Partners
  2.2.5     Home Preservation Loan Program Department of Housing &      Program implementation beginning 2014-15 CDBG, Wells Fargo Bank
                                           Community Development                                                 National Fair Housing
                                           (DHCD) – Housing Assistance                                           Alliance Settlement
                                           Center/Strategic Initiatives                                          Agreement Funds
  Policy 2.3: Density Bonus Program
  2.3.1     Density Bonus Ordinance        Bureau of Planning           Ongoing, 2015-23                         Permit Fees
  Policy 2.4: Permanently Affordable Homeownership
  2.4.1     Community Land Trust Program   Department of Housing &      Ongoing support and expansion of Land    DHCD staff time when
                                           Community Development        Trust as funds are available.            applicable.
                                           (DHCD)
  2.4.2     Resale Controls                Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23                         HOME, HUD, CALHFA,
                                           Community Development                                                 County, misc.
                                           (DHCD)                                                                State/Federal housing
                                                                                                                 programs, AHP private
                                                                                                                 funds
  Policy 2.5: Seniors and Other Special Needs
  2.5.1     Housing Development Program    Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23                         HOME, CalHFA, State
                                           Community Development                                                 Supportive Housing
                                           (DHCD) – Housing                                                      Funds, HOME, HUD,
                                           Development Services                                                  Tax Credits, AHP
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                            327

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                 Table 7-1
                                                     Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                      Agency                     Approximate Timeframe    Funding
  2.5.2     Housing For Persons With           Department of Housing &    Ongoing, 2015-23         HOME, Supportive
            HIV/AIDS                           Community Development                               Housing Program, Private
                                               (DHCD)                                              Funds, HOPWA, State
                                                                                                   and Federal Tax Credits,
                                                                                                   State Housing Funds
                                               Community Housing Services
                                                                                                   (CalHome Help
                                               (DHS)
                                                                                                   Programs)
  2.5.3     Accessible Units in New Federally- Department of Housing &    Ongoing, 2015-23         HOME
            Assisted Housing                   Community Development
                                               (DHCD) – Housing
                                               Development Services
  Policy 2.6: Large Families
  2.6.1     Housing Development Program        Department of Housing &    Ongoing, 2015-23         HOME, HUD, CALHFA,
                                               Community Development                               County, misc.
                                               (DHCD) – Housing                                    State/Federal housing
                                               Development Services                                programs, AHP private
                                                                                                   funds
  Policy 2.7: Expand Local Funding Sources
  2.7.1     Jobs/Housing Impact Fee            Department of Housing &    Ongoing, 2015-23         Permit Fees
                                               Community Development
                                               (DHCD)
328                                                                                             GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                                                           CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                      Table 7-1
                                                        Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                        Agency                       Approximate Timeframe                     Funding
  2.7.2     Consider Implementing Mandatory      Department of Housing &      Complete nexus study by December 31, 2014 Permit Fees
            and/or Voluntary Options for         Community Development
            Developer Contributions to           (DHCD)
            Affordable Housing Development by
            Conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                 Bureau of Planning
            Economic Feasibility Study for
            Affordable Housing
  2.7.3     Sale of City-Owned Property for      Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23                          Staff time
            Housing                              Community Development
                                                 (DHCD)
  2.7.4     Utilize 25% of the funds distributed Department of Housing &      Beginning in 2015 and ongoing, 2015-23    Redevelopment Property
            to the City as a taxing entity under Community Development                                                  Tax Trust Fund (RPTTF)
            the Redevelopment dissolution and    (DHCD)                                                                 Allocation to the City of
            deposit them into the Affordable                                                                            Oakland
            Housing Trust Fund (aka
            “Boomerang Funds”)
  Policy 2.8: Rental Assistance
  2.8.1     Expansion of Section 8 Vouchers      Housing Authority            Ongoing, 2015-23                          Housing Authority
                                                                                                                        Administrative Funds,
                                                                                                                        Section 8 Program
  2.8.2     City of Oakland Rental Assistance    Department of Housing &      Ongoing as funds are available, 2015-23   Wells Fargo Bank
            Program                              Community Development                                                  National Fair Housing
                                                 (DHCD) – Housing Assistance                                            Alliance Settlement
                                                 Center/Strategic Initiatives                                           Agreement Funds
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                                     329

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table 7-1
                                                       Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                        Agency                     Approximate Timeframe    Funding
  Policy 2.9: PATH Strategy for the Homeless
  2.9.1     Provide outreach programs to those   Community Housing Services Ongoing, 2015-23         General Fund, HCD/ESG,
            who are homeless or in danger of     (DHS)                                               HUD/CDBG
            becoming homeless
  2.9.2     Support programs that help prevent   Department of Housing &    Ongoing, 2015-23         General Fund, HCD/ESG,
            renters from becoming homeless.      Community Development                               HUD/CDBG
                                                 (DHCDDHCD)
                                                 Community Housing Services
                                                 (DHS)
  2.9.3     Provide shelter programs to the      Community Housing Services Ongoing, 2015-23         General Fund, HCD/ESG,
            homeless and special needs           (DHS)                                               HUD/CDBG
            populations
  2.9.4     Provide transitional housing         Community Housing Services Ongoing, 2015-23         General Fund,
            programs to those who are ready to   (DHS)                                               HUD/CDBG, HUD
            transition to independent living                                                         Supportive Housing,
                                                                                                     Alameda County Funds
  2.9.5     Support development of permanent     Department of Housing &    Ongoing, 2015-23         HUD/HOME, Section 8
            housing affordable to extremely low  Community Development
            income households                    (DHCD)
  2.9.6     Coordinate actions and policies that Department of Housing &    Ongoing, 2015-23         General Fund, HUD/ESG,
            affect the extremely low income      Community Development                               HUD/CDBG,
            population of Alameda County         (DHCD)                                              HUD/Supportive Housing
                                                 Community Housing Services
                                                 (DHS)
330                                                                                               GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
                                                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table 7-1
                                                      Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                       Agency                     Approximate Timeframe               Funding
  2.9.7     Advocate for policies beneficial to Department of Housing &    Ongoing, 2015-23                    General Fund, HUD/ESG,
            the extremely low income and        Community Development                                          HUD/CDBG,
            homeless populations of Oakland     (DHCD)                                                         HUD/Supportive Housing,
                                                                                                               Section 8 and HUD
                                                                                                               Moving to Work funds
                                                Community Housing Services
                                                (DHS)
  2.9.8     Sponsor-based Housing Assistance Oakland Housing Authority     Ongoing, 2015-23                    Housing Authority
            Program                                                                                            Administrative Funds,
                                                                                                               Section 8 Program
  Policy 2.10: Promote an Equitable Distribution of Affordable Housing throughout the Community
  2.10.1    Provide Incentives for Location of  Department of Housing &    Ongoing, 2015-23                    HOME, HUD, CALHFA,
            City-Assisted Developments in Areas Community Development                                          County, misc.
            of Low Concentration of Poverty     (DHCD) – Housing                                               State/Federal housing
                                                Development Services                                           programs, AHP private
                                                                                                               funds
  Policy 2.11: Affordable Housing Preference for Oakland Residents and Workers
  2.11.1    Oakland Resident and Worker         Department of Housing &    Ongoing enforcement, 2015-23        City staff time
            Housing Preference Policy           Community Development
            Resolution                          (DHCD)
  Goal 3: Remove Constraints to the Availability and Affordability of Housing for All Income Groups
  Policy 3.1: Expedite and Simplify Permit Processes
  3.1.1     Allow Multifamily Housing           Bureau of Planning         Ongoing, 2015-23                    Permit Fees
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                          331

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table 7-1
                                                        Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                         Agency                    Approximate Timeframe                      Funding
  3.1.2     Special Needs Housing                 Bureau of Planning        Transitional and Supportive Housing review Permit Fees
                                                                            and update:
                                                                            By December 2015
                                                                            Allowing Emergency Shelters By-Right:
                                                                            Ongoing, 2015-23
  3.1.3     Discretionary Permits                 Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23                           Permit Fees
  3.1.4     “One-Stop” Permit Process             Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23                           Permit Fees
  3.1.5     Assign Priority      to    Affordable Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23                           Permit Fees
            Housing
  3.1.6     Expedite Environmental Review         Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23                           Permit Fees
  3.1.7     Secondary Units                       Bureau of Planning        See Action 1.4.1                           Permit Fees
  Policy 3.2: Flexible Zoning Standards
  3.2.1     Alternative Building Code Standards Bureau of Planning          Ongoing, 2015-23                           Permit Fees
  3.2.2     Planned Unit Development Zoning       Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23                           Permit Fees
  3.2.3     Flexible Parking Standards            Bureau of Planning        2014-2017                                  Permit Fees
  3.2.4     Reduced Open Space Requirements       Bureau of Planning        2014-2017                                  Permit Fees
  Policy 3.3: Development Fees and Site Improvement Requirements
  3.3.1     Project    Review     Process    and Bureau of Planning         Ongoing, 2015-23                           Permit Fees
            Development Agreements
  3.3.2     Development Fees                      Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23                           Permit Fees
332                                                                                                                 GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                                                        CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                              HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table 7-1
                                                        Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                         Agency                    Approximate Timeframe                    Funding
  Policy 3.4: Intergovernmental Coordination
  3.4.1     Multiple Agency Reviews               Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23                         Permit Fees
  3.4.2     Allocation of Project-based Section 8 Oakland Housing Authority Ongoing, 2015-23                         Section 8 Program
            Units
  Policy 3.5: Financing Costs
  3.5.1     Access to Low-Cost Financing for      Department of Housing &   See Housing Programs Under Goal 2        See Housing Programs
            Development                           Community Development                                              Under Goal 2
                                                  (DHCD) – Housing
                                                  Development Services
  3.5.2     Access to Low-Cost Financing For      Department of Housing &   See Action 2.2.1                         See Action 2.2.1
            Home Purchase                         Community Development
                                                  (DHCD) – Housing
                                                  Development Services
  Policy 3.6: Environmental Constraints
  3.6.1     Remediation of Soil Contamination     Housing & Community       Investigate potential funding sources
                                                  Development
  Policy 3.7: Community Outreach and Education
  3.7.1     Community Outreach Program            Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015 – 23                       Permit Fees
                                                  Housing & Community
                                                  Development
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                               333

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                       Table 7-1
                                                         Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                         Agency                       Approximate Timeframe    Funding
  Goal 4: Conserve and Improve Older Housing and Neighborhoods
  Policy 4.1: Housing Rehabilitation Loan Programs
  4.1.1     Rehabilitation Loan Programs for      Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23         CDBG, HOME
            Owner-Occupied Housing                Community Development
                                                  (DHCD) – Residential Lending
                                                  Services
  4.1.2     Rehabilitation Loans for Owner-       Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23         CDBG, HOME
            Occupied Buildings With 2 To 4        Community Development
            Units                                 (DHCD) – Residential Lending
                                                  Services
  Policy 4.2: Blight Abatement
  4.2.1     Anti-Blight Programs                  Bureau of Building           Ongoing, 2015 – 23       Permit Fees; fees/fines
                                                                                                        charged to property
                                                                                                        owners, state/federal
                                                                                                        grants
  4.2.2     Housing Code Enforcement              Bureau of Building           Ongoing, 2015 – 23       Permit Fees; Property
                                                                                                        Liens, Fines
  4.2.3     Problem Properties Program            Bureau of Building           Ongoing, 2015 – 23       Permit Fees
  4.2.4     Foreclosed and Defaulted Residential Department of Housing &       Ongoing, 2015-23         Registration Fees, Fines
            Property Registration, Inspection and Community Development
            Maintenance Program                   (DHCD) – Housing Assistance
                                                  Center/Strategic Initiatives
  4.2.5     Tax Default Properties Program        Bureau of Building           Ongoing, 2015 – 23       Registration Fees
334                                                                                                  GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table 7-1
                                                      Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                      Agency                       Approximate Timeframe                    Funding
  4.2.6     Investor-owned Property            Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23                         Registration Fees, Fines
            Registration, Inspection and       Community Development
            Maintenance Program                (DHCD) – Housing Assistance
                                               Center/Strategic Initiatives
  Policy 4.3: Housing Preservation and Rehabilitation
  4.3.1     Historic Residential Building      Bureau of Planning           Ongoing, 2015 – 23                       Varies, depending on
            Relocation                                                                                               funds used for the specific
                                                                                                                     project.
  4.3.2     Housing Repairs for Seniors and    Department of Housing &      Consider funding program in next Housing CDBG
            People with Disabilities           Community Development        Element Program Round, Planning Bureau
                                               (DHCD) – Community
                                               Development Block Grant
                                               Program
  4.3.3     Access Improvement Program         Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23                         CDBG
                                               Community Development
                                               (DHCD) – Residential Lending
                                               Services
  4.3.4     Scattered-site Single Family       Department of Housing &      Program implementation beginning 2014-15 CDBG, Foreclosure
            Acquisition and Rehabilitation     Community Development                                                 Abatement Program
            Program                            (DHCD) – Housing Assistance                                           Funds
                                               Center/Strategic Initiatives
  4.3.5     Continuing Implementation of Mills Bureau of Planning           Ongoing, 2015-23                         Application and
            Act Contracts                                                                                            inspection fees; property
                                                                                                                     tax reduction.
  4.3.6     Rehabilitating Public Housing      Oakland Housing Authority    Ongoing, 2015-23                         HUD Moving to Work
                                                                                                                     funds
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                                    335

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table 7-1
                                                       Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                       Agency                       Approximate Timeframe                          Funding
  4.3.7     Proactive Rental Inspection Policy  Department of Housing &      Program implementation beginning 2014-15 Proposed: Registration
                                                Community Development                                                       Fees
                                                (DHCD) – Housing Assistance
                                                Center/Strategic Initiatives
  4.3.8     Mitigate Loss of Units Demolished   Department of Housing and    Program implementation beginning 2015          City staff time
            by Public or Private Actions        Community Development
                                                (DHCD) and Bureau of
                                                Planning
  4.3.9     Seismic Safety Retrofit Policy      Department of Housing and    Program implementation begins in 2015.         City staff time
                                                Community Development;                                                      (administration)
                                                Bureau of Building
  Policy 4.4: Anti-Displacement Of City Of Oakland Residents
  4.4.1     Consider Developing a Standard City Department of Housing &      FY 2014-15                                     City staff time
            Tenant Relocation Policy and Fund   Community Development
            City Program Operations             (DHCD) – Housing Assistance
                                                Center/Strategic Initiatives
  Goal 5: Preserve Affordable Rental Housing
  Policy 5.1: Preservation of At-Risk Housing
  5.1.1     Monitoring and Preservation         Department of Housing &                                                     HOME
                                                Community Development
                                                (DHCD) – Policy and          Annual, 2015-23
                                                Programs
                                                                             City will identify projects at highest-risk
  5.1.2     Contact With Owners of At-Risk      Department of Housing &      each year (that could convert within the next HOME
            Buildings                           Community Development        24 months)
                                                (DHCD) – Policy and
                                                Programs
336                                                                                                                      GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table 7-1
                                                        Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                         Agency                    Approximate Timeframe        Funding
  5.1.3     Financial Assistance for Preservation Department of Housing &   Ongoing, 2015 – 23           Federal Preservation
            Projects                              Community Development                                  Programs (HUD), State
                                                  (DHCD) – Housing                                       Programs, HOME,
                                                  Development Services                                   Redevelopment Housing
                                                                                                         Set-Aside Funds, Tax
                                                                                                         Credits
  5.1.4     Project Based Section 8 Assistance    Department of Housing &   Ongoing, 2015-23             Section 8 Program
                                                  Community Development
                                                  (DHCD) – Housing
                                                  Development Services and
                                                  Oakland Housing Authority
  5.1.5     Local Non-traditional Housing         Oakland Housing Authority Ongoing, 2015-23             Section 8 Program
  Policy 5.2: Support for Assisted Projects with Capital Needs
  5.2.1     Advocacy for State and Federal        Department of Housing &   Ongoing, 2015-23             General Fund
            Financing                             Community Development
                                                  (DHCD) – Policy and
                                                  Programs
  5.2.2     Funding for Capital Needs--           Department of Housing &   Ongoing, 2015-23             HOME, CDBG, State
            Preservation and Rehabilitation       Community Development                                  housing programs, Tax
            Programs for Rental Housing (not      (DHCD) – Housing                                       credits/equity, Private
            owner-occupied, buildings)            Development Services                                   lenders and Foundations
                                                                                                         See Action 5.1.3 for
                                                                                                         additional funding options
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                       337

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                 Table 7-1
                                                    Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                     Agency                    Approximate Timeframe    Funding
  Policy 5.3: Rent Adjustment Program
  5.3.1     Rent Adjustment Ordinance         Department of Housing &   Ongoing, 2015-23         Registration Fees
                                              Community Development
                                              (DHCD) – Rent Adjustment
                                              Board
  5.3.2     Just Cause for Eviction Ordinance Department of Housing &   Ongoing, 2015-23         Registration Fees
                                              Community Development
                                              (DHCD) – Rent Adjustment
                                              Board
  5.3.3     Ellis Act Protections Ordinance   Department of Housing &   Ongoing, 2015-23         Registration Fees
                                              Community Development
                                              (DHCD) – Rent Adjustment
                                              Board
  Policy 5.4: Preservation of Single Room Occupancy Hotels
  5.4.1     Residential Hotel                 Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23         General Fund, Permit Fees
            Conversion/Demolition Protections
  Policy 5.5: Limitations on Conversion of Residential Property to Non-Residential Use
  5.5.1     Residential Property Conversion   Bureau of Planning        Ongoing, 2015-23         Permit Fees
            Ordinance
  Policy 5.6: Limitations on Conversion of Rental Housing to Condominiums
  5.6.1     Condominium Conversion Ordinance Bureau of Planning         FY 2014-15               Permit Fees
338                                                                                           GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                                           CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table 7-1
                                                     Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                     Agency                       Approximate Timeframe        Funding
  Policy 5.7: Preserve and Improve Existing Oakland Housing Authority-Owned Housing
  5.7.1     Rehabilitation of Public Housing  Oakland Housing Authority    Ongoing, 2015-23             HUD Moving to Work
            Units                                                                                       funds
  Goal 6: Promote Equal Housing Opportunity
  Policy 6.1: Fair Housing Actions
  6.1.1     Funding for Fair Housing          Department of Housing and    Ongoing, 2015-23             CDBG
            Organizations                     Community Development
                                              (DHCD) – CDBG Programs
  6.1.2     Housing Search Assistance for     Department of Housing and    Ongoing, 2015-23             CDBG
            People with Disabilities          Community Development
                                              (DHCD) – CDBG Programs
  6.1.3     Affirmative Fair Marketing        Department of Housing and    Ongoing, 2015-23             CDBG, HOME
                                              Community Development
                                              (DHCD) – Policy and
                                              Programs
  6.1.4     Housing Assistance Center         Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23             CDBG
                                              Community Development
                                              (DHCD) – Housing Assistance
                                              Center/Strategic Initiatives
  Policy 6.2: Reasonable Accommodations
  6.2.1     Incorporate Reasonable            City Manager, Office of ADA Ongoing, 2015-23              General Fund, CDBG
            Accommodations into City Programs Compliance
            and Policies
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                339

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table 7-1
                                                      Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                      Agency                     Approximate Timeframe    Funding
  6.2.2     Publicize and Implement Reasonable Zoning Administrator       Ongoing, 2015-23         Permit Fees
            Accommodations Policy and
            Procedures
  Policy 6.3: Promote Regional Efforts to Expand Housing Choice
  6.3.1     Regional Housing Needs Allocation  Planning Bureau,           Ongoing, 2015-23         Permit Fees
                                               Department of Housing and
                                               Community Development
                                               (DHCD) – Policy and
                                               Programs
  Policy 6.4: Fair Lending
  6.4.1     Community Credit Needs Assessment Department of Housing and   Ongoing, 2015-23         Staff Costs
                                               Community Development
                                               (DHCD) – Policy and
                                               Programs
                                               Financial Services Agency,
                                               Treasury Division
  6.4.2     Community Reinvestment Activities  Department of Housing and  Ongoing, 2015-23         Staff Costs
            linked to Banking                  Community Development
                                               (DHCD) – Policy and
                                               Programs
                                               Financial Services Agency,
                                               Treasury Division
340                                                                                             GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS

                                                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table 7-1
                                                     Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                     Agency                       Approximate Timeframe                Funding
  6.4.3     Community Outreach and Predatory  Department of Housing &      Ongoing, 2015-23                     Foreclosure Abatement
            Lending Controls                  Community Development                                             Program Funds, Wells
                                              (DHCD) – Housing Assistance                                       Fargo Bank National Fair
                                              Center/Strategic Initiatives                                      Housing Alliance
                                              Financial Services Agency,                                        Settlement Agreement
                                              Treasury Division                                                 Funds
  Policy 6.5: Accountability
  6.5.1     Housing Element Annual Progress   Planning Bureau,             On an annual basis by April 1        Staff Costs
            Report                            Department of Housing and
                                              Community Development
                                              (DHCD) – Policy and
                                              Programs
  Goal 7: Promote Sustainable Development and Sustainable Communities
  Policy 7.1: Sustainable Residential Development Programs
  7.1.1     Promote Green Building Design for Bureau of Building           Ongoing, 2015-23                     Permit Fees
            Private Development
  7.1.2     Green Building Standards          Bureau of Building           Ongoing, 2015-23                     Permit Fees
  7.1.3     Require Green Building Design     Bureau of Building           Ongoing, 2015-23                     Permit Fees
            requirements for City-funded
            Development
  Policy 7.2: Minimize Energy and Water Consumption
  7.2.1     Energy-Efficiency and             Environmental Services       Ongoing, 2015-2023                   Bay Area Air Quality
            Weatherization Programs           (PWA), with input from all                                        Management District
                                              agencies                                                          Grant and Williams
                                                                                                                Settlement
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                              341

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table 7-1
                                                       Implementation Program
          1
  Actions                                       Agency                     Approximate Timeframe    Funding
  7.2.2     Alternative Energy Production       Bureau of Planning and     Ongoing, 2015-23         Permit Fees; Williams
                                                Bureau of Building,                                 Settlement
                                                Environmental Services
                                                (PWA),
  7.2.3     Facilitate a Community Solar        Environmental Services      Ongoing, 2015-23        Permit Fees, Grants
            Program                             (PWA), with input from all
                                                agencies
  7.2.4     Technical Assistance                Bureau of Building         Ongoing, 2015-23         Permit Fees
  7.2.5     Promote Water Conservation and      Bureau of Planning and     Ongoing, 2015-23         Permit Fees
            Efficiency                          Bureau, Building,
                                                Environmental Services
                                                (PWA),
  Policy 7.3: Encourage Development that reduces Carbon Emissions
  7.3.1     Mixed Use Development Incentives    Bureau of Planning         Ongoing 2015-23          Permit Fees
  7.3.2     Transit-Oriented Development        Bureau of Planning         2014-2017                Permit Fees
  7.3.3     Implement SB 375 provisions, direct Bureau of Planning         Ongoing 2015-23          Permit Fees
            new housing to be built in Priority
            Development Areas
  7.3.4     Integrate Land Use and              Bureau of Planning         Ongoing 2015-23          Permit Fees
            Transportation Planning in Major
            Residential Projects
  7.3.5     Encourage New Housing at a Range    Bureau of Planning         Ongoing 2015-23          Permit Fees
            of Prices
342                                                                                              GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
                                                                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                           Table 7-1
                                                                         Implementation Program
            1
  Actions                                                       Agency                                    Approximate Timeframe        Funding
  Policy 7.4: Minimize Environmental Impacts from New Housing
  7.4.1        Compact Building Design                          Bureau of Planning , Bureau of Ongoing, 2015-23                        Permit Fees
                                                                Building
  7.4.2        Waste Reduction                                  Bureau of Planning , Bureau of Ongoing 2015-23                         Permit Fees
                                                                Building
  7.4.3        Foster Healthy Indoor Air Quality                Bureau of Planning , Bureau of Ongoing 2015-23                         Permit Fees
                                                                Building
  7.4.4        Recycled, Reclaimed or Renewable                 Bureau of Planning , Bureau of Ongoing 2015-23                         Permit Fees
               content of Building Materials                    Building
  7.4.5        Re-Use and Rehabilitation of                     Bureau of Planning , Bureau of Ongoing, 2015-23                        Permit Fees
               Historic Materials                               Building
  7.4.6        Encourage Food Production in Open                Bureau of Planning                        Ongoing, 2015-23             Permit Fees
               Space Areas
  Policy 7.5: Climate Adaptation and Neighborhood Resiliency
  7.5.1        Climate Change and the Planning                  Bureau of Planning                        Ongoing, 2015-23             Permit Fees
               process
  7.5.2        Climate Adaptation Strategies                    Bureau of Planning, Bureau of Ongoing, 2015-23                         Permit Fees
                                                                Building, Environmental
                                                                Services (PWA),
        1
          For a complete description of each action, see the Goals and Policies section that precedes Table 7-1.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS                                                                                                                              343
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
8.         QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
State law (California Government Code Section 65583[b]) requires that the City’s Housing Element
contain quantified objectives, relative to the maintenance, preservation, improvement, and development
of housing. The California Department of Housing and Community Development’s Housing Element
Update Guidance December 2012 recommends that housing elements contain three broad categories of
quantified objectives: new construction, rehabilitation, and conservation. A subset of the conservation
objective is the preservation of at-risk subsidized rental housing.
While the City has identified sites sufficient to meet its entire Regional Housing Needs Allocation (see
Chapter 4, Table 4-2 based on the detail in tables found in Appendix C), the City does not anticipate
having sufficient financial resources to ensure that the entire need for extremely low-, very low-, low- and
moderate-income units will be met. A substantial portion of the City’s resources are anticipated to be
devoted to assisting households with the greatest needs – very-low and low income households.
Table 8-1 on the following page provides a summary of the City’s quantified objectives for these broad
categories by income level. These objectives are a reasonable estimate of what the City may be able
to achieve based on projects that are currently underway but not yet completed, historical rates of
funding and completion, and estimates of likely funding resources over the next eight and a half
years. These objectives also consider new affordable housing construction not funded by the City.
In recent years there have been a number of developments with TCAC funding and no City
Funding.
344                                                                                 QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES

                                                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table 8-1
      City of Oakland Quantified Objectives (January 2015 – June 2023)
                                                                                Estimated Number of Units
                                                                                   by Affordability Level
                                                       Extremely
                                                                          Very Low             Low             Moderate             Total
                Activity Type                               Low
                                                          New Housing Construction1
 Units Built                                                 450              940              1,550               100               3,040
                                                             Housing Rehabilitation2
 Substantial Rehab                                           520            1,050              1,750               120               3,440
 Moderate and Minor Home Rehab3                             1,150           2,375              1,150                --               4,675
                                                     Housing Conservation/Preservation
 At-Risk Units
                                                             200               22                --                 --                222
 (See Ch. 3, Table 3-54)
                                                             Homebuyer Assistance
 Mortgage & Down payment
                                                              23               23               142                142                330
 Assistance
 1
   Includes units for multi-family rental, homeownership, senior, special needs, and permanent supportive housing. Estimate is based on units
 currently planned or approved, and funded, as well as an estimate of the number of additional units that can be completed by 2014 with present
 levels of local financial resources.
 2
   Includes substantial rehabilitation of rental or public housing units.
 3
   Includes existing City of Oakland programs such as: Emergency Home Repair, Home Maintenance and Improvement, Lead-Safe Housing, and
 Minor Home Repair.
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES                                                                                                                        345

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
9. OTHER REQUIREMENTS
This chapter of the Housing Element demonstrates consistency with the General Plan and policies, and
various additional requirements of the 2015-2023 Housing Element including flood hazard land
management, coastal zone and disadvantaged communities’ requirements, as well as water and sewer
priority requirements. Additionally, the chapter also identifies opportunities for energy conservation in
residential developments.
A.       CONSISTENCY WITH GENERAL PLAN AND POLICIES
This section evaluates the consistency of the Housing Element with applicable land use planning and
regulatory documents, specifically the elements from the City of Oakland’s General Plan: the Land Use
and Transportation Element (LUTE), the Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element, the Noise
Element, the Historic Preservation Element and the Safety Element. A review was made of all elements
of the General Plan for policies which encourage retention, restoration and construction of housing in
Oakland. The policies selected below highlight the policies that demonstrate clear implications for future
planning and development for housing.
Unlike many cities, Oakland’s LUTE already permits high density housing and mixed use developments
on the main streets and commercial corridors—which is why this Housing Element shows the City can
accommodate the 2014-2022 RHNA without any rezoning or General Plan Amendments. This is because
the vision and specific policies contained in the LUTE seek to encourage and facilitate the types of infill,
re-use, mixed-use, and central city/corridor-oriented residential development that are the focus of the
Housing Element and the City’s ability to accommodate its regional housing allocation from ABAG. The
preamble to the LUTE makes this clear:
         Through application of the policies and classifications of the new General Plan, the character of
         established neighborhoods will be maintained and enhanced, while new housing, new business
         and new City services will be concentrated in neighborhood centers and along key corridors.
         (emphasis added, p. 5)
Residential growth in Oakland is directed to the “Grow and Change” areas of the City, as outlined in the
LUTE’s Strategy Diagram (p. 122-125). These areas are described in the LUTE:
         Most of the…new households projected to be added in the city of Oakland through the year 2015
         will be located on the city’s corridors, in Downtown, in Transit Oriented Districts near BART
         stations, along the Waterfront, and through infill projects that respect established neighborhood
         character. (p.25)
In addition, the intention of the Grow and Change areas are explained in the LUTE:
         …Grow and Change areas will emphasize significant changes in density, activity or use, which
         are consistent with the …General Plan. Growth and change areas include areas with many
         parcels, or, in some cases, larger sites that can accommodate significant increases in intensity. (p.
         124)
Figure C-5 shows that the housing opportunity sites in this Housing Element correspond with the areas
designated by the LUTE as “Grow and Change.” Most of the housing to be provided in Oakland will
result from the development or redevelopment of under-used and infill parcels. Anticipated development
346                                                                                     OTHER REQUIREMENTS

                                                                                        CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
on these sites are expected to be in compliance with policy standards for noise, safety, open space,
recreation, and conservation contained in the other General Plan elements.
The polices in the other General Plan elements will advance the ability of the City to achieve the
objectives contained in the 2015-2023 Housing Element and implement specific housing policies and
programs. Likewise, the Housing Element policies will advance the implementation of policies and
programs in the other General Plan elements. The City has therefore determined that the updated
Housing Element is consistent with the General Plan.
LAND USE AND TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT
DOWNTOWN (D)
         Policy D1.4 Planning for Old Oakland
         Old Oakland should be respected and promoted as a significant historic resource and character-
         defining element, with Washington Street as its core. Residential development in Old Oakland
         should be of mixed housing type, with group floor retail where feasible.
         Policy D1.5 Planning for Gateway District
         New development and rehabilitation in the Gateway district should contribute to greater
         neighborhood cohesion and identity, emphasizing mixed housing type and urban density
         residential development.
         Policy D1.7 Planning for the Gold Coast
         The Gold Cost should be recognized and conserved as an established neighborhood providing
         urban density housing in a unique urban setting.
         Policy D10.1 Encouraging Housing
         Housing in the downtown should be encouraged as a vital component of a 24-hour community
         presence.
         Policy D10.2 Locating Housing
         Housing in the downtown should be encouraged in identifiable districts, within walking distance
         of the 12th Street, 19th Street, City Center, and Lake Merritt BART stations to encourage transit
         use, and it other locations where compatible with surrounding uses.
         Policy D10.3 Framework for Housing Densities
         Downtown residential areas should generally be within the Urban Residential and Central
         Business District density range where not otherwise specified. The height and bulk should reflect
         existing and desired district character, the overall city skyline, and the existence of historic
         structures or areas.
         Policy D10.4 Providing Housing for a Range of Needs
         Housing in the downtown should not be geared toward any one housing market, but rather should
         be promoted for a range of incomes, ownership options, household types, household sizes and
         needs.
         Policy D10.5 Designing Housing
         Housing in the downtown should be safe and attractive, of high quality design, and respect the
         downtown’s distinct neighborhoods and its history.
OTHER REQUIREMENTS                                                                                        347

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
      Policy D10.6 Creating Infill Housing
      Infill housing that respects surrounding development and the streetscape should be encouraged in
      the downtown to strengthen or create distinct districts.
      Policy D10.7 Developing Live-Work Spaces
      Locational and performance criteria should be developed for live-work developments.
      Policy D11.1 Promoting Mixed-Use Development
      Mixed use developments should be encouraged in the downtown for such purposes as to promote
      its diverse character, provide for needed goods and services, support local art and culture, and
      give incentive to reuse existing vacant or underutilized structures.
      Policy D11.2 Locating Mixed-Use Development
      Mixed-use development should be allowed in commercial areas, where the residential component
      is compatible with the desired commercial function of the area.
NEIGHBORHOODS (N)
      Policy N1.8: Making Compatible Development
      The height and bulk of commercial development in the “Neighborhood Mixed Use Center” and
      “Community Commercial” areas should be compatible with that which is allowed for residential
      development.
      Policy N3.1 Facilitating Housing Construction
      Facilitating the construction of housing units should be considered a high priority for the City of
      Oakland.
      Policy N3.2 Encouraging Infill Development
      In order to facilitate the construction of needed housing units, infill development that is consistent
      with the General Plan should take place throughout the City of Oakland.
      Policy N3.3 Facilitating Development of Second Units
      One accessory housing unit (also known as second or secondary unit) per property should be
      permitted outright in all residential zones provided that it meets the setback requirements for the
      primary structure, is clearly secondary to the primary structure, is compatible with other
      structures on the site and in the vicinity, and the property owner lives on-site. The permitting
      procedures and performance criteria applied to these units should facilitate construction of units,
      and not be prohibitive in their requirements. Accessory units should be allowed when a new
      primary residence is being constructed or maybe added to properties with an existing residence.
      (See also Policy N7.2 “Defining Compatibility.”)
      Policy N3.4 Constructing Housing on Orphan Lots
      Construction of housing units on “orphan lots” in residential areas (i.e. lots that are substandard in
      area but which cannot be increased in size because existing development is located on all sides)
      should be allowed where the proposed unit meets other applicable standards.
      Policy N3.5 Encouraging Housing Development
      The City should actively encourage development of housing in designated mixed housing type
      and urban housing areas through regulatory and fiscal incentives, assistance in identifying parcels
      that are appropriate for new development, and other measures.
348                                                                                  OTHER REQUIREMENTS

                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       Policy N3.8 Required High-Quality Design
       High-quality design standards should be required of all new residential construction. Design
       requirements and permitting procedures should be developed and implemented in a manner that is
       sensitive to the added costs of those requirements and procedures.
       Policy N3.9 Orienting Residential Development
       Residential developments should be encouraged to face the street and to orient their units to
       desirable sunlight and views, while avoiding unreasonably blocking sunlight and views for
       neighboring buildings, respecting the privacy needs of residents of the development and
       surrounding properties, providing for sufficient conveniently located on-site open space, and
       avoiding undue noise exposure.
       Policy N3.11 Enforcing Codes
       The City should aggressively enforce the requirements of the City’s Housing Code and other
       applicable regulations on housing of all types.
       Policy N4.1 Supporting “Fair Share” Accountability
       The City is generally supportive of any efforts to establish accountability for communities that do
       not provide their fair share of affordable housing units.
       Policy N4.2 Advocating for Affordable Housing
       The City encourages local non-profit organizations, affordable housing proponents, the business
       community, the real estate industry, and other policy makers to join in efforts to advocate for the
       provision of affordable housing in communities throughout the Bay Area region.
       Policy N5.2 Buffering Residential Areas
       Residential areas should be buffered and reinforced from conflicting uses through the
       establishment of performance-based regulations, the removal of non-conforming uses, and other
       tools.
       Policy N5.3 Supporting Live-Work Development
       The City should support and encourage residents desiring to live and work at the same location
       where neither the residential use nor the work occupation adversely affects nearby properties or
       the character of the surrounding area.
       Policy N6.1 Mixed Housing Types
       The city will generally be supportive of a mix of projects that provide a variety of housing types,
       unit sizes, and lot sizes which are available to households with a range of incomes.
       Policy N6.2 Increased Home Ownership
       Housing developments that increase home ownership opportunities for households of all incomes
       are desirable.
       Policy N7.1 Ensuring Compatible Development
       New residential development in Detached Unit and Mixed Housing type areas should be
       compatible with the density, scale, design and existing or desired character of surrounding
       development.
       Policy N7.2 Defining Compatibility
       Infrastructure availability, environmental constraints and natural features, emergency response
       and evacuation times, street width and function, prevailing lot size, predominant development
OTHER REQUIREMENTS                                                                                      349

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
        type and height, scenic values, distance to public transit, and desired neighborhood character are
        among the factors that could be taken into account when developing and mapping zoning
        designations or determining “compatibility.” These factors should be balanced with the citywide
        need for additional housing.
        Policy N8.1 Developing Transit Villages
        “Transit Village” areas should consist of attached multi-story development on properties near or
        adjacent to BART stations or other well-used or high volume transit facilities, such as light rail,
        train, ferry stations or multiple-bus transfer locations. While residential units should be
        encouraged as part of any transit village, other uses may be included where they will not
        negatively affect the residential living environment.
        Policy N8.2 Making Compatible Interfaces Between Densities
        The height of development in Urban Residential and other higher density residential areas should
        step down as it nears lower density residential areas to minimize conflicts at the interface between
        the different types of development.
TRANSPORTATION
        Policy T2.1 Encouraging Transit-Oriented Development
        Transit-Oriented development should be encouraged at existing or proposed transit-nodes,
        defined by the convergence of two or more modes of public transit, such as BART, bus, shuttle
        service, light rail or electric trolley, ferry and inter-city or commuter rail.
        Policy T2.2 Guiding Transit-Oriented Development
        Transit-oriented developments should be pedestrian oriented, encourage night and day times use,
        provide the neighborhood with needed goods and services, contain a mix of land uses, and be
        designed to be compatible with the character of surrounding neighborhoods.
PEDESTRIAN MASTER PLAN
        Policy 3.2 Land Use
        Promote land uses and site designs that make walking convenient and enjoyable.
WATERFRONT (W)
        Policy W9.6 Developing Housing Along the Estuary: Quality, Type and Services
        Housing quality, type and services should be developed in a manner that is consistent with the
        policies and requirements of: future detailed plans created for the Waterfront; the Housing
        Element of the General Plan; the City’s Building Code; and / or other appropriate codes per
        regulations.
        Policy W9.7 Supporting Existing Residential Communities Along the Estuary
        The existing residential communities within and adjacent to the waterfront should be supported
        and enhanced.
OPEN SPACE, CONSERVATION & RECREATION ELEMENT (OSCAR)
    Policy OS-4.1 Provision of Useable Open Space
        Continue to require new multi-family development to provide useable outdoor open space for its
        residents.
350                                                                                     OTHER REQUIREMENTS

                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       Policy OS-4.4 Elimination of Blighted Vacant Lots
       Discourage property owners from allowing vacant land to become a source of neighborhood
       blight, particularly in residential areas with large numbers of vacant lots.
       Policy CO-12.1: Land Use Patterns Which Promote Air Quality
       Promote land use patterns and densities which help improve regional air quality
       conditions…reducing the percentage of people in Oakland who must drive to work on a daily
       basis.
NOISE ELEMENT
       Policy 1
       Ensure the compatibility of existing and, especially, of proposed development projects not only
       with neighboring land uses but also with their surrounding noise environment.
       Policy 3
       Reduce the community’s exposure to noise by minimizing the noise levels that are received by
       Oakland residents and others in the City.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION ELEMENT
       Policy 1.2: Potential Designated Historic Properties
       The City considers any property receiving an existing or contingency rating from the
       Reconnaissance or Intensive Surveys of “A” (highest importance), “B” (major importance), or
       “C” (secondary importance) and all properties determined by the Surveys to contribute or
       potentially contribute to an Area of Primary or Secondary Importance to warrant consideration
       for possible preservation. Unless already designated as Landmarks, Preservation Districts, or
       Heritage properties pursuant to Policy 1.3, such properties will be called “Potential Designated
       Historic Properties.”
       Policy 1.3: Designated Historic Properties
       The City will designate significant older properties which definitively warrant preservation as
       Landmarks, Preservation Districts or Heritage Properties. The designations will be based on a
       combination of Historical and Architectural Inventory Ratings, National Register or Historical
       Places criteria, and special criteria for Landmarks and Preservation District eligibility.
       Landmarks, properties, which contribute or potentially contribute to Preservation Districts, and
       Heritage Properties, will be called “Designated Historic Properties.”
       Policy 2.2: Landmark and Preservation District Eligibility Criteria
       Landmarks and Preservation Districts will be classified according to importance, with three
       classes of Landmarks and two classes of Preservation Districts. Properties eligible for each of
       these classifications will be as follows: (See Historic Preservation Element Pg. 4-3)
       Policy 2.6: Preservation Incentives
       (a) Landmarks and all properties contributing or potentially contributing to a Preservation
           District will be eligible for the following preservation incentives:
                i.    Mills Act contracts for reducing property tax assessments;
                ii.   State Historical Building Code and other related alternative codes for older
                      buildings such as the Uniform Code for Building Conservation (UCBC), to provide
                      more flexible construction standards;
OTHER REQUIREMENTS                                                                                     351

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                   iii.   Conservation easements to reduce property tax assessments and, for National
                          Register properties, to obtain income tax deductions;
                   iv. Broader range of permitted or conditionally-permitted uses;
                   v.     Transferable development rights;
                   vi. Priority for economic development and community development project assistance
                          and eligibility for possible historic preservation grants for low-income housing;
                   vii. Eligibility for acquisition, rehabilitation, and other development assistance from a
                          possible historic preservation revolving fund or possible Marks historical
                          rehabilitation bond program; and
          (b) Compatible new development on vacant noncontributing Preservation District parcels will be
              eligible for Incentives (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii). Heritage Properties will be eligible for
              incentives (ii), (vi) and (vii).
SAFETY ELEMENT
     Policy GE-3: Continue, enhance or develop regulations and programs designed to minimize
     seismically related structural hazards from new and existing buildings.
     Policy FI-2: Continue, enhance or implement programs that seek to reduce the risk of structural fires.
     Policy HM-2: Reduce the public’s exposure to toxic air contaminants through appropriate land use
     and transportation strategies.
B.         FLOOD HAZARD LAND MANAGEMENT
Government Code Section 65302(g)(2) requires cities to include analysis and policies regarding flood
management and flood hazard in the General Plan’s Safety Element. Cities are further required to
annually review flood maps and the General Plan Land Use and Transportation Element. The City’s
Safety Element was adopted in November 2004 and Amended in 2012 to comply with more recent
requirements. The City’s Safety Element analyzes Oakland’s risk from five inundation hazards: excessive
storm water runoff from heavy rain, the failure of dams and other water-holding structures, tsunamis,
seiches (waves in an enclosed or semi-enclosed body of water such as a lake, reservoir or Harbor) and a
rise in sea level.
Oakland’s creek protection, storm water management and discharge control ordinance contains several
provisions to reduce flooding risks (Oakland Municipal Code, Chapter 13, section 13.16). Requirements
include that natural waterways be kept free of obstacles and that hydrology reports be obtained for
development proposals within a creek floodway or riparian corridor, or near the top of a creek bank. In
addition, the erosion and sedimentation ordinance (Oakland Municipal Code, Chapter 15, section
15.04.780 and 15.04.780 respectively) prohibits the issuance of grading permits for sites located in a
designated flood-hazard area unless the grading plan provides for measures to mitigate the projected flood
hazard. Finally, the City has enacted provisions pertaining to land subdivisions requiring that subdivisions
be designed to minimize flood damage; that streets and lots be laid out to provide for approved drainage
facilities; that street grading and improvements include catch basins, pipes, culverts and storm drains; that
public utilities be constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; that water-supply systems be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and that tentative parcel
maps contain provisions for drainage and flood control. (Flood-related regulations pertaining to land
subdivisions are found in the Oakland Municipal Code, Chapter16, sections 16.20.010 and 16.24.070.)
352                                                                                       OTHER REQUIREMENTS

                                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Any development proposal with potential flood hazards will be evaluated in-depth pursuant to California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Furthermore, any new construction or major improvements within
flood plains are subject to the City’s zoning and building measures such as, building at or above flood-
elevation levels, for reducing damages from future floods. The Housing Element has been reviewed for
internal consistency with the Safety, Open Space, Conservation and Recreation, and Land Use and
Transportation Elements of the General Plan in regards to flood hazards. For disclosure purposes, the
following Housing Opportunity sites from Table C-6 are identified to be located within the 100-year
FEMA flood plain 59:
     • 7710-7722 International Blvd (sites COL-12B through 12F)
     • 2910 Broadway (site PPDA-136)
     • 3615 Foothill (site FDA-72)
     • 2956 International Blvd (site FDA-81)
The following are Housing Opportunity sites from Table C-6 which are located within the 500-year
FEMA flood plain
     • Coliseum BART parking lot (sites COL-1 and COL-1C)
     • 8001-8023 International Blvd (sites COL-9, COL-9A and COL-9B)
     • 8000 International Blvd (COL-10)
     • 7915 & 7933 International BLVD (COL-11 and COL-11A)
     • 7710 & 7722 International Blvd (sites COL-12C and COL-12F through 12H)
     • 3615 Foothill (site FDA-72)
     • 1750 35th Ave (site FDA-73)
     • 3009 Foothill Blvd (site FDA-77)
     • 3002 Foothill Blvd (site FDA-78)
     • 3111 International Blvd (site FDA-79)
     • 3053 International Blvd (site FDA-80)
     • 2120 Montana St. (site FDA-82)
     • 3609 International Blvd (site FDA-85)
     • 2055 Macarthur Blvd (site FDA-86)
     • 4529 Foothill Blvd (site FDA-91)
     • 4610 International Blvd (site FDA-95)
     • 2910 Broadway (site PPDA-136)
     • 296 27th St (site PPDA-140)
     • 8332 International Blvd.(site PPDA-160)
C.         COASTAL ZONE REQUIREMENTS
Government Code Section 65588(d) requires the review of the housing element for jurisdictions located
within a coastal zone to provide an additional analysis of units constructed, demolished and replaced
within three miles of a coastal zone to ensure the affordable housing stock with the coastal zone is being
protected and provided as required by Government Code Section 65590. Following is language from the
California Coastal Commission website on implementation of planning near California’s Coastal Zones:
          The California Coastal Commission was established by voter initiative in 1972 (Proposition 20)
          and later made permanent by the Legislature through adoption of the California Coastal Act of
          1976.
59
   Using California State Department of Water Resources “Best Available Maps’ online program, accessed October 31, 2014.
OTHER REQUIREMENTS                                                                                                       353

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
          The Coastal Commission, in partnership with coastal cities and counties, plans and regulates the
          use of land and water in the coastal zone. Development activities, which are broadly defined by
          the Coastal Act to include (among others) construction of buildings, divisions of land, and
          activities that change the intensity of use of land or public access to coastal waters, generally
          require a coastal permit from either the Coastal Commission or the local government…
          California's coastal management program is carried out through a partnership between state and
          local governments. Implementation of Coastal Act policies is accomplished primarily through the
          preparation of local coastal programs (LCPs) that are required to be completed by each of the 15
          counties and 61 cities located in whole or in part in the coastal zone.
The City of Oakland is not included in the list of Coastal Cities/Counties and therefore is not required to
do an analysis of housing stock in the Coastal Zone.
D.          SB 244 (DISADVANTAGED COMMUNITIES)
          REQUIREMENTS
Following is background and underlying purpose for Senate Bill 244 (2011) 60:
          According to legislative findings in SB 244, hundreds of unincorporated communities in
          California lack access to basic community infrastructure like sidewalks, safe drinking water, and
          adequate waste processing. These communities range from remote settlements throughout the
          state to neighborhoods that have been surrounded by, but are not part of, California’s fast-
          growing cities. This lack of investment threatens residents’ health and safety and fosters
          economic, social, and education inequality. Moreover, when this lack of attention and resources
          becomes standard practice, it can create a matrix of barriers that is difficult to overcome.
          The purpose of SB 244 is to begin to address the complex legal, financial, and political barriers
          that contribute to regional inequity and infrastructure deficits within disadvantaged
          unincorporated communities. Including these communities in the long range planning of a city or
          county, as required by SB 244, will result in a more efficient delivery system of services and
          infrastructure including but not limited to sewer, water, and structural fire protection. In turn,
          investment in these services and infrastructure will result in the enhancement and protection of
          public health and safety for these communities…
          SB 244 requires LAFCos to make determinations regarding “disadvantaged unincorporated
          communities,” A “disadvantaged community” is defined as a community with an annual median
          household income that is less than 80 percent of the statewide annual median household income
          (Water Code Section 79505.5). Disadvantaged unincorporated communities (DUCs) are defined
          as “a territory that constitutes all or a portion of a “disadvantaged community” including 12 or
          more registered voters or some other standard as determined by the commission…
          On or before the next adoption of its housing element, Government Code Section 65302.10(a)
          requires that each city and county review and update the land use element of its general plan,
          based on available data, including, but not limited to, the data and analysis developed pursuant to
60
   Technical Advisory on Senate Bill 244: Land Use, General Plans, and Disadvantaged Communities by Neilia Sperka, State of
California, Office of Planning and Research.
354                                                                                             OTHER REQUIREMENTS

                                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
          Section 56430, of unincorporated island, fringe, or legacy communities inside or near its
          boundaries.
Alameda County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCo), in the resolution number 2013-13,
determined that based on Census Designated Places there are no disadvantaged unincorporated
communities within Alameda County that meet state-mandated criteria. Alameda County LAFCo further
recognized that there are communities in the County that experience disparities related to socio-economic,
health and crime-issues. Regardless, those communities do have access to municipal services such as
water, sewer, and fire protection. Given this determination by the Alameda County LAFCo, SB 244 is not
applicable to the City of Oakland, which is a part of Alameda County.
E.          WATER AND SEWER PRIORITY
Senate Bill 1087, Chapter 727 (2005) 61 requires that local governments, when conducting their housing
element analysis consider water and sewer services for lower income households. Following is
background to this statute:
          Chapter 727, Statutes of 2005 (SB 1087) establishes processes to ensure the effective
          implementation of Government Code Section 65589.7. This statute requires local governments to
          provide a copy of the adopted housing element to water and sewer providers. In addition, water
          and sewer providers must grant priority for service allocations to proposed developments that
          include housing units affordable to lower-income households. Chapter 727 was enacted to
          improve the effectiveness of the law in facilitating housing development for lower-income
          families and workers.
In compliance with SB 1087, the City of Oakland provided the East Bay Municipal Utilities District
(EBMUD—water provider for Alameda and Contra Costa Counties) the final version of the 2007-14
Housing Element in 2009. City of Oakland commits to providing the 2015-2023 Housing Element within
a month of its adoption slated for late 2014.
Additionally, the City of Oakland consulted with its contact at EBMUD regarding its compliance with
Government Code Section 65589.7(b)—its plan for provision of water services to Alameda and Contra
Costa counties in light of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation for those areas. EBMUD adopted
Policy 3.07 effective August 12. 2014 that ensures, during times of water shortage, available water
supplies are appropriately allocated to water customers.
Finally, the City of Oakland consulted with its contact at EBMUD regarding its compliance with
Government Code Section 65589.7(c)—a confirmation that EBMUD has not denied or subjected to
conditions for approval, an application for services by a proposed development that includes housing
units affordable to lower income households (or if they did issue a denial or condition of approval, they
need to describe the findings for this denial or conditions). As of September 2014, EBMUD has not
denied service or had to prioritize water service in conformance with this State law.
61
   California Housing and Community Development Department memo dated May 22, 2006 Regarding “Senate Bill 1087,
Legislation Effective January 1, 2006: Water and Sewer Service Priority for Housing Affordable to Lower-income Households
(Government Code Section 65589.7).
OTHER REQUIREMENTS                                                                                                      355

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
F.        OPPORTUNITIES FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION
Government Code Section 65583(a)(8) requires local governments, when preparing a housing element, to
analyze opportunities for energy conservation in affordable housing developments. Following is the
language contained in this statute:
         Cities and counties are encouraged to include weatherization and energy efficiency improvements
         as part of publicly subsidized housing rehabilitation projects. This may include energy efficiency
         measures that encompass the building envelope, its heating and cooling systems, and its electrical
         system.
Oakland has a strong legacy of environmental leadership, and has taken several measures to implement
energy conservation programs in residential projects. The City of Oakland is committed to leading
Oakland's progress in becoming a more sustainable city – a community in which all people have the
opportunity to pursue safe, happy, healthy and fulfilling lives, now and into the future.
There are three areas that require analysis to comply with energy conservation in the housing element:
planning and land use, conservation incentives for the City’s building industry and residents, and
promoting green building and energy efficient building standards and practices.
In addition, the State recently adopted Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32) (Chapter 488, Statutes of 2006) that
seeks to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Senate Bill 375 (SB 375), signed by Governor
Schwarzenegger in September 2008, links AB 32 to land use planning and transportation decisions that
will reduce the use of fossil fuel consumption. Highlights of SB 375 are that it requires regional
governing bodies to include a “sustainable community strategy” in their regional transportation plan that
encourages reductions of vehicle miles travelled by encouraging development near public transportation.
In addition it will mandate that transportation projects consistent with the “sustainable community
strategy” receive federal transportation funds administered by the state.
In an effort to reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions in Oakland, the Oakland Energy and
Climate Action Plan (ECAP) was adopted by the City Council on December 4, 2012. Optimizing the use
of energy and minimizing associated energy costs and GHG emissions are important components of
Oakland's sustainable city vision. The ECAP establishes GHG reduction actions, as well as a framework
for coordinating implementation and monitoring, and reporting on progress. The ECAP outlines a ten-
year plan including more than 150 actions that will enable Oakland to achieve a 36% reduction in GHG
emissions. The ECAP assists the City of Oakland in continuing its legacy of leadership on energy, climate
and sustainability issues.
The City’s General Plan promotes a clean and ecologically healthy environment; growing a strong
economy brimming with opportunity; and fostering a safe, equitable and vibrant community. The
Housing Element is seen as a tool to implement this state policy by coordinating efficient land use
strategies that promote housing development that is affordable, is higher-density in strategic urban
locations, and that promotes housing policies related to the reduction of GHG emissions.
The following three sections look at policies in place and policy goals for the next planning period that
address energy conservation through the lens of housing development in the City.
Planning and Land-Use
Planning policies encourage energy conservation and sustainable development by focusing development
in Oakland’s downtown and near major corridors well served by transit, as well as zoning land to ensure
356                                                                                   OTHER REQUIREMENTS

                                                                                       CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
there is land available to meet housing needs at appropriate densities with an emphasis on land well
served by public transit, and close to public services. Specifically, Policy 1.1 Priority Development Areas
(PDAs) Housing Program, Policy 1.2 Availability of Land, and Policy 1.3 Appropriate Locations and
Densities for Housing all encourage housing that maximizes sustainable development. With these
policies in place, Oakland will help create more sustainable environment.
A key component of the City’s General Plan is the concept of promoting transit-oriented development
(TOD). This implies locating housing near transportation corridors, well served by public transportation
and with access to goods and services, thus reducing single-occupancy vehicle trips improving
neighborhoods and reducing air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. The City implements TODs
through the establishment of six transit-oriented priority development areas (PDAs) and is currently
developing comprehensive plans and zoning to guide future development in these areas.
In 2007, the Oakland City Council adopted a citywide Bicycle Master Plan. The plan aims at promoting
bicycling as a viable alternative to the private automobile by improving safety and access for cyclists
while minimizing adverse effects on other roadway users. The plan will help the city meet its policy goals
regarding transportation, sustainability, public health, equity, and quality of life. The Plan was funded in
part by a grant made possible by the Alameda County Measure B half-cent transportation sales tax,
administered by the Alameda County Transportation Improvement Authority (ACTIA), now part of the
Alameda County Transportation Commission.
Conservation Incentives for the Building Industry and Residents
The City of Oakland’s Housing Element Policy Goal 7 (see Chapter 7 for a full list of Housing
Element planning period policy goals where this is detailed) addresses the City’s efforts to promote
sustainable development and follow the principles of a sustainable community strategy. Policies that are
supported by the City include the following:
    •    promoting a sustainable residential development program,
    •    minimizing energy and water consumption
    •    fostering low-carbon emissions and development by encouraging infill development at densities
         that are appropriate for targeted communities and by encouraging development in close proximity
         to transit resulting in a reduction in the number and frequency of trips made by automobiles,
    •    minimizing environmental impacts from new housing construction by working with
         developers to construct new housing that reduces the footprint of new construction, preserves
         green spaces, and supports ecological systems.
Promoting Green Building and Energy Efficient Building Standards and Practices
Optimizing use of energy, water and other resources can lower associated costs, air pollution and
greenhouse gas emissions. Increasing local energy security and planning for future climate impacts can
increase the resilience of our community. Oakland’s comprehensive approach to improving local energy
and climate performance involves reducing waste and pollution, keeping money in the local economy,
improving local infrastructure and encouraging new investment.
In October, 2010, Oakland passed a Green Building Ordinance (resolution number 13040), which requires
private construction in the City, after certain thresholds are met, to use checklists and best practices for
conserving energy and resources. These regulations enhance a 2005 ordinance which required that any
OTHER REQUIREMENTS                                                                                           357

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
City building project or public works project follow Green Building requirements as codified in Chapter
15.35 of the Oakland Municipal Code. For a number of years, the City used Green Building Guidelines
(resolution number 79871, May 2, 2006), to encourage private and commercial residential developers to
use green building and landscape design and construction whenever feasible. Additionally, the City’s
Housing and Community Development department’s annual Notice of Funding Availability for affordable
housing development requires that developers achieve a minimum of 50 points on Build It Green’s
GreenPoint Checklist.
The City’s Weatherization and Energy Retrofit Revolving Loan Program provides income-eligible
property owners access to 0% interest loans ranging from $6,500 - $30,000 for weatherization and energy
efficiency improvements to owner-occupied residential properties of 1 - 4 units.
In March 2006, the Oakland City Council adopted a Zero Waste Goal by 2020 and in December 2006
passed a resolution adopting a Zero Waste Strategic Plan. The Zero Waste Strategic Plan provides a
framework of policies and initiatives that guide the planning and decision-making process to achieve the
City’s Zero Waste Goal. Oakland continues to exceed the 50% waste reduction goal mandated by state
law (AB 939), primarily through participation in residential recycling collection programs,
mandatory construction and demolition (C&D) debris recycling, and businesses served by the many
independent recycling companies operating in Oakland. Zero Waste goes beyond recycling discarded
materials. It considers the vast flow of resources and waste through our society and economy, and moves
to eliminate waste.
On January 31, 2005, the Environmental Services Division of Oakland Public Works introduced the first
major modification to Oakland’s residential recycling program since the addition of yard trimming
service in 1995. The existing yard trimming program was expanded to include food scraps and to accept
unlimited amounts of yard trimmings, with collection increasing from bi-weekly to weekly service. The
tub-based curbside recycling program, which was previously provided as a weekly service in only half of
the City, was replaced by a weekly single-cart service throughout Oakland. The results of this expansion
have been dramatic: yard trimming tonnage has increased by over 46% compared to 2004, and recycling
tonnage increased by 37%.
358                                                                                  OTHER REQUIREMENTS

                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY
METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
The 2014 Oakland Housing Conditions Survey was a survey of exterior housing conditions, sometimes
referred to as a “windshield survey.” This means that housing surveyors were only able to evaluate the
physical conditions of a residential structure and its immediate surroundings as visible from the public
right-of-way. This survey did not include any evaluation of interior housing conditions or any other
physical condition not detectable from the street.
BAE designed and executed the survey with input from City staff during the months of May and June
2014. Specifically, BAE designed a survey instrument to be used by housing surveyors in the field,
generated a geographically stratified random sample of Oakland housing units to be surveyed, oversaw
the administration of the survey by contract housing surveyors, and extrapolated citywide housing
conditions from the survey results.
APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS                                             359

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Survey Results
In total, BAE surveyed 1,776 residential structures across Oakland, accounting for over 18,113 residential
units 62. Surveyed structures were spread relatively evenly across nine Plan Areas (e.g. West Oakland)
encompassing all of Oakland except the Port and Airport areas. Between 180 and 210 structures were
successfully surveyed in each Plan Area.
Of these, wood frame buildings of one to four floors made up the most common construction type (94.4
percent) and 3.8 percent of surveyed structures were steel or concrete frame buildings of five or more
floors. Half of surveyed structures were single family homes and one quarter of structures were buildings
of two to four units or buildings of five or more units, respectively.
Accessibility to surveyed structures was also evaluated; roughly one in five surveyed structures was
accessible via curbs, sidewalks, and/or driveways that were in poor condition (e.g. cracked, uneven, or
partially missing) and roughly seven percent of surveyed structures were on a street that did not have
curbs and/or a sidewalk. Finally, for a significant majority (80.3 percent) of surveyed structures, the main
entry was accessible from the street only by steps.
Among surveyed structures, 1,370 (77.2 percent) were evaluated as being in sound condition, meaning
that no deferred maintenance or minor damage to the structure’s exterior, foundation, roof, or windows
and doors was visible from the street. One in five (369 structures or 20.7 percent) surveyed structures
were evaluated as being in need of minor rehabilitation or repair for exterior deficiencies such as peeling
paint or missing roof shingles. The remaining 2.3 percent of surveyed structures were evaluated as in
need of moderate to substantial rehabilitation or repair or as being totally dilapidated and in need of
replacement. Only four surveyed structures were deemed to be totally dilapidated and in need of
replacement.
Housing Condition Findings
BAE extrapolated from the raw survey results presented above to estimate the housing condition profile
of all housing units in Oakland. The methodology used to extrapolate these findings accounted for the
geographic distribution of and variance in the number of housing units in surveyed structure; this
methodology is described in detail in the following chapter of this report.
Based on the results of this survey of exterior housing conditions, BAE estimates the following profile of
housing conditions among an estimated total of 170,825 housing units in Oakland:
     •    Three quarters (78.4 percent) of Oakland’s housing units are in sound condition. These
          133,922 units show no signs of exterior damage or deferred maintenance on the portions of the
          structures visible from the public right-of-way.
     •    Nearly one quarter (19.9 percent) of housing units in Oakland are in need of minor
          rehabilitation or repair. These 34.004 units are in need of minor repairs such as partial re-
          painting or minor repair or replacement of a window or door.
62
   This unit count figure is based on the Alameda County Assessor parcel database provided to BAE by the City of Oakland.
BAE did not independently verify the unit count in surveyed structures.
360                                     APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS

                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
    •   Moderate to substantial rehabilitation or repair is needed for 2,635 housing units in
        Oakland. These units (less than two percent of all units in Oakland) are in structures that show
        major damage such as missing siding, holes in the roof or a roof that is listing, a tilted or cracked
        foundation, or missing windows or doors.
    •   A small number of units are completely dilapidated and in need or replacement or complete
        rehabilitation. In Oakland, 264 housing units show signs of excessive neglect and appear to
        require demolition or major rehabilitation to become habitable.
Definitions of Housing Conditions
SOUND: A unit that appears new or well maintained and structurally intact. The foundation should
appear structurally undamaged and there should be straight roof lines. Siding, windows, and doors should
be in good repair with good exterior paint condition. Minor problems such as small areas of peeling paint
and/or other maintenance items are allowable under this category.
MINOR: A unit that show signs of deferred maintenance, or which needs only one major component
such as a roof.
MODERATE: A unit in need of replacement of one or more major components and other repairs, such as
roof replacement, painting, and window repairs.
SUBSTANTIAL: A unit that requires replacement of several major systems and possibly other repairs
(e.g. complete foundation work, roof structure replacement and re-roofing, as well as painting and
window replacement.)
DILAPIDATED: A unit suffering from excessive neglect, where the building appears structurally
unsound and maintenance is none-existent, not fit for human habitation in its current condition, may be
considered for demolition or at minimum, major rehabilitation will be required.
APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS                                               361

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Housing/Property Condition Survey Form
362                  APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Survey Results and Weights
APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS                    363
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
364                       APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS                         365
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
366                       APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS                         367
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
368                       APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS                         369
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
370                       APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS                         371
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
372                       APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS                         373
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
374                       APPENDIX A: HOUSING CONDITION SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING
                                                        Total                             Sub
Property     Property                   Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub  Sub   Sub        Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                  Section
                           Use Type                   Subsidized                           4+   Units    Units
                                                                                                                     8
Name         Address                  Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR 2 BR 3 BR                           Units
                                                        Units                             BR
                           Disabled
Allen        7607
                           HIV/AIDS
Temple       International              2001     24      23       0    0   21    2    0     0     0       2         0
                           Special
Manor        Blvd.
                           Needs
                           Disabled
             3800
                           HIV/AIDS
Coolidge Ct  Coolidge                   1998     19      18       0   18    0    0    0     0     0       9        18
                           Special
             Ave
                           Needs
                           Disabled
CURA-        531 24th      HIV/AIDS
                                        2001     18      17       0   15    2    0    0     0     0       2         0
North        Street        Special
                           Needs
                           Disabled
             6850
Eastmont                   HIV/AIDS
             Foothill                   2005     19      18       0    0    9    9    0     0     0       0         0
Court                      Special
             Blvd
                           Needs
                           Disabled
Homes Now
             1800 Linden   HIV/AIDS
in the                                  1983     10      10       0    0    6    4    0     0     0       1        10
             St            Special
Community
                           Needs
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING                                                                        375
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                     Total                                     Sub
Property     Property                Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub     Sub     Sub            Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                        Section
                          Use Type                 Subsidized                                   4+    Units    Units
                                                                                                                           8
Name         Address               Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR   2 BR    3 BR                               Units
                                                     Units                                     BR
                          Disabled
Marlon       269 Vernon   HIV/AIDS
                                     1996     13      12       0    0   12       0      0        0      0       1         0
Riggs Apts   St           Special
                          Needs
                          Disabled
Peter
             2350         HIV/AIDS
Babcock                              1996      5       5       0    0    0       0      0        0      0       1         0
             Woolsey St   Special
House
                          Needs
                          Disabled
Providence                HIV/AIDS
             540 23rd St             1990     41      40       0    0   34       6      0        0      0      40        40
House                     Special
                          Needs
                          Disabled
Rosa Parks   521 W.       HIV/AIDS
                                     1999     11      11       0    2    7       2      0        0      0       1         0
House        Grand Ave    Special
                          Needs
                         SUBTOTAL
                         Disabled
                         HIV/AIDS             160     154      -   35   91      23       -       -      -      57        68
                         Special
                         Needs
Adcock/
             532 16th St  Families   1994      50      50      0   25   25       0      0        0      0       5         0
Joiner Apts.
Adeline      2320
                          Families   2002     38      37       0    0   12      13      12       0      0       8         0
Lofts        Adeline St
Brookfield
             555 98th
Place                     Families   2009     58      57       0    0    9      28      20       0      0       0         0
             Avenue
Apartments
376                                                                        APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING
                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Total                             Sub
Property     Property                   Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub  Sub   Sub        Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                  Section
                           Use Type                   Subsidized                           4+   Units    Units
                                                                                                                     8
Name         Address                  Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR 2 BR 3 BR                           Units
                                                        Units                             BR
Chestnut     2240
                           Families     2003      72     26       0    0    4   20    2     0     0       0         0
Court Rental Chestnut St
City Towers
Apartments   1050 7th St   Families     1980      77      77      0   11   22   44    0     0     0       0        77
#1
City Towers
             725 Market
Apartments                 Families     1980     77      77       0   11   22   44    0     0     0       0        77
             St
#2
City Towers
Apartments   1055 8th St   Families     1980      77      77      0   11   22   44    0     0     0       0        77
#3
Clinton      720 E. 11th
                           Families     2012      55     54       0    0   18   17    17    3     0      11        16
Commons      Street
Courtyards
             923 Adeline   Families     2000      87      87      0    6    7   20    52    2     0       0         0
at Acorn
Drachma      scattered
Housing Inc. sites in W.   Families     2005      14     14       0    0    0    1    12    1     0       0         4
(14 unit)    Oakland
Drachma      scattered
Housing LP   sites in W    Families     2003      19     19       0    3    1    9    5     1     0       0         0
(19 unit)    Oakland
             2530
Drasnin
             International Families     1993      26     26       0    0    3    5    18    0     3       3        25
Manor
             Blvd
             2700-2785
E.C. Reems
             Alvingroom    Families     1999     126     124      0    0   17   71    36    0     0       0         0
Gardens
             Court
East Side    2277-2289
Arts and     International Families     2006      18     16       0    8    8    0    0     0     0       0         0
Housing      Blvd.
Effie's      829 E 19th
                           Families     1999      21     20       0   11    9    0    0     0     0       0         6
House        St
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING                                                                        377
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                       Total                                     Sub
Property      Property                 Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub     Sub     Sub            Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                          Section
                            Use Type                 Subsidized                                   4+    Units    Units
                                                                                                                             8
Name          Address                Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR   2 BR    3 BR                               Units
                                                       Units                                     BR
Eldridge
              275 E. 12th
Gonaway                     Families   1984      40      39      0    0   10      14      13       2      0       3        39
              street
Commons
              401
Fairmount
              Fairmount     Families   2011      31     30       0    0   26       4      0        0      0       0        16
Apartments
              Avenue
Foothill      6946
Family        Foothill      Families   2000      65     64       0    0    0      31      33       0      0       0        11
Apartments    Blvd
Foothill      2701 64th
                            Families   1988      54     11       0    0    6       5      0        0      0       1         0
Plaza         Avenue
              555 19th
Fox Courts                  Families   2009      80     79       0   18    9      13      35       5      0       0        20
              Street
Frank G.      283 18th
                            Families   1990     119     119      0    0   51      35      27       6     38       8         0
Mar           street
Fruitvale     3301 and
Transit       3411 E 12th   Families   2003      47     10       0    0    4       6      0        0      0       1         0
Village       St
Hillside      1485 E 22nd
                            Families   1990      23     22       0    0    0      11      11       0      0       1         0
Terrace       St
Hismen        2555
Hin-nu        International Families   1995      92     92       0    0   18      34      30      10      0       5         0
Terrace       Blvd
Howie Harp
              430 28th St   Families   1995      20      19      0    0    0       7      12       0      0       0        18
Plaza
International 6600
Blvd Family   International Families   2002      30     29       0    0    7       9      11       2      0       8         0
Housing       Blvd
Ironhorse at
              1801 14th
Central                     Families   2009     99      99       0    0   27      32      40       0      0       0        20
              Street
Station
378                                                                          APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING
                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Total                             Sub
Property     Property                   Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub  Sub   Sub        Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                  Section
                          Use Type                    Subsidized                           4+   Units    Units
                                                                                                                     8
Name         Address                  Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR 2 BR 3 BR                           Units
                                                        Units                             BR
James Lee
             690 15th St  Families      1992      26      25      0    0     4   7    10    4     0       0         12
Court
             5321
Keller Plaza Telegraph    Families      1973     201     201      0   40   120  41    0     0     0       1        168
             Ave
             6475
Kenneth
             Foothill     Families      1992      51      51      0    0    8   27    14    2     0      19         13
Henry Ct
             Henry Ct
Linden
             1089 26th St Families      2003      79      40      0    0    15  20    5     0     0       0         0
Court Rental
Lion Creek
             881 69th
Crossings                 Families      2006     115      70      0    0   11   22    26   11     0       0         0
             Avenue
Phase I
Lion Creek
             885 69th
Crossings                 Families      2007     146      92      0    0   20   59    11    2     0       0        18
             Avenue
Phase II
Lion Creek
             950 66th
Crossings                 Families      2008     106      69      0    0    3   19    33    9     0       0        16
             Avenue
Phase III
Lion Creek
             6591 Lion
Crossings                 Families      2012      72      71      0    0    16  28    28    0     0       0         10
             Way
Phase IV
Lottie
Johnson      970 14th St  Families      1974      27      22      0    8    12   2    0     0     0       0         22
Apts
Madison      160 14th
                          Families      2008      79      78      0   16    36  20    6     0     0       0         19
Lofts        Street
Madison
             100 9th St   Families      1995      98      98      0   20    69   9    0     0     0       5         5
Park Apts
Mandela
             1346 and
Gateway
             1420 7th     Families      2005     168     120      0    0   36   61    23    0     0      12        30
Rental
             Street
Housing
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING                                                                        379
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                      Total                                      Sub
Property     Property                 Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub      Sub     Sub            Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                          Section
                           Use Type                 Subsidized                                    4+    Units    Units
                                                                                                                             8
Name         Address                Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR    2 BR    3 BR                               Units
                                                      Units                                      BR
Marcus
             721 Wood
Garvey                     Families   1992     22      21       0    0    4        7      8        2      0       4        10
             Street
Commons
MORH I       741 Filbert
                           Families   1972     126     125      0    0    0        0      56      69      0       1         0
Housing      Street
             2301
Northgate
             Northgate     Families   2003      42     41       0    0    0       14      23       4      0       0         0
Apartments
             Ave
             3700
Nueva Vista  International Families   1986      30     29       0    0    8       14      7        0      0       0         0
             Blvd
Oak Center
             850 18th St.  Families   1983      89      89      0    0    11      38      33       7      0       1        89
Homes
             1601 Market
Oak Center I               Families   1972      79     76       0    0    33      20      11      12      0       1        76
             St, Unit 106
Oak Park     2618 E. 16th
                           Families   2004      35     34       0    0    13       3      16       2      0       0         0
Apartments   St
             780 13th St,
Oak Village                Families   1973     117      3       0    0    2        1      0        0      0       0         0
             #103
Oakland
Point        1448 10th
                           Families   2002     31      31       0    6    1       16      3        5      0       0        15
Limited      St.
Partnership
             215 W
Piedmont
             MacArthur     Families   1998     250     250      0   33   193      24      0        0      0       0         0
Apts
             Blvd
             2220 10th
Santana Apts               Families   1992      30     30       0    6    12       6      6        0      0       4         0
             Ave
             2946
Seven
             International Families   2008      36     35       0    2    2       17      13       1      0       0        18
Directions
             Blvd
380                                                                          APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING
                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Total                             Sub
Property     Property                   Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub  Sub   Sub        Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                  Section
                           Use Type                   Subsidized                           4+   Units    Units
                                                                                                                     8
Name         Address                  Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR 2 BR 3 BR                           Units
                                                        Units                             BR
Slim Jenkins 700 Willow
                           Families     1991      32      31      0    0    0   13    0     0     0       3        11
Ct           St
Stanley      6006
Avenue       International Families     2003      24      23      0    0    5    5    11    2     0       8         0
Apartments   Blvd
Swans
Market       918 Clay St.  Families     1999      18      18      0    0    8   10    0     0     0      18         0
Housing
Tassafarong
             919 85th
a Village,                 Families     2010     137     136      0    0   16   48    56   16     0       0        80
             Avenue
Phase 1
Tassafarong
             919 85th
a Village,                 Families     2010      20      20      0    7    1   12    0     0     0       0        19
             Avenue
Phase 2
Taylor
             1080 14th St  Families               12      12      0    0    0    8    4     0     0       0         0
Methodist
Town Center  1143-10th
                           Families     2000     206     206      0   18   25   63    90   10     0       0        25
at Acorn     St.
United       9410
Together     MacArthur     Families     1992      18      17      0    0   11    6    0     0     0       1         0
Manor        Blvd
             500, 600,
Uptown       601
                           Families     2008     665     166      0   32   75   50    9     0     0       0         0
Apartments   Wiliiams
             Street
             2000
Ventana
             international Families     1987      20      19      0    0    0   19    0     0     0       2        19
Townhouse
             Blvd.
             3927 West
West Street                Families     1999      3        3      0    0    0    1    2     0     0       0         0
             St.
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING                                                                        381
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                      Total                                     Sub
Property     Property                 Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub     Sub     Sub            Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                         Section
                          Use Type                  Subsidized                                   4+    Units    Units
                                                                                                                            8
Name         Address                Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR   2 BR    3 BR                               Units
                                                      Units                                     BR
                         SUBTOTAL
                                              4,725   3,726     -   292 1,107  1,227    890     190     41
                         Families
1063 82nd    1063 82nd    Home-
                                      2002      2       2       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
Avenue       Avenue       ownership
1226 94th
Avenue
             1226 94th    Home-
(Wang                                 2002      1       1       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
             Avenue       ownership
Scattered
Site)
1311
Campbell     1311
                          Home-
Street (Wang Campbell                 2005      1       1       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
                          ownership
Scattered    Street
Site)
4100 MLK     4100 Martin
                          Home-
Homeowner    Luther King              2002      1       1       0    0    0      0       0        4      0       0         0
                          ownership
ship (Wang)  Jr Way
901 70th
Avenue
             901 70th     Home-
(Wang                                 2005      1       1       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
             Avenue       ownership
Scattered
Site)
938 46th
Street (Wang 938 46th     Home-
                                      2007      2       2       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
Scattered    Street       ownership
Site)
             Market St.
Bayporte                  Home-
             between 8th              1999      71     71       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
Village                   ownership
             and 10th
Central East
             scattered    Home-
Oakland                               1995      4       4       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
             sites        ownership
Infill
382                                                                         APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING
                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Total                             Sub
Property      Property                  Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub  Sub   Sub        Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                  Section
                            Use Type                  Subsidized                           4+   Units    Units
                                                                                                                     8
Name          Address                 Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR 2 BR 3 BR                           Units
                                                        Units                             BR
Chestnut
                            Home-
Court         1114 14th St              2003     15      15       0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
                            ownership
Ownership
Edes Avenue
              10900 Edes    Home-
Homes,                                  2008     26      26       0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
              Avenue        ownership
Phase A
Edes Avenue
              10800 Edes    Home-
Homes,                                  2011     28      28       0    0    0    6    11   11     0       0         0
              Avenue        ownership
Phase B
Elmhurst
Infill        scattered     Home-
                                        1998     8        8       0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
Housing       sites         ownership
(Wang)
Elmhurst
              1153 79th     Home-
Scattered                                0       7        7       0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
              Avenue        ownership
Site
              82nd
Golf Links    Avenue and    Home-
                                        2010     10       3       0    0    0    0    0     3     0       0         0
Road          Golf Links    ownership
              Road
Golf Links
              8200 - 8400
Road                        Home-
              Golf Links                1991     10      10       0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
Rehabilitatio               ownership
              Road
n
              82nd
Habitat for   Avenue and    Home-
                                        2001     3        3       0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
Humanity      International ownership
              Blvd
Habitat       2662
                            Home-
Fruitvale     Fruitvale                 2003     4        4       0    0    0    0    2     2     0       0         0
                            ownership
Homes         Ave
Habitat       277 105th     Home-
                                        2001     40      40       0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
Village       Avenue        ownership
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING                                                                        383
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                       Total                                     Sub
Property      Property                 Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub     Sub     Sub            Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                          Section
                           Use Type                  Subsidized                                   4+    Units    Units
                                                                                                                             8
Name          Address                Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR   2 BR    3 BR                               Units
                                                       Units                                     BR
Kinsell       949 85th     Home-
                                       2012     22      22       0    0    0      2       20       0      0       0         0
Commons       Avenue       ownership
Leola         2428 90th    Home-
                                       1997     8        8       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
Terrace       Avenue       ownership
Mandela       8th Street
Gateway       bet. Mandela Home-
                                       2007     14      14       0    0    0      0       14       0      0       0         0
Ownership     Pkwy &       ownership
Housing       Center St
              Dover St,
MLK Plaza                  Home-
              58th St and              2002     11      11       0    0    0      0       11       0      0       0         0
Homes                      ownership
              Aileen St
NCLT
Homeowner     3032 Linden  Home-
                                       2003     4        4       0    0    1      2       1        0      0       0         0
ship          St           ownership
Program
North
              scattered    Home-
Oakland                                1989     4        4       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
              sites        ownership
Infill (Ward)
              Creekside
Oakwood       Circle at    Home-
                                       1997     36      36       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
Estates       105th        ownership
              Avenue
              926- 949     Home-
Palm Court                             2005     12      12       0    0    0      0       8        4      0       0         0
              Palm Court   ownership
              MacArthur
              Blvd btwn    Home-
Palm Villa                             2003     78      78       0    0    0      0       74       4      0       0         0
              90th and     ownership
              94th
              5216 San
San Pablo                  Home-
              Pablo                    2000     11      11       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
Gateway                    ownership
              Avenue
Sausal Creek  2464 26th    Home-
                                       2008     17      17       0    0    0      0       0        0      0       0         0
Townhomes     Avenue       ownership
384                                                                          APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING
                                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                         Total                              Sub
Property     Property                    Year    Total            Sub  Sub  Sub  Sub   Sub        Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                    Section
                           Use Type                    Subsidized                            4+   Units    Units
                                                                                                                       8
Name         Address                   Completed Units            SRO  0 BR 1 BR 2 BR 3 BR                           Units
                                                         Units                              BR
Town         1 - 27 Town   Home-
                                         1994      27      27       0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
Square       Square Place  ownership
Traditional  1044 - 1048   Home-
                                         1996      2        2       0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
Homes        91st Avenue   ownership
             1400 and
Victoria     1500 blocks   Home-
                                         1996      16     16        0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
Court        of Adeline    ownership
             St
             1400 and
Victorian                  Home-
             1500 blocks                 1994      56     56        0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
Village                    ownership
             of Market St
Villas at    East 10th     Home-
                                         1997      53      53       0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
Jingletown   Street        ownership
West
             scattered     Home-
Oakland                                   0        11     11        0    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         0
             sites         ownership
Infill
                          SUBTOTAL
                          Home-                   616     609        -   -    1   10   141   28     -        -         -
                          ownership
             583-587 8th   Residential
Aztec Hotel                              1993      58      58      58    0    0    0    0     0     0       4         0
             St            Hotel
C.L.
                           Residential
Dellums      644 14th St                 1995      73      72       72   0    0    0    0     0     0       6         72
                           Hotel
Apts
California   3501 San      Residential
                                         2013     137     135       0   119  12    6    0     0     0       0        135
Hotel        Pablo Ave     Hotel
             1445          Residential
Coit Apts                                1995     118     107      105   0   10         3     0     0       0        105
             Harrison St   Hotel
Hamilton     510 21st      Residential
                                         1997      92      92      92    0    0    0    0     0     0       0         92
Hotel        Street        Hotel
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING                                                                          385
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                         Total                                      Sub
Property    Property                     Year    Total            Sub  Sub  Sub     Sub     Sub            Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                             Section
                           Use Type                    Subsidized                                    4+    Units    Units
                                                                                                                                8
Name        Address                    Completed Units            SRO  0 BR 1 BR   2 BR    3 BR                               Units
                                                         Units                                      BR
            1415
Harrison                   Residential
            Harrison                     1996      81     59       59     0   0      0       0        0      0      59         59
Hotel                      Hotel
            Street
            1935
Hugh Taylor                Residential
            Seminary                     1994      42     25       20     0   5      0       0        0      0       2         3
House                      Hotel
            Ave
Madrone                    Residential
            477 8th St                   1988      32      32      31     1   0      0       0        0      0       0         0
Hotel                      Hotel
                           Residential
The Savoy   587 15th St                  2013     106     105      105    0   0      0       0        0      0       0        101
                           Hotel
                          SUBTOTAL
                          Residential             739     685      542  120  27      6       3        -      -      71        567
                          Hotel
Allen       8135
Temple      International  Seniors       1982      76     75        0    0   75      0       0        0     75       7         75
Arms I      Blvd
Allen
            1388 81st
Temple                     Seniors       1987      51      51       0    13  38      0       0        0     51       7         51
            Ave
Arms II
Allen       10121
Temple      International  Seniors       2001      50     49        0    0   49      0       0        0     49       5         0
Gardens     Blvd
            1720
Altenheim
            MacArthur      Seniors       2007      93     92        0    52  40      0       0        0     92       0         23
Phase I
            Blvd
            1720
Altenheim
            MacArthur      Seniors       2010      81     80        0    7   73      0       0        0     80       0         40
Phase II
            Blvd
Bancroft    5636
Senior      Bancroft       Seniors       2001      61     60        0    0   60      0       0        0     60       3         0
Homes       Ave
Baywood     225 41st St    Seniors       1981      77     76        0     5  72      0       0        0     76      10         76
386                                                                             APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING
                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Total                             Sub
Property      Property                  Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub  Sub   Sub        Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                  Section
                          Use Type                    Subsidized                           4+   Units    Units
                                                                                                                     8
Name          Address                 Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR 2 BR 3 BR                           Units
                                                        Units                             BR
              3649
Beth Asher                Seniors       1971     50      50       0   34   16    0    0     0    49       0         49
              Dimond
              1100 Market
Beth Eden                 Seniors       1975     54      54       0    0   54    0    0     0    54      10         54
              St
Bishop
Nichols       1027 62nd
                          Seniors       2003     17      16       0    0   16    0    0     0    16       0         0
Senior        St
Housing
              2221
Casa
              Fruitvale   Seniors       2003     20      19       0   12    7    0    0     0    19       0         20
Velasco
              Ave
Doh On
              211 8th St  Seniors                48      46       0   36   10    0    0     0    46       0         46
Yuen
E.E.          2611
Cleveland     Alvingroom  Seniors       1990     54      53       0   13   40    0    0     0    53       4         53
Manor         Ct
Glen Brook    4030
                          Seniors                66      66       0   57    9    0    0     0    65       0         65
Terrace       Panama Ct
Harrison      1633
Street Senior Harrison    Seniors       2012     73      73       0    0   73    0    0     0    72       0         11
Housing       Street
Hotel
              270 13th St Seniors       1981     315     313      0   77   236   0    0     0   313     313        313
Oakland
Irene Cooper  1218 2nd
                          Seniors       2000     40      39       0    0   39    0    0     0    39       0         0
Terrace       Ave
J.L. Richards 250 E 12th
                          Seniors       1988     80      80       0   20   60    0    0     0    80       8         80
Terrace       St
Jack London   989 Brush
                          Seniors       2009     61      60       0    0   57    3    0     0    60       0         60
Gateway       Street
Lake Merritt  1417 1st
                          Seniors       2003     55      54       0    0   54    0    0     0    54      54         54
Apartments    Ave
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING                                                                        387
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                    Total                                      Sub
Property     Property               Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub      Sub     Sub            Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                        Section
                         Use Type                 Subsidized                                    4+    Units    Units
                                                                                                                           8
Name         Address              Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR    2 BR    3 BR                               Units
                                                    Units                                      BR
Lakemount    136 E 12th
                         Seniors    1974      66     66       0    12   54       0      0        0     66      66         66
Apts         St
Las
             1223 37th
Bougainville             Seniors    1998      67      67       0    0   66       1      0        0     67       6         67
             Ave
as
Lincoln      2400
Court Senior MacArthur   Seniors    2006      82     81       0     2   79       0      0        0     81       0         0
Housing      Blvd
             32 Linda
Linda Glen               Seniors    1973      42     42       0    33   9        0      0        0     42      10         40
             Ave
Mark Twain   2426-38
                         Seniors    1996     102     106      68   22   6        0      0        0    106      12         22
Senior       35th Ave
Merritt      609 Oak
                         Seniors    2012      70     69       0     5   55      10      0        0     69       0         50
Crossings    Street
Miley
Gardens      2520 Church
                         Seniors    2006     69      68       0    16  52       0       0        0     68       0         0
Senior       Street
Housing
Noble        1515
                         Seniors    1982     194     194      0     0  194       0      0        0    195      14        195
Towers       Lakeside Dr
Northgate
             550 24th St Seniors    1970     201     200       0  180  20       0       0        0    200      10        155
Terrace
Oak Center   1515 Market
                         Seniors    1974     196     195      0   173  22       0       0        0    195       4        195
Towers       St
Oak Street
             1109 Oak St Seniors    2004     39      38       0    38   0       0       0        0     38       0         0
Terrace
             2719
Orchards on
             Foothill    Seniors    2008      65     64       0     0   64       0      0        0     64       0         64
Foothill
             Blvd
Otterbein    5375 Manila
                         Seniors    1973      39     39       0    31   8        0      0        0     38       0         38
Manor        Ave
388                                                                        APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING
                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Total                             Sub
Property     Property                   Year    Total            Sub Sub  Sub  Sub   Sub        Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                  Section
                           Use Type                   Subsidized                           4+   Units    Units
                                                                                                                     8
Name         Address                  Completed Units            SRO 0 BR 1 BR 2 BR 3 BR                           Units
                                                        Units                             BR
Park Blvd    4135 Park
                           Seniors                42      39      0    33   6    0    0     0    39       0         39
Manor        Blvd
Percy
             1094
Abram, Jr
             Alcatraz      Seniors      2006      44      44      0     0   44   0    0     0    44       0         0
Senior
             Ave
Apartments
             2221
Posada de
             Fruitvale     Seniors      1979     100     100      0     0  99    1    0     0   100      14        100
Colores
             Ave
             1600
Rose of
             Lakeshore     Seniors      1977     143     143      0    83  56    0    0     0   143      30         88
Sharon
             Ave
Saint
             3250 San
Andrew's                   Seniors      1973      60      59      0    51   8    0    0     0    59       6         59
             Pablo Ave
Manor
Saint        2647
Joseph's     International Seniors      2011      84      83      0    33  50    1    0     0    83       0         83
Senior       Blvd
Saint Marks
Hotel/Victor 394 12th St   Seniors      1986     100     100      0     0  100   0    0     0   100       7        100
ia Plaza
Saint Mary's
             801 10th St   Seniors      1979     100     100      0     0  100   0    0     0   100       9        100
Gardens
Saint
             1212 Center
Patrick's                  Seniors      1973      66      65      0    57   8    0    0     0    65       4         65
             St
Terrace
San Pablo    1955 San
                           Seniors      1995     144     144     144    0   0    0    0     0   144     144         0
Hotel        Pablo Ave
Satellite
             540 21st St   Seniors      1970     151     150      0   115  35    0    0     0   150       0        150
Central
Sister Thea
             6400 San
Bowman                     Seniors      1990      55      55      0    14  41    0    0     0    55       6         55
             Pablo Ave
Manor
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING                                                                        389
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Total                                        Sub
Property     Property                   Year    Total            Sub  Sub   Sub      Sub     Sub            Senior Accessible
                                                                                                                               Section
                          Use Type                    Subsidized                                      4+    Units    Units
                                                                                                                                  8
Name         Address                  Completed Units            SRO  0 BR  1 BR    2 BR    3 BR                                Units
                                                        Units                                        BR
             5815, 5915,
Sojourner    6015 Martin
                          Seniors       1976      88     87        0    74    13      0       0        0     87      10          87
Truth Manor  Luther King
             Jr Way
Southlake    1501 Alice
                          Seniors       2004     130     129       0    0    129      0       0        0    129      14         129
Tower        St
Sylvester
             3255 San
Rutledge                  Seniors       2003      65     64        0    0    64       0       0        0     64       0          0
             Pablo Ave
Manor
Valdez Plaza 280 28th St  Seniors       1981     150     150       0     0   150       0      0        0    150      20         150
Westlake
Christian    251 28th St  Seniors                200     200       0   158   42       0       0        0    200       0         91
Terrace I
Westlake
Christian    275 28th St  Seniors       1977     200     200       0     0   200       0      0        0    200       0          40
Terrace II
                         SUBTOTAL
                                                4,576   4,547     212 1,456 2,852     16      -        -  4,544     807       3,298
                         Seniors
Hale         369
                         Transitional
Laulima      Fairmount                  1995      1        1       0     0     0      0       0        1      0       1          0
                         Housing
House        Ave
Henry
Robinson                 Transitional
             559 16th St                1993      62      62      32     0     0      24      6        0      0       0          0
Multi-                   Housing
Service Ctr
Matilda      8314
                         Transitional
Cleveland    MacArthur                  1992      14      14       5     0     3      3       3        0      0       1          0
                         Housing
Hsg          Blvd
390                                                                              APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING
                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                             HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                          Total                                    Sub
Property      Property                   Year     Total            Sub   Sub     Sub   Sub    Sub          Senior  Accessible
                                                                                                                               Section
                           Use Type                     Subsidized                                  4+      Units    Units
                                                                                                                                  8
Name          Address                  Completed  Units            SRO  0 BR    1 BR  2 BR   3 BR                               Units
                                                          Units                                    BR
              2577-79 San
                          Transitional
Project Pride Pablo                      2012       20     20       20     0      0     0      0     0       0        0          0
                          Housing
              Avenue
              3800
                          Transitional
Rising Oaks   Coolidge                   2013       32     30        0    30      0     0      0     0       0        0          0
                          Housing
              Avenue
Walnut
Street        9905 Walnut Transitional
                                         1992       4       4        0     0      0     4      0     0       0        0          0
Transitional  St          Housing
Housing
                          SUBTOTAL
                          Transitional                        131    57      30     3     31     9     1         -
                                                   133
                          Housing
                          Total of All
                          Assisted
                                                 10,949   9,852     811 1,933   4,081 1,313  1,043 219    4,585     935       3,933
                          Housing
                          Units
APPENDIX B: LIST OF PRIVATE ASSISTED HOUSING                                                                                     391
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
Appendix C presents the inventory of sites suitable for residential development in Oakland, as
discussed and summarized in Chapter 4, Land Inventory. Background on assumptions and sources
also are included. The appendix text and tables are organized into four groups of sites, based on the
status of housing development on each site:
         Group 1: Sites with housing projects recently completed;
         Group 2: Sites with housing projects approved;
         Group 3: Sites with housing projects planned; and
         Group 4: Additional housing opportunity sites.
Group 1:         Sites With Housing Projects Recently Completed
    • Table C-1 identifies the inventory of Group 1 sites, those private sector market rate units,
        including affordable units completed between 01/01/14 and 03/07/14.
    • Figure C-2 locates these Group 1 sites on a map ,showing market rate developments,
        completed, as well as approved and in Pre-development (Figure C-3, shows those market rate
        developments in Downtown Oakland).
The data describing housing potential on these sites are actual data for the sites/projects listed, as
available from City of Oakland records, including Accela, the Major Projects List, and other sources.
Group 2:         Sites With Housing Projects Approved
Two tables identify the inventory of Group 2 sites:
    • Table C-2: Sites with Approved Housing Projects
    • Table C-3: Sites with Funded Publicly Subsidized Affordable Housing Projects in
        Predevelopment
Three figures locate these sites on maps:
    •    Figure C-2, Market rate developments in predevelopment (approved and planned)
    • Figure C-3, Market rate developments in Oakland Central (downtown) in predevelopment
        (approved and planned)
    • Figure C-4, Affordable housing developments in site acquisition and predevelopment
        (approved and planned)
The data describing housing potentials on the Group 2 sites are actual data for the sites/projects listed,
as available from City of Oakland records, including the Permit Tracking System, the Major Projects
List, and other sources.
392                                                            APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY

                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Group 3:          Sites With Housing Projects Planned
Two tables identify the inventory of Group 3 sites:
     • Table C-4: Sites with Affordable Projects in Site Acquisition, and
     • Table C-5: Sites with Private Sector Projects in Predevelopment.
The figures are the same as those for Group 2 (predevelopment projects include approved and
planned projects).
The data describing housing potentials on the Group 3 sites are actual data for the sites/projects listed,
as available from City of Oakland records, including the Permit Tracking System, the Major Projects
List, and other sources.
Group 4:          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
Table C-6 and Figure C-5 presents the inventory of additional housing opportunity sites, and shows
conclusively that Oakland has the land potential to meet its RHNA by 2023. The criteria for
identifying the opportunity sites are explained in the text in Chapter 4 (see “Group 4” discussion).
The sites were identified by City of Oakland staff by reviewing sites from the 2007-2014 Housing
Element that had not been built on nor entitled to construct buildings.
In determining the residential development potential of a site with no current specific development
proposal (Group 4), the City used projections that are based on conservative estimates of the capacity
of these sites based on other existing proximate similar developments. In some cases these estimates
are either equal to or less than the current maximum densities permitted by the City’s General Plan
and Zoning Ordinance. This analysis yields a potential for about 10,032 units (See Table C-6). The
results of this analysis show that housing potential on land suitable for residential development is
more than adequate to meet Oakland’s allocation of regional housing needs (RHNA).
In rare cases, housing opportunity sites in Table C-6 are located in historic preservation districts, or
have demolished structures on them which still retain a rating in the Oakland Cultural Heritage
Survey; Table C-6a lists these properties.
Priority Development Areas Identified On Inventory Tables
One figure maps the boundaries of the planning areas used in the analysis:
     • Figure C-1, Locations of the Priority Development Area boundaries
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                    393

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                              Table C-1
                                Private Sector Market Rate (includes private sector affordable units)
                                                   Complete (01/01/14-03/07/14)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HOUSING TYPE /
           PROJECT NAME, LOCATION, STATUS                                              UNIT COUNT                                    AFFORDABILITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TENURE / DENSITY
                                                                                                                                     Subsidized Units   Very Low Income                Moderate Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Above Moderate
                 Project Name                                         Year Completed                                 City Assisted                                                                                                                          Units per acre
                                            Location                                                                                                                      Low Income                                      Special Use                                                  Comments
                                                           PDA                         Units   New   Rehab   Reuse                                                                                                                         Rental   Owner
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Income
                                      945 53rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mixed Use/Phase III of
                                      Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 project, 61 units and
 Bakery Lofts                                                       Jan-14             61      61     -       -        -                -                  -                -             -                 61              -             61         -      42
                                      APN: 049 -         MA                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3,161 sq. ft. of
                                      1173-002-00                                                                                                                                                                                                                            commercial
 COMPLETED PRIVATE
 SECTOR PROJECTS                                                                       61      61                                                                                                           61                            61                42
 TOTAL
Source: City of Oakland
Methodology: Projects on this table have "B" (building) permits which were Issued and finaled after January 1, 2014; or have Temporary Certificates of Occupancy issued after 1/1/14. Projects with
Electrical, Plumbing and Mechanical permits finaled after 1/1/14 are not currently on this table.
394                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                          Table C-2
                                 Private Sector Market Rate units-approved (01/01/14-03/27/14)
 PROJECT NAME, LOCATION, STATUS                                   UNIT COUNT                                  AFFORDABILITY*                                                                                      HOUSING TYPE/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TENURE/DENSITY
                                          Expect Completed                                                    Subsidized Units   Very Low Income                Moderate Income
                                                                                                                                                                                  Above Moderate
                                                                                              City Assisted                                        Low Income                                      Special Use                          Units per acre              Comments
     Project         Location                                 Units           Rehab   Reuse                                                                                                                        Rental   Owner
                                    PDA                                New
                                                                                                                                                                                     Income
               64.2 acre
               waterfront site                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3,100 residential units;
               bounded by                                                                                                                                                                                                                                200,000 sq. ft.
               Fallon Street,                                                                                                                                                                                                                            commercial; 3,950
               Embarcadero                                                                                                                                                                                                                               structured parking spaces;
Brooklyn
               Road, 10th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                29.9 acres public open
Basin
               Ave., and the                                                                                                                                                                                                        1 du/3000            space; 2 renovated
(formerly                          DJL                       3,100    3,100
               Oakland Estuary                                                                                                                                                                                                      sf (gross)           marinas; 170 boat slips
Oak to Ninth
Mixed Use)     APN: 0430-001-                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Development Agreement
               02, 0430-001-04                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (DA06011) submitted for
               (por),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    review (and approved) on
               0460-003,004,                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2/14/14
               0465-002, 0470-
               002 (por).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CD13157; 70 micro living
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         quarters; 1 live/work space
2425 Valdez    2425 Valdez St.
                                   PPDA                      70       70                                                                                                                                          70                                     B1303158 Accela "final
Street         APN: 008 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         check" "task status"
               0672-007-02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "approved" on 2-11-2014
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             395
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-2
                                   Private Sector Market Rate units-approved (01/01/14-03/27/14)
 PROJECT NAME, LOCATION, STATUS                                       UNIT COUNT                                AFFORDABILITY*                                                                                      HOUSING TYPE/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TENURE/DENSITY
                                             Expect Completed                                                   Subsidized Units   Very Low Income                Moderate Income
                                                                                                                                                                                    Above Moderate
                                                                                                City Assisted                                        Low Income                                      Special Use                       Units per acre             Comments
      Project          Location                                  Units          Rehab   Reuse                                                                                                                        Rental    Owner
                                      PDA                                 New
                                                                                                                                                                                       Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CMD08185; Phase II of a
                Block bounded                                                                                                                                                                                                                           multifamily residential
                by 35th and                                                                                                                                                                                                                             development with 275
                37th Avenues,                                                                                                                                                                                                                           residential units
                East 12th Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PUD08186& TTM8038
 Fruitvale
                and BART                                                                                                                                                                                                                                extended on 1/10/14
 Village                             FDA    2016                275       275                                                                                                                                                          80
 Phase II       tracks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The overall 275 unit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        project is envisioned at
                APN: 033-2197-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80% market rate and 20%
                019 and 033-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        affordable.
                2177-02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (L.Gallegos 6/16/14)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CMDV07064; 120
 Creekside      5132 Telegraph                                                                                                                                                                                                                          residential units and
 Mixed Use      Ave                  MA                         120      120                                                                                                                                                                            7,700 sq. ft. commercial
 Project        APN: 014 -                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CMDV07064 extended
                1226-013-00                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3/14/14
396                                                                                                                                                                                                                           APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                          Table C-2
                                 Private Sector Market Rate units-approved (01/01/14-03/27/14)
 PROJECT NAME, LOCATION, STATUS                                   UNIT COUNT                                AFFORDABILITY*                                                                                      HOUSING TYPE/
                                                                                                                                                                                                               TENURE/DENSITY
                                          Expect Completed                                                  Subsidized Units   Very Low Income                Moderate Income
                                                                                                                                                                                Above Moderate
                                                                                            City Assisted                                        Low Income                                      Special Use                      Units per acre              Comments
     Project          Location                                Units         Rehab   Reuse                                                                                                                        Rental   Owner
                                    PDA                               New
                                                                                                                                                                                   Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CMDV05469; 68
               Area bounded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   residential units and less
51st &         by Telegraph,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   than 3,000 sq. ft.
Telegraph,     51st and Clark      MA                        68       68                                                                                                          68             No                               72
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   commercial
Civiq          Streets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CMDV05469 extended
               APN: Multiple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3/14/14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CU05116; 55 townhomes
               2400 Filbert
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CU05116 extended
Emerald        Street
                                   WO                        52       52                                                                                                          52             No                       52      34               1/10/14
Parc           APN: 005-0433-
               018-04
               377 2nd Street                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CD13309; 96 unit 6 story
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   building w/ ground floor
               APN: 001 -                                                                                                                                                                                                                          commercial - pending
377 2nd        0143-008-00,                                                                                                                                                                                                                        approval (replaces
                                   DJL                       96       96                                                                                                                                                  96      203
Street         001 -0143-007-                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CMD13223 )
               00,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CD13309-A01 (appeal of
               001-0143-010-                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CD13309) submitted on
               00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3/14/14
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        397
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                          Table C-2
                                 Private Sector Market Rate units-approved (01/01/14-03/27/14)
 PROJECT NAME, LOCATION, STATUS                                    UNIT COUNT                                  AFFORDABILITY*                                                                                      HOUSING TYPE/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TENURE/DENSITY
                                           Expect Completed                                                    Subsidized Units   Very Low Income                Moderate Income
                                                                                                                                                                                   Above Moderate
                                                                                               City Assisted                                        Low Income                                      Special Use                          Units per acre              Comments
      Project         Location                                 Units           Rehab   Reuse                                                                                                                        Rental    Owner
                                    PDA                                 New
                                                                                                                                                                                      Income
                3884 Martin                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CDV06326; 40 residential
 3884 Martin    Luther King Jr.                                                                                                                                                                                                                           units
 Luther King    Way                MA     2016                40       40                                                                                                            40                                                 174
 Jr. Way        APN: 012-0968-                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CDV06326 extended
                031-00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1/8/14
 "The Hive"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CV13162; Parcel B: 367
 Broadway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          residential units and
 West Grand
                2345 Broadway                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8,500 sq. ft. retail
 (formerly                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 du/1452
                APN: 008 –         PPDA                       367      367              8                                                                                                                          367
 known as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sf
                0666-007-00                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PUDF03553-R01
 Negherbon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (revision) received
 Mixed Use
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3/14/14)
 Project)
 APPROVED PRIVATE
 SECTOR PROJECTS TOTAL                                        4,188    4,188           8                                                                                            160                            533        52
398                                                                                                                                                                                                                          APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                          Table C-3
                         Publicly Subsidized Affordable-funded and in Pre-development (March 2014)
             PROJECT NAME, LOCATION, STATUS                                          UNIT COUNT                                                                     AFFORDABILITY                                                                      HOUSING TYPE/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TENURE/DENSITY
                                                                 Expect Completed    Units at Completion   New Construction                                                     Very Low Income                   Moderate Income
                                                                                                                                                                Extremely Low
                                                                                                                               Rehabilitation   City Assisted                                      Low Income                       Not Restricted       Special Use
               Project                    Location                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rental   Owner
                                                          PDA
                                                                                                                                                                    Income
11th & Jackson                 1110 Jackson Street       DJL    2016                 71                    Yes                No                Yes                22           18                30                                 1               Family            Yes       No
1701 Martin Luther King Jr.    1701 Martin Luther                                                                                                                                                                                                    Special
                                                         DJL    2015                 26                    Yes                No                Yes                14           11                                                   1                                 Yes       No
Way                            King Jr. Way                                                                                                                                                                                                          Needs
                               9400-9500 International
94th & International                                     PPDA   2016                 59                    Yes                No                Yes                 6           52                                                   1               Family            Yes       No
                               Blvd
Civic Center 14 TOD            632 14th Street           DJL    2016                 40                    Yes                No                Yes                12           14                13                                 1               Family            Yes       No
Redwood Hill                   4858-68 Calaveras         PPDA   TBD                  12                    Yes                No                Yes                                                              12                                  Family            Yes       No
Byron Avenue Homes             10211 Byron Ave           ETC    TBD                  10                    Yes                No                Yes                              4                  4              2                                 Ownership         No        Yes
Oakland Home Renovation        Scattered Sites
                                                                TBD                  3-5                   No                 Yes               Yes                                                                3                 2               Ownership         No        Yes
Program                        Citywide
TOTAL AFFORDABLE PROJECTS IN                                                        221-
                                                                                                                                                                   54           99                47             17                  6
PREDEVELOPMENT                                                                      223
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               399
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                          Table C-4
                               Publicly Subsidized Affordable-Site Acquisition (as of March 2014)
             PROJECT NAME,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HOUSING TYPE/
                                                                              UNIT COUNT                                                                            AFFORDABILITY
            LOCATION, STATUS                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TENURE/DENSITY
                                      Expect Complete   Units at Completion     New Construction                                                 Subsidized Units      Very Low Income                     Moderate Income    Not Restricted                                             Units per Acre
                                                                                                    Substantial
                                                                                                                                City Assisted                                                Low Income                                            Special Use                                                    Comments
      Project      Location                                                                                         Net Unit                                                                                                                                          Rental    Owner
                               PDA
                                                                                                   Rehabilitation
                3701
3701
                Martin
Martin
                Luther        MA     TBD                   4                   Yes                   No              4         Yes              TBD                   TBD                4                TBD                TBD               Ownership             No        Yes
Luther King
                King Jr.
Jr. Way
                Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Unit count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          represents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          approximate
                3829
3829                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      affordable units
                Martin
Martin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    that are required
                Luther        MA     TBD                   4                   Yes                   No              4         Yes              TBD                   TBD                4                TBD                TBD               TBD                   TBD       TBD
Luther King                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               with City
                King Jr.
Jr. Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   subsidy.
                Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Considered an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          opportunity site
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in Table C-6.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Unit count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          represents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          affordable units
                3801-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          that are required
MacArthur       3807
                              MA     TBD                   8                   Yes                   No              8         Yes              TBD                   TBD                8                TBD                TBD               TBD                   TBD       TBD      TBD               with City
Homes           MLK Jr.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          subsidy.
                Way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Considered an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          opportunity site
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in Table C-6.
400                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                         Table C-4
                              Publicly Subsidized Affordable-Site Acquisition (as of March 2014)
            PROJECT NAME,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HOUSING TYPE/
                                                                                 UNIT COUNT                                                                                AFFORDABILITY
           LOCATION, STATUS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TENURE/DENSITY
                                     Expect Complete       Units at Completion     New Construction                                                     Subsidized Units      Very Low Income                 Moderate Income    Not Restricted                                          Units per Acre
                                                                                                       Substantial
                                                                                                                                       City Assisted                                             Low Income                                           Special Use                                                 Comments
     Project      Location                                                                                                 Net Unit                                                                                                                                   Rental    Owner
                              PDA
                                                                                                      Rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Unit count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          represents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          affordable units
Peralta
               1574-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      that are required
Gardens
               1590 7th      WO     TBD                5                          Yes                   No             5              Yes              TBD                   TBD                TBD             2                    3            Ownership          No        Yes                        with City
(aka: 7th &
               St.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        subsidy.
Peralta)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Considered an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          opportunity site
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in Table C-6.
               1662 &
               1664 7th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Unit count
7th &          Street,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    represents an
Campbell       1672 7th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   approximate low-
                             WO     TBD                30                         Yes                   No             30             Yes              TBD                                      30                                                TBD                TBD       TBD      TBD
(aka Faith     St., 715                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   end estimated
Housing)       Campbel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    number of units
               l, 1666                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for this site.
               7th St.
               Wood
               Street
Wood           and
Street         Frontage
Affordable     Road          WO     TBD                170                        Yes                   No             170            TBD              TBD                                      141                             29                TBD                TBD       TBD      TBD
Housing        between
Parcel         11th and
               14th
               Streets
AFFORDABLE SITE
ACQUISITION PROJECTS                                   221                                                             221                                                                      187            2                 32
TOTAL
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          401
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                       Table C-5
                                           Private Sector Market Rate-in Planning Pre-development (3/27/14)
                    PROJECT NAME,                                                                                                                                                                   HOUSING TYPE/
                                                               UNIT COUNT                                AFFORDABILITY
                   LOCATION, STATUS                                                                                                                                                                TENURE/DENSITY
                                                                                                         Subsidized Units   Very Low Income                Moderate Income
                                                                                                                                                                             Above Moderate
        Project Name                                                                     City Assisted                                        Low Income                                      Special Use                        Units per acre              Comments
                                Location         PPDA     Units          Rehab   Reuse                                                                                                                          Rental   Owner
                                                                   New
                                                                                                                                                                                Income
                         12th Street / 2nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  247 residential units
                         Avenue (land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and 201 parking spaces
 Lake Merritt            remaining after
                                                PPDA    247       247                                                                                                        247                              247                264              with 5,000 sq. ft. of
 Boulevard               completion of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  retail/community
                         the 12th Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  space
                         Bridge)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Proposed 28 story
                         1900 Broadway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  residential tower w/ 294
 1900 Broadway           APN: 008 -             DJL     294       276    18                                                                                                  294                                                 315
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  units & 11,000 sq. ft. of
                         0638-005-00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  commercial
                         Devon Way                                                                                                                                                                                                                subdivision into 25
 Felton Acres            APN: 048H-             OPDA      25      25                                                                                                            25                                       25                       single family lots and
                         7600-007-00                                                                                                                                                                                                              two new access roads
                         1331 Harrison
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25-story, 172
 1331 Harrison           Street
                                                DJL     172       172                                                                                                        172                                                 482              residential unit building
 Project                 APN: 002-0065-
                         006-01
402                                                                                                                                                                                                         APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table C-5
                                         Private Sector Market Rate-in Planning Pre-development (3/27/14)
                   PROJECT NAME,                                                                                                                                                                   HOUSING TYPE/
                                                            UNIT COUNT                                 AFFORDABILITY
                  LOCATION, STATUS                                                                                                                                                                TENURE/DENSITY
                                                                                                       Subsidized Units   Very Low Income                Moderate Income
                                                                                                                                                                           Above Moderate
       Project Name                                                                    City Assisted                                        Low Income                                       Special Use                     Units per acre              Comments
                              Location         PPDA     Units          Rehab   Reuse                                                                                                                        Rental   Owner
                                                                 New
                                                                                                                                                                              Income
                        4901-4939
                        Broadway, 311-
                        313
                        51st Street,
                        4964-4974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5-story, 119 units &
                        Desmond Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              retail space w/199
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              parking spaces. Project
Temescal                APN: 013 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              includes 6 other lots on
Apartments (was         1136-008-04,          MA      119       119                                                                                                        119                                       119
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              51st St. &on Desmond
Merrill Gardens)        013 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              St. Few lots are vacant
                        1136-011-00,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              & others are vacant
                        013 -1136-012-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              buildings
                        00, 013 -1136-
                        009-02, 013 -
                        1106-005-05,
                        013 -1136-004-
                        02
                        5107, 5117,                                                                                                                                                                                                           6-story 174,608 (g) sq.
                        5175 Broadway                                                                                                                                                                                                         ft. mixed use building
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              with 127 assisted-living
                        APN: 014 -                                                                                                                                                                                                            residential units, 7,743
5107 Merrill
                        1241-009-00,          MA      127       127                                                                                                        127              Yes                      127                      sq. ft. of street level
Gardens
                        014 -                                                                                                                                                                                                                 retail and partial below
                        1241-008-00,                                                                                                                                                                                                          grade parking.
                        014 -1241-005-                                                                                                                                                                                                        Application under
                        01                                                                                                                                                                                                                    review.
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 403
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                       Table C-5
                                           Private Sector Market Rate-in Planning Pre-development (3/27/14)
                    PROJECT NAME,                                                                                                                                                                   HOUSING TYPE/
                                                              UNIT COUNT                                 AFFORDABILITY
                   LOCATION, STATUS                                                                                                                                                                TENURE/DENSITY
                                                                                                         Subsidized Units   Very Low Income                Moderate Income
                                                                                                                                                                             Above Moderate
        Project Name                                                                     City Assisted                                        Low Income                                      Special Use                        Units per acre               Comments
                                Location         PPDA     Units          Rehab   Reuse                                                                                                                          Rental   Owner
                                                                   New
                                                                                                                                                                                Income
                         Telegraph/19th
 Uptown Parcel 4
                         Street/New
 (Telegraph                                     PPDA    370       370                                                                                                        370                                         370     385              370 units
                         Street/Williams
 Ave/19th Street)
                         Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  960 residential units
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (408 SFD, 248
                         167 acre site
 Oak Knoll                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        townhomes, 304
                         8750 Mountain
 Redevelopment                                  OPDA    960       960                                                                         72                             888                                                 960              condominiums) and
                         Blvd.
 Project                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          82,000 sq. ft.
                         APN: Multiple
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  commercial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Construction of a 42-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  story high-rise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  residential tower with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  approximately 370
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  units, a 993 sq. ft.
 Emerald Views
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ground floor café, 357
 (formerly19th           222 19th Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  subterranean parking
 Street                  APN: 008-0634-         DJL     370       370                                                                                                        370                                         370     370
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  stalls, approximately
 Residential             003-00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14,220 sq. ft. of public
 Condominiums)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  usable open space at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  grade and 20,850 sq. ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of private open space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  located on balconies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and the roof.
404                                                                                                                                                                                                         APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                       Table C-5
                                           Private Sector Market Rate-in Planning Pre-development (3/27/14)
                    PROJECT NAME,                                                                                                                                                                      HOUSING TYPE/
                                                              UNIT COUNT                                    AFFORDABILITY
                   LOCATION, STATUS                                                                                                                                                                   TENURE/DENSITY
                                                                                                            Subsidized Units   Very Low Income                Moderate Income
                                                                                                                                                                                Above Moderate
        Project Name                                                                        City Assisted                                        Low Income                                      Special Use                     Units per acre              Comments
                                Location         PPDA     Units             Rehab   Reuse                                                                                                                       Rental   Owner
                                                                    New
                                                                                                                                                                                   Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Resolution 84309:
                         5th St., 7th St.,                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exclusive Negotiating
West Oakland             Kirkham St. and                                                                                                                                                                                                          Agreement; Phase 2
                                                WO      563       563                                                                                                           563                                              563
Transit Village          Mandela                                                                                                                                                                                                                  includes 563 residential
                         Parkway                                                                                                                                                                                                                  units on a 2.76 acre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  parcel
PRIVATE SECTOR PROJECTS IN
                                                        3,247     3,229     18                                                                   72                             3,175                           374      884
PREDEVELOPMENT TOTAL
Source: City of Oakland, Methodology: projects which have received either ZP permits or other pre-application consideration, as of March 2014
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     405
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                  General                             Of       Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                   Plan              Height          Units (units/acre)     # Of Units   Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                                Designation           Area            Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low     High   Low     High
                          041-
            Coliseum
                          4164-                  Community           Height
COL-1       BART                117,586    2.70                S-15           275     428    -        -      -       -  Surface Parking
                          024-                   Commercial         Limit:75'
            Parking Lot
                          03
                          041-
                          4164-                  Community           Height
COL-1-A           -             114,395    2.63                S-15           275     416    -        -      -       -  Surface Parking
                          031-                   Commercial         Limit:75'
                          02
                          041-
                          4162-                 Community           Height
COL-1-B           -             78,033     1.79               S-15            275     284    -        -      -       -  Surface Parking
                          001-                  Commercial          Limit:75'
                          05
                          041-
                          4166-                 Community           Height
COL-1-C           -             59,317     1.36               S-15            275     216    -        -      -       -  Surface Parking
                          031-                  Commercial          Limit:75'
                          02
                                369,331    8.48                                      1,343   -        -    300     300
                          041-
            7101-7135
                          4129-                  Community           Height                                             Vacant
COL-2       International       21,182     0.49                CC-2           375     56     -        -      -       -
                          001-                   Commercial         Limit:60'                                           Storefront
            Blvd.
                          02
                          041-
                          4129-                  Community           Height
COL-2-A           -              5,179     0.12                CC-2           375     14     -        -      -       -  One Story Store
                          004-                   Commercial         Limit:60'
                          00
                                26,361     0.61                                       70    45       65    27       40
                          041 -
            7025
                          4131-                    Urban             Height
COL-3       International       10,457     0.24               RU-5            375     28    45       65    11       16  Vacant Land
                          003-                   Residential        Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                          01
                          039 -
            7000-7016
                          3312-                    Urban             Height
COL-4       International        2,402     0.06               RU-5            375      6     -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
                          030-                   Residential        Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                          00
406                                                                                             APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                  General                             Of       Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                    Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                                Designation          Area             Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                          039 -
                                                                                                                     Two Story
                          3312-                    Urban             Height
COL-4-A           -             11,539     0.26               RU-5            375     31     -        -    -       - Store and
                          033-                   Residential        Limit:60'
                                                                                                                     Surface Parking
                          01
                                13,941     0.32                                       37    45       65   14      21
                          035 -
            5490                                Neighborhood
                          2366-                                      Height
COL-5       International       11,603     0.27 Center Mixed  CN-3            275     42    40       60   11      16 Vacant Land
                          018-                                      Limit:75'
            Blvd                                    Use
                          00
                          038 -
            6200
                          3222-                    Urban             Height
COL-6       International       10,261     0.24               RU-5            275     37    45       65   11      16 Surface Parking
                          019-                   Residential        Limit:75'
            Blvd
                          01
                          038 -
            5542
                          3232-                    Mixed             Height
COL-7       International       26,035     0.60               CN-3            375     69    40       60   24      36 Surface Parking
                          015-                  Housing Type        Limit:60'
            Blvd
                          01
                          041 -
            6415
                          4050-                    Urban             Height
COL-8       International       11,892     0.27               RU-5            375     32    45       65   12      18 One-Story Store
                          021-                   Residential        Limit:60'
            Blvd
                          00
                          041 -
            8001-8023
                          4202-                    Urban             Height
COL-9       International       12,413     0.28               RU-4            375     33     -        -    -       - Auto Center
                          001-                   Residential        Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                          00
                          041 -
                          4202-                    Urban             Height
COL-9-A           -              9,428     0.22               RU-4            375     25     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                          002-                   Residential        Limit:60'
                          00
                          041 -
                          4202-                    Urban             Height
COL-9-B           -              7,835     0.18               RU-4            375     21     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                          003-                   Residential        Limit:60'
                          00
                                29,676     0.68                                       79    45       65   31      44
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                              407
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                  General                             Of       Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                   Plan             Height           Units (units/acre)    # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                                Designation          Area             Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low     High   Low    High
                          040 -
            8000
                          3368-                    Urban             Height
COL-10      International       14,864     0.34               RU-5            375     40    45       65    15      22   Vacant Land
                          023-                   Residential        Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                          01
                          041 -
            7915-7991
                          4198-                    Urban             Height
COL-11      International       22,719     0.52               RU-5            375     61     -        -     -       -   Auto Repair
                          001-                   Residential        Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                          01
                          041 -
                          4198-                    Urban             Height
COL-11-A          -              9,245     0.21               RU-5            375     25     -        -     -       -   Auto Repair
                          005-                   Residential        Limit:60'
                          00
                                31,964     0.73                                       85    45       65    33      47
                                                                                                                        Vacant Land
                          040 -
            7700-7744                                                                                                   and Two Story
                          3355-                    Urban             Height
COL-12      International        3,580     0.08               RU-5            375     10     -        -     -       -   Building with
                          056-                   Residential        Limit:60'
            Blvd.                                                                                                       Store on First
                          00
                                                                                                                        Floor
                          040 -
                          3355-                    Urban             Height
COL-12-A          -              4,610     0.11               RU-5            375     12     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                          055-                   Residential        Limit:60'
                          00
                          040 -
                          3355-                    Urban             Height
COL-12-B          -              1,977     0.05               RU-5            375      5     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                          054-                   Residential        Limit:60'
                          00
                          040 -
                          3355-                    Urban             Height
COL-12-C          -              2,383     0.05               RU-5            375      6     -        -     -           Vacant Land
                          053-                   Residential        Limit:60'
                          00
                          040 -
                          3355-                    Urban             Height
COL-12-D          -              2,705     0.06               RU-5            375      7     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                          057-                   Residential        Limit:60'
                          00
408                                                                                             APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                   Max #
                                                 General                             Of       Density
                                                                             Sq.
                                                   Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location    APN   Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation           Area            Per
                                                                             Unit
                                                                                   Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                        040 -
                        3355-                     Urban             Height
COL-12-E          -             3,327     0.08               RU-5            375      9     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                        058-                    Residential        Limit:60'
                        00
                        040 -
                        3355-                     Urban             Height
COL-12-F          -             7,289     0.17               RU-5            375     19     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                        051-                    Residential        Limit:60'
                        01
                        040 -
                        3355-                     Urban             Height
COL-12-G          -             5,400     0.12               RU-5            375     14     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                        050-                    Residential        Limit:60'
                        01
                        040 -
                        3355-                     Urban             Height
COL-12-H          -             2,730     0.06               RU-5            375      7     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                        049-                    Residential        Limit:60'
                        01
                               34,001     0.78                                        91   45       65   35      51
                        008 -                     Central             5,
            1440                                             CBD-                                                   Surface Parking
DJL-13                  0626-  12,797     0.29   Business           Special   90     142    -        -            -
            Harrison                                          C                                                     Lot
                        024                      District           Area A
                        008 -                     Central             5,
            1450                                             CBD-                                                   Surface Parking
DJL-13-A                0626-  10,358     0.24   Business           Special   90     115    -        -    -       -
            Harrison                                          C                                                     Lot
                        025                      District           Area A
                               23,155     0.53                                       257  150      180   80      95
                                                                                                                    One Story
                   th                                                                                               public parking
            301 12 St.  002 -                     Central
                                                             CBD-                                                   garage and
DJL-14      (12th       0063-  59,592     1.37   Business             6       90     662    -        -    -       -
                                                              C                                                     Oakland
            /Harrison)  006                      District
                                                                                                                    Charter High
                                                                                                                    School
                        002-                                                                                        Empty fenced
                                                  Central             5,
                   th   0069-                                CBD-                                                   lot with a few
DJL-14-A    285 12 St.         15,000     0.34   Business           Special   90     167    -        -    -       -
                        003-                                  X                                                     outdoor play
                                                 District            Area
                        01                                                                                          structures
                               74,592     1.71                                       829  150      180  257     308
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                              409
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                   CURRENT ZONING               ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                  Max #
                                                General                             Of     Density
                                                                            Sq.
                                                  Plan             Height          Units (units/acre)   # Of Units   Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres              Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation          Area            Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                  Zoning Low    High  Low     High
                                                                                                                    Surface Parking
                         003 -
            20th/Castro/                         Central                                                            Lot with One
                         0039-                              CBD-
DJL-15      San Pablo           4,369     0.10   Business             4      90      49   -       -      -       -  Story
                         002-                                X
            (Greyhound)                          District                                                           Greyhound
                         02
                                                                                                                    Station
                                                                                                                    Surface Parking
                         003 -                   Central                                                            Lot with One
                                                            CBD-
DJL-15-A          -      0039- 65,003     1.49   Business             4      90     722   -       -      -       -  Story
                                                             X
                         003                     District                                                           Greyhound
                                                                                                                    Station
                               69,372     1.59                                      771  150     180   239     286
                         003 -                                                                                      Surface Parking
                                                 Central
            1601 San     0065-                              CBD-                                                    Lot with One
DJL-16                         11,024     0.25   Business             7      90     122  150     180   38       45
            Pablo Ave    002-                                C                                                      small Food joint
                                                 District
                         00                                                                                         at a corner
                         008 -
                                                 Central
            1431         0621-                              CBD-                                                    Surface Parking
DJL-17                         20,922     0.48   Business             7      90     232  150     180    72      86
            Franklin St. 008-                                 P                                                     Lot
                                                 District
                         07
                         008 -
                                                 Central
            1425         0624-                              CBD-                                                    Surface Parking
DJL-18                         12,165     0.28   Business             7      90     135  150     180   42       50
            Webster St.  037-                                C                                                      Lot
                                                 District
                         00
                         008 -
                                                 Central             2,
            1429 Alice   0626-                              CBD-                                                    Surface Parking
DJL-19                         11,508     0.26   Business          Special  200      58  150     180   39       47
            St.          017-                                C                                                      Lot
                                                 District           Area
                         00
                         008 -
                                                 Central
            1600         0626-                              CBD-  5,Special                                         One Story
DJL-20                         11,719     0.27   Business                    90     130  150     180    41      49
            Harrison St. 030-                                C      Area                                            garage
                                                 District
                         01
                         002 -                                                                                      Surface parking
                                                 Central
            1329         0079-                              CBD-  2,Special                                         and play area in
DJL-21                         10,009     0.23   Business                   200      50  150     180    35      41
            Madison St.  004-                                 P     Area                                            rear of a child-
                                                 District
                         00                                                                                         care center.
410                                                                                         APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                           CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                              HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING              ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                  Max #
                                                 General                            Of      Density
                                                                            Sq.
                                                   Plan            Height          Units (units/acre)  # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone           ft. /
                                               Designation          Area            Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                  Zoning Low    High  Low    High
                         001-
                                                  Central
            6th/7th/     0234-                               CBD-
DJL-22                          2,500     0.06   Business            4       90      28   -       -     -       - Surface Parking
            Franklin     003-                                P/CH
                                                 District
                         00
                         001-
                                                  Central
                         0234-                               CBD-                                                 Surface Parking
DJL-22-A    629 Franklin        7,497     0.17   Business            4       90      83   -       -     -       -
                         004-                                P/CH                                                 Lot
                                                 District
                         00
                         001 -
                                                  Central
                         0234-                               CBD-                                                 Surface Parking
DJL-22-B            -          12,505     0.29   Business            4       90     139   -       -     -       -
                         005-                                  X                                                  Lot
                                                 District
                         00
                               22,502     0.52                                      250  150     180   78      94
             th  th      001 -                    Central
            7 /8 /                                           CBD-
DJL-23                   0195-  3,699     0.08   Business            4       90      41   -       -     -       - Surface Parking
            Broadway                                           P
                         003                     District
                         001 -
                                                  Central
                         0195-                               CBD-
DJL-23-A            -           4,868     0.11   Business            4       90      54   -       -     -       - Surface Parking
                         004-                                  P
                                                 District
                         02
                         001 -                    Central
                                                             CBD-
DJL-23-B            -    0195-  3,704     0.09   Business            4       90      41   -       -     -       - Surface Parking
                                                               P
                         008                     District
                         001 -                    Central
                                                             CBD-
DJL-23-C            -    0195-  3,744     0.09   Business            4       90      42   -       -     -       - Surface Parking
                                                               P
                         009                     District
                               16,015     0.37                                      178  150     180   56      67
            Webster/     001 -                   Estuary
                                                                                                                  Surface Parking
DJL-24      Harrison/2nd 0149- 19,513     0.45  Policy Plan  C-45     -     300     65   145     145   65      65
                                                                                                                  Lot
            3rd          005                       Area
                         001 -
            431 Madison  0161-                 Estuary Plan                                                       Surface Parking
DJL-25                         30,035     0.69               C-45     -     300     100  145     145  100     100
            St.          007-                      Area                                                           Lot
                         07
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                           411
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                   CURRENT ZONING               ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                  Max #
                                                General                             Of      Density
                                                                            Sq.
                                                  Plan             Height          Units (units/acre)   # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#       Location    APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres              Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation          Area            Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                  Zoning Low    High   Low    High
                         008 -
                                                 Central
            1717         0624-                              CBD-                                                     Motor Service
DJL-26                         15,000     0.34   Business             7      90     167  150     180    51      61
            Webster St.  007-                                 C                                                      Center
                                                 District
                         00
                         008 -
                                                 Central
                         0625-                              CBD-                                                     Surface Parking
DJL-27      301 19th St.       22,950     0.53   Business             6      90     255  150     180    80      95
                         002-                                 C                                                      Lot
                                                 District
                         01
                         008 -
                                                 Central
            1431         0627-                              CBD-  2,Special                                          Surface Parking
DJL-28                         13,720     0.31   Business                   200      69  150     180    47      56
            Jackson St.  015-                                 R     Area                                             Lot
                                                 District
                         01
                         008 -
                                                 Central
            1975         0637-                              CBD-                                                     Surface Parking
DJL-29                         11,045     0.25   Business             7      90     123  150     180    38      45
            Webster St.  003-                                 C                                                      Lot
                                                 District
                         03
                         001 -                   Central
            8th &                                           CBD-                                                     Surface Parking
DJL-30                   0201-  2,441     0.06   Business             1     300      8    -       -      -       -
            Washington                                      P/S-7                                                    Lot
                         008                     District
                         001 -                   Central
                                                            CBD-                                                     Surface Parking
DJL-30-A          -      0201-  4,882     0.11   Business             1     300      16   -       -      -       -
                                                            P/S-7                                                    Lot
                         009                     District
                         001 -                   Central
                                                            CBD-                                                     Surface Parking
DJL-30-B          -      0201-  7,580     0.17   Business             1     300      25   -       -      -       -
                                                            P/S-7                                                    Lot
                         010                     District
                         001 -                   Central
                                                            CBD-                                                     Surface Parking
DJL-30-C          -      0201-  3,681     0.08   Business             1     300      12   -       -      -       -
                                                            P/S-7                                                    Lot
                         011                     District
                               18,584     0.42                                       62  145     145    61      61
                    th   001 -                   Central
            MLK/7                                           CBD-                                                     Surface Parking
DJL-31                   0211-  4,534     0.10   Business             2     200      23   -       -      -       -
            /8th                                              R                                                      Lot
                         012                     District
                         001 -                   Central
                                                            CBD-                                                     One Story
DJL-31-A          -      0211-  4,499     0.10   Business             2     200      22   -       -      -       -
                                                              R                                                      structure
                         011                     District
412                                                                                          APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                              Table C-6
                                            Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION             SITE SIZE                   CURRENT ZONING              ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                   General                            Of      Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                     Plan            Height          Units (units/acre)  # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location       APN   Sq. Ft.   Acres              Zone           ft. /
                                                  Designation         Area            Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low    High  Low    High
                           001 -                    Central                                                         One Story
                                                               CBD-
DJL-31-B            -      0211-  24,032     0.55   Business           2      200     120   -       -     -       - Structure and
                                                                R
                           015                      District                                                        Vacant Lot
                                  33,065     0.75                                     165  150     180  113     135
                           001 -                    Central
                                                               CBD-
DJL-32      7th /8th /Clay 0209-   8,705     0.20   Business           2      200      44   -       -     -       - Surface Parking
                                                                X
                           009                      District
                            001 -                   Central
                                                               CBD-
DJL-32-A            -      0209-   2,470     0.06   Business           2      200      12   -       -     -       - Surface Parking
                                                                X
                           010                      District
                           001 -                    Central
                                                               CBD-
DJL-32-B            -      0209-   7,500     0.17   Business           2      200      38   -       -     -       - Surface Parking
                                                                X
                           011                      District
                           001 -
                                                    Central
                           0209-                               CBD-                                                 Restaurant and
DJL-32-C            -             14,952     0.34   Business           2      200      75   -       -     -       -
                           014-                                 X                                                   Parking Lot
                                                    District
                           01
                           001 -                    Central
                                                               CBD-                                                 One Story
DJL-32-D            -      0209-   7,401     0.17   Business           2      200      37   -       -     -       -
                                                                X                                                   Stores
                           015                      District
                                  41,028     0.94                                     205  150     180  141     169
                           001 -                    Central
            Jefferson b/t                                      CBD-
DJL-33                     0211-   2,672     0.06   Business           2      200     13    -       -     -       - Surface Parking
            8th & 9th St.                                       R
                           004                      District
                           001 -                    Central
                                                               CBD-                                                 One Story
DJL-33-A            -      0211-  12,321     0.28   Business           2      200      62   -       -     -       -
                                                                R                                                   Stores
                           005                      District
                                                                                                                    Underutilized
                           001 -                    Central
                                                               CBD-                                                 One Story
DJL-33-B            -      0211-   5,004     0.11   Business           2      200      25   -       -     -       -
                                                                R                                                   Commercial
                           006                      District
                                                                                                                    Building
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                             413
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                   CURRENT ZONING              ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                  Max #
                                                 General                            Of      Density
                                                                            Sq.
                                                   Plan            Height          Units (units/acre)    # Of Units   Existing Use
  Site#       Location    APN   Sq. Ft.   Acres              Zone           ft. /
                                                Designation         Area            Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                  Zoning Low    High   Low     High
                         001 -                    Central
                                                             CBD-
DJL-33-C           -     0211-   15,270    0.35   Business           2      200     76    -       -       -       -  Warehouse
                                                              R
                         016                      District
                                 35,267    0.80                                     176  150     180    120     144
                         002 -
                                                Housing and
            587 E 11th   0035-                               CBD-
DJL-34                           19,925    0.46   Business           2      200     100  150     180     69      83  Surface Parking
            St.          005-                                 C
                                                  Mix***
                         02
                         008 -                    Central
                                                             CBD-
DJL-35      644 22nd St. 0659-   6,396     0.15   Business           4       90      71   -       -       -       -  Surface Parking
                                                              X
                         022                      District
                         008 -                    Central
            2126 MLK                                         CBD-
DJL-35-A                 0659-   6,953     0.16   Business           2      200      35   -       -       -       -  Surface Parking
            Jr Way                                            X
                         023                      District
                               13,349     0.31                                      106  150     180    47       56
                         008 -
            20th /21st/                           Central                                                            Office Building
                         0649-                               CBD-
DJL-36      Telegraph            10,858    0.25   Business           6       90     121   -       -       -       -  and Surface
                         001-                                  P
            Ave                                   District                                                           Parking
                         01
                         008 -
                                                  Central                                                            Two Story
                         0649-                               CBD-
DJL-36-A           -             1,786     0.04   Business           6       90      20   -       -       -       -  Underutilized
                         001-                                  P
                                                  District                                                           Commercial
                         02
                         008 -                    Central
                                                             CBD-
DJL-36-B           -     0649-   9,372     0.22   Business           7       90     104   -       -       -       -  Surface Parking
                                                               P
                         009                      District
                         008 -                    Central
                                                             CBD-
DJL-36-C           -     0649-   10,736    0.25   Business           6       90     119   -       -       -       -  Surface Parking
                                                               P
                         010                      District
                                 32,752    0.76                                     364  150     180    114     137
                         008 -
                                                  Central
                         0647-                               CBD-
DJL-37      585 22nd St.         16,753    0.38   Business           1      300     56   145     145    56       56  Surface Parking
                         028-                                 R
                                                  District
                         04
414                                                                                          APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                        Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION         SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                 ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                   Max #
                                                General                              Of       Density
                                                                             Sq.
                                                  Plan            Height            Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.  Acres               Zone             ft. /
                                              Designation          Area              Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                   Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                         008 -
            2200                                 Central
                         0658-                              CBD-                                                    Gas station and
DJL-38      Telegraph          17,041    0.39   Business             6        90     189  150      180   59      70
                         009-                                 P                                                     Surface Parking
            Ave                                 District
                         01
                         008 -
            2225                                 Central                                                            Valero Gas
                         0659-                              CBD-
DJL-39      Telegraph          15,893    0.36   Business             6        90     177  150      180   54      65 Station and
                         002-                                 C
            Ave                                 District                                                            Surface Parking
                         01
            27th &       009 -
                                                                   Height
            Northgate    0682-                   Urban                                                              Two Story
DJL-40                         68,384    1.57               RU-5   Limit:    225     304    -        -    -       -
            (2633        001-                  Residential                                                          Parking garage
                                                                    90'
            Telegraph)   01
                         009-
            553 27th     0682-                   Urban             Height                                           Two Story
DJL-40-A                       10,769    0.25               RU-5             225      48    -        -    -       -
            Street       031-                  Residential        Limit:90'                                         Parking garage
                         04
                               79,153    1.82                                        352  150      180  273     328
                         008 -
                                                 Central
            2270         0656-                              D-BV-
DJL-41                         20,126    0.46   Business            250       90     224  150      180   69      83 Surface Parking
            Broadway     002-                                 2
                                                District
                         01
                         008 -
            2250                                 Central
                         0658-                              CBD-                                                    Car Service
DJL-42      Telegraph          11,429    0.26   Business             6        90     127  150      180   39      47
                         006-                                 P                                                     Center
            Ave                                 District
                         02
                         001 -
            5th St. (at  0121-                   Mixed
DJL-43                         10,233    0.23                C-40            450      23   80      100   18      23 Surface Parking
            Castro)      027-                 Housing Type
                         02
                                                                               1
                         005 -                                                                                      Vacant Land
                                                                            unit/
                      th 0377-                   Mixed      RM-4/                                                   and
DJL-44      1230 14 St.        12,173    0.28                               1,100     11   40       40   11      11
                         019-                 Housing Type   S-20                                                   Underutilized
                                                                            sf. of
                         01                                                                                         Buildings
                                                                              lot
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                             415
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                 ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                     Max #
                                                  General                              Of       Density
                                                                               Sq.
                                                   Plan             Height            Units (units/acre)    # Of Units   Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone             ft. /
                                                Designation          Area              Per
                                                                               Unit
                                                                                     Zoning Low     High   Low    High
                                                                                 1
                          005 -
                                                                               unit/
                          0378-                    Mixed      RM-4/
DJL-45      1158 14th St.        2,625     0.06                               1,100     -     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                          028-                  Housing Type   S-20
                                                                              sf. of
                          00
                                                                                lot
                                                                                 1
                          005 -
                                                                               unit/
                          0378-                    Mixed      RM-4/
DJL-45-A         -               2,625     0.06                               1,100     -     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                          029-                  Housing Type   S-20
                                                                              sf. of
                          00
                                                                                lot
                                                                              1
                          005 -
                                                                              unit/
                          0378-                    Mixed      RM-4/
DJL-45-B         -               1,929     0.04                               1,100     -     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                          030-                  Housing Type   S-20
                                                                              sf. of
                          00
                                                                              lot
                                                                              1
                          005 -
                                                                              unit/
                          0378-                    Mixed      RM-4/
DJL-45-C         -               1,929     0.04                               1,100     -     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                          031-                  Housing Type   S-20
                                                                              sf. of
                          00
                                                                              lot
                                                                              1
                          005 -
                                                                              unit/
                          0378-                    Mixed      RM-4/
DJL-45-D         -               1,929     0.04                               1,100     -     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                          032-                  Housing Type   S-20
                                                                              sf. of
                          00
                                                                              lot
                                                                              1
                          005 -
                                                                              unit/
                          0378-                    Mixed      RM-4/
DJL-45-E         -               1,929     0.04                               1,100     -     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                          033-                  Housing Type   S-20
                                                                              sf. of
                          00
                                                                              lot
                                12,966     0.28                                        12    40       40    11      11
                          009 -
            2703 Martin   0691-                    Urban             Height                                              Auto Repair
DJL-46                          12,606     0.29               RU-4             550     23    45       65    13      19
            Luther King   003-                   Residential        Limit:35'                                            Garage
                          01
416                                                                                              APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                   Max #
                                                 General                             Of       Density
                                                                             Sq.
                                                   Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation           Area            Per
                                                                             Unit
                                                                                   Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                         009 -
            3314 San     0723-                    Urban             Height
DJL-47                         11,075     0.25               RU-5            375      30   40       60   10      15 Gas Station
            Pablo Ave    015-                   Residential        Limit:60'
                         01
                         009 -                                                                                      Vacant Land
            2720 San     0692-                  Community           Height                                          with Temporary
DJL-48                         14,229     0.33               CC-2            375      38   40       60   13      20
            Pablo Ave    015-                   Commercial         Limit:60'                                        Storage
                         02                                                                                         Structures
                         008-
            250 14th St.                          Central             2,
                         0626-                               CBD-
*DJL-49     (LMSP Site          7,621     0.17   Business           Special  200      38    -        -   17      17 Parking Lot
                         018-                                  P
            #3)                                   District           Area
                         00
            1225         002-
                                                  Central
            Webster St.  0057-                               CBD-
*DJL-50                        12,197     0.28   Business             7       90     136    -        -   28      28 Parking
            (LMSP Site   004-                                 C
                                                  District
            #9)          02
            1314         002-
                                                  Central
            Franklin St. 0055-                               CBD-                                                   Structured
*DJL-51                        60,984     1.40   Business             7       90     678    -        -  384     384
            (LMSP Site   001-                                 C                                                     Parking Lot
                                                  District
            #8)          00
                         002-
            226 13th St.                          Central             2,
                         0077-                               CBD-
*DJL-52¹    (LMSP Site         59,728     1.37   Business           Special  200     299    -        -  441     441 Parking Lot
                         001-                                 X
            #6)                                   District          Area A
                         00
            1309
                         002-                     Central             2,
            Madison St.                                      CBD-
*DJL-53                  0079- 16,635     0.38   Business           Special  200      83    -        -   72      72 Parking Lot
            (LMSP Site                                        X
                         005                      District           Area
            #5)
                         039 -                                                                                      Vacant Land
            2901 68th    3281-                  Community           Height                                          and One Story
ETC-54                         15,655     0.36               CC-2            450      35   40       60   14      22
            Ave          009-                   Commercial         Limit:45'                                        Vacant
                         02                                                                                         Building
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                             417

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                        Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION         SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                  Max #
                                                General                             Of       Density
                                                                            Sq.
                                                  Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)    # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location    APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                              Designation          Area             Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                  Zoning Low     High   Low    High
                        039 -                                                                                         Vacant Land
            6620
                        3279-                  Community           Height                                             and One Story
ETC-55      Foothill          15,006     0.34               CC-2            450     33    40       60    14      20
                        013-                   Commercial         Limit:45'                                           Vacant
            Blvd
                        02                                                                                            Building
                        039 -
            6403
                        3276-                    Urban             Height                                             Restaurant and
ETC-56      Foothill          16,824     0.39               RU-4            450     37    40       60    16      23
                        028-                   Residential        Limit:45'                                           Parking Lot
            Blvd
                        02
            6001        038 -
                                                 Urban             Height                                             Auto Repair
ETC-57      Foothill    3201-  8,323     0.19               CN-3            450     18    40       60     8      11
                                               Residential        Limit:45'                                           Center
            Blvd        001
            5833        038 -                 Neighborhood
                                                                   Height
ETC-58      Foothill    3182- 16,510     0.38 Center Mixed  CN-3            450     37     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                                                                  Limit:45'
            Blvd        023                       Use
                        038 -                 Neighborhood
                                                                   Height
ETC-58-A         -      3182-  6,547     0.15 Center Mixed  CN-3            450     15     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                                                                  Limit:45'
                        022                       Use
                        038 -                 Neighborhood
                                                                   Height
ETC-58-B         -      3182-  2,303     0.05 Center Mixed  CN-3            450      5     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                                                                  Limit:45'
                        021                       Use
                        038 -                 Neighborhood
                                                                   Height                                             Two Story
ETC-58-C         -      3182-  4,572     0.10 Center Mixed  CN-3            450     10     -        -     -       -
                                                                  Limit:45'                                           Building
                        006                       Use
                              29,932     0.68                                       67    40       60    27      41
                        039 -
            6600
                        3279-                  Community           Height
ETC-59      Foothill          13,750     0.32               CC-2            450     31    40       60    13      19   Gas Station
                        015-                   Commercial         Limit:45'
            Blvd
                        03
                        040 -
            7301
                        3334-                  Community           Height
ETC-60      Bancroft          11,361     0.26               CC-2            450     25     -        -     -       -   Restaurant
                        015-                   Commercial         Limit:45'
            Ave
                        01
418                                                                                           APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                   Max #
                                                 General                             Of       Density
                                                                             Sq.
                                                   Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location    APN   Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation          Area             Per
                                                                             Unit
                                                                                   Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                        040 -
                        3334-                   Community           Height
ETC-60-A          -             2,309     0.05               CC-2            450      5     -        -    -       - Restaurant
                        016-                    Commercial         Limit:45'
                        01
                        040 -
                        3334-                   Community           Height
ETC-60-B          -             1,735     0.04               CC-2            450      4     -        -    -       - Restaurant
                        004-                    Commercial         Limit:45'
                        02
                               15,405     0.35                                       34    40       60   14      21
                        047-
            10451                              Neighborhood
                        5576-                                       Height
ETC-61      MacArthur          22,508     0.52 Center Mixed  CN-3            450     50    14       28   7       15 Vacant Land
                        007-                                       Limit:45'
            Blvd.                                  Use
                        03
                        046-
            9601                               Neighborhood
                        5489-                                       Height
ETC-62      MacArthur          10,845     0.25 Center Mixed  RU-4            450     24    14       28   4        7 Vacant Land
                        001-                                       Limit:45'
            Blvd.                                  Use
                        01
                        046-
            9547
                        5488-                     Urban             Height
ETC-63      MacArthur           7,727     0.18               RU-4            450     17     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                        016-                    Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                        01
                        046-
                        5488-                     Urban             Height
ETC-63-A          -             3,680     0.08               RU-4            450      8     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                        015-                    Residential        Limit:45'
                        01
                               11,407     0.26                                       25    14       28   4        7
                        043-
            8201-8237
                        4620-                     Urban             Height
ETC-64      MacArthur          15,065     0.35               RU-4            450     33     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                        001-                    Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                        01
                        043-
                        4620-                     Urban             Height
ETC-64-A          -             5,024     0.12               RU-5            450     11     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                        001-                    Residential        Limit:45'
                        02
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                            419
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                        Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION         SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                  Max #
                                                General                             Of       Density
                                                                            Sq.
                                                  Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)    # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location    APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                              Designation          Area             Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                  Zoning Low     High   Low    High
                        043-
                                                                                                                      One Story
                        4621-                    Urban             Height
ETC-64-B          -            5,023     0.12               RU-4            450     11     -        -     -       -   Vacant
                        001-                   Residential        Limit:45'
                                                                                                                      Building
                        00
                              25,112     0.59                                       56    14       28     8      17
                        040-
            7951
                        3407-                    Urban             Height
ETC-65      MacArthur          6,320     0.15               RU-4            450     14                                Vacant Land
                        001-                   Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                        00
                        040-
            7963
                        3407-                    Urban             Height
ETC-65-A    MacArthur          8,893     0.20               RU-4            450     20     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
                        002-                   Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                        00
                              15,213     0.35                                       34    14       28     5      10
                        040-
            7823
                        3403-                 Housing and          Height
ETC-66      MacArthur         18,410     0.42               CN-3            450     41    14       28     6      12   Vacant Land
                        002-                  Business Mix        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                        00
                        040A-
            7506-7540                         Neighborhood
                        3409-                                      Height
ETC-67      MacArthur         14,935     0.34 Center Mixed  CN-3            450     33     -              -       -   Vacant Land
                        012-                                      Limit:45'
            Blvd.                                 Use
                        00
                        040A-
                                              Neighborhood
                        3409-                                      Height
ETC-67-A          -            3,285     0.08 Center Mixed  CN-3            450      7     -        -     -       -   One Story Store
                        013-                                      Limit:45'
                                                  Use
                        00
                        040A-
                                              Neighborhood                                                            One Story Store
                        3409-                                      Height
ETC-67-B          -            9,940     0.23 Center Mixed  CN-3            375     27     -        -     -       -   and Surface
                        014-                                      Limit60'
                                                  Use                                                                 Parking
                        02
                              28,160     0.65                                       67    14       28     9      18
                        025 -
            2777
                        0733-                    Urban             Height
FDA-68      Foothill          20,634     0.47               RU-5            450     46    14       28     7      13   Vacant Land
                        008-                   Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                        02
420                                                                                           APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING               ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                  General                             Of     Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                    Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)  # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                                Designation          Area             Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low    High  Low    High
                          020 -
            2345
                          0105-                    Urban             Height                                         Automobile
FDA-69      International       20,592     0.47               CN-3            375     55   100     115   47      54
                          004-                   Residential        Limit:60'                                       Sale
            Blvd.
                          00
                          020 -
            2424
                          0154-                    Urban             Height
FDA-70      International       10,917     0.25               CN-3            450     24    40      60   10      15 Surface Parking
                          006-                   Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                          00
                          033 -
            3815          2138-                    Urban             Height
FDA-71                           6,094     0.14               RU-5            450     14    40      60   6        8 Vacant Land
            Foothill      053-                   Residential        Limit:45'
                          01
                          033 -
                                                                                                                    One Story Store
            3615          2134-                    Urban             Height
FDA-72                          11,957     0.27               RU-5            450     27    40      60   11      16 and Surface
            Foothill      002-                   Residential        Limit:45'
                                                                                                                    Parking
                          01
                          033 -
            1750 35th     2128-                    Urban             Height
FDA-73                           5,991     0.14               RU-5            450     13    40      60   6        8 Vacant Land
            Ave.          003-                   Residential        Limit:45'
                          00
            3600          032 -
                                                   Urban             Height
FDA-74      Foothill      2084- 10,659     0.24               RU-5            450     24    40      60   10      14 Vacant Land
                                                 Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.         051
                          033 -
            3755
                          2135-                    Urban             Height
FDA-75      Foothill             8,700     0.20               RU-4            450     19    40      60   8       12 Auto Service
                          031-                   Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                          00
                          032 -
            3938                                                                                                    Two Story
                          2087-                    Urban             Height
FDA-76      Fruitvale            4,780     0.11               RU-5            450     11    40      60   4        7 Store and
                          018-                   Residential        Limit:45'
            Avenue                                                                                                  Parking
                          00
                          025 -
            3009                                Neighborhood
                          0726-                                      Height                                         Auto Repair
FDA-77      Foothill             7,030     0.16 Center Mixed  CN-3            375     19    40      60   6       10
                          008-                                      Limit:60'                                       Garage
            Blvd.                                   Use
                          00
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                             421
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                     Max #
                                                  General                              Of     Density
                                                                               Sq.
                                                    Plan            Height            Units (units/acre)   # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone             ft. /
                                                Designation          Area              Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                     Zoning Low    High   Low    High
                          026 -
            3002                                Neighborhood
                          0747-                                      Height                                             Two Story
FDA-78      Foothill             2,875     0.07 Center Mixed  CN-3             375      8    40     60      3       4
                          015-                                      Limit:60'                                           Building
            Blvd.                                   Use
                          03
                          025 -
            3111                                Neighborhood                                                            Fast Food
                          0689-                                      Height
FDA-79      International       26,837     0.62 Center Mixed  CN-2             275     98    14     28      9      17   Restaurant and
                          001-                                      Limit:75'
            Blvd.                                   Use                                                                 Surface Parking
                          01
                          025 -
            3053
                          0690-                  Community           Height
FDA-80      International       12,556     0.29               CC-2             275     46    14     28      4       8   Surface Parking
                          008-                   Commercial         Limit:75'
            Blvd.
                          01
                                                                                 1
                          025 -                                                unit
            2956
                          0720-                    Mixed                       per
FDA-81      International       26,720     0.61               RM-4     -               24    40     40     24      24   Surface Parking
                          007-                  Housing Type                  1,100
            Blvd.
                          02                                                  sf. of
                                                                                lot
                          026 -
                                                Neighborhood
            2120          0834-                                      Height
FDA-82                          13,732     0.32 Center Mixed  CN-3             550     25    40     60     13      19   Gas station
            Montana St.   022-                                      Limit:35'
                                                    Use
                          01
                          028 -
            2411                                                                                                        One Story Store
                          0906-                    Urban             Height
FDA-83      Macarthur           18,170     0.42               CN-1             450     40    14     28      6      12   and Surface
                          027-                   Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.                                                                                                       Parking
                          01
                          032 -
            4134
                          2079-                    Urban             Height
FDA-84      Foothill            12,387     0.28               RU-5             450     28    40     60     11      17   Parking Lot
                          018-                   Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                          00
                          033 -
            3609
                          2177-                    Urban             Height
FDA-85      International       10,979     0.25               CN-2             275     40    40     60     10      15   Service Stations
                          001-                   Residential        Limit:75'
            Blvd.
                          01
422                                                                                             APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                  General                             Of       Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                    Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                                Designation          Area             Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                          026 -
            2055                                Neighborhood
                          0835-                                      Height
FDA-86      Macarthur           12,885     0.30 Center Mixed  CN-1            450     29    14       28   4        8 Restaurant
                          006-                                      Limit:45'
            Blvd                                    Use
                          01
                          034 -
            4323                                                                                                     Miscellaneous
                          2251-                  Community           Height
FDA-87      International       17,766     0.41               CC-2            275     65    40       60   16      25 Improved
                          002-                   Commercial         Limit:75'
            Blvd                                                                                                     Commercial
                          01
                          035 -
            5490                                   Urban             Height
FDA-88                    2376-  5,832     0.13               RU-4            450     13    40       60   5        8 Surface Parking
            Foothill                             Residential        Limit:45'
                          001
            5310 & 5308
                                                                                                                     Two Story
            Fairfax;      035 -                 Neighborhood
                                                                     Height                                          Building with
FDA-89      5319 & 5323   2389-  2,700     0.06 Center Mixed  CN-3            550      5     -        -    -       -
                                                                    Limit:35'                                        Store on 1st
            Foothill      013                       Use
                                                                                                                     floor
            Blvd
                          035 -                 Neighborhood
                                                                     Height
FDA-89-A          -       2389-  3,300     0.08 Center Mixed  CN-3            550      6     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                                                                    Limit:35'
                          014                       Use
                          035 -                 Neighborhood
                                                                     Height
FDA-89-B          -       2389-  4,799     0.11 Center Mixed  CN-3            550      9     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                                                                    Limit:35'
                          015                       Use
                          035 -                 Neighborhood
                                                                     Height
FDA-89-C          -       2389-  4,799     0.11 Center Mixed  CN-3            550      9     -        -    -       - One Story Store
                                                                    Limit:35'
                          016                       Use
                                15,598     0.36                                       28    40       60   14      22
                          035 -
            4825                                   Urban             Height
FDA-90                    2385- 15,700     0.36               RU-5            450     35    40       60   14      22 Auto Repair
            Foothill                             Residential        Limit:45'
                          001
                          035 -
            4529          2401-                    Urban             Height
FDA-91                          19,634     0.45               RU-5            450     44    40       60   18      27 Vacant Land
            Foothill      001-                   Residential        Limit:45'
                          01
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                               423
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING               ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                   Max #
                                                 General                             Of     Density
                                                                             Sq.
                                                   Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.  Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation          Area             Per
                                                                             Unit
                                                                                   Zoning Low    High   Low    High
                          035 -
            4280
                          2351-                 Community           Height
FDA-92      Foothill            18,524    0.43               CC-2            375     49    40     60     17      26   Gas Station
                          005-                  Commercial         Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                          02
                          035 -
            4265
                          2352-                 Community           Height
FDA-93      Foothill            26,422    0.61               CC-2            375     70    40     60     24      37   Gas Station
                          008-                  Commercial         Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                          01
                          035 -
                                                                                                                      Fast Food
            1435 High     2353-                 Community           Height
FDA-94                          13,930    0.32               CC-1            275     51    40     60     13      19   Restaurant and
            St.           026-                  Commercial         Limit:75'
                                                                                                                      Surface Parking
                          01
                          035 -
            4610
                          2359-                   Urban             Height                                            Restaurant and
FDA-95      International       14,598    0.34               CC-2            275     53    40     60     14      20
                          022-                  Residential        Limit:75'                                          Surface Parking
            Blvd.
                          01
                          035 -
            5130
                          2363-                   Urban             Height                                            Auto Service
FDA-96      International       12,273    0.28               RU-5            375     33    40     60     11      17
                          029-                  Residential        Limit:60'                                          Center
            Blvd.
                          00
                          035 -
            5216
                          2364-                   Urban             Height                                            U-Haul Rental
FDA-97      International       22,528    0.52               RU-5            275     82    40     60     21      31
                          022-                  Residential        Limit:75'                                          Lot
            Blvd.
                          01
                          035 -
            5232                                 Detached
                          2364-                                     Height                                            U-Haul Rental
FDA-98      International       20,906    0.48     Unit      RU-5            275     76    40     60     19      29
                          024-                                     Limit:75'                                          Lot
            Blvd.                               Residential
                          00
                          035 -
            5330                               Neighborhood
                          2378-                                     Height                                            Auto Service
FDA-99      Foothill            11,268    0.26 Center Mixed  CN-3            550     20    40     60     10      16
                          006-                                     Limit:35'                                          Center
            Blvd.                                  Use
                          00
424                                                                                           APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                        Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION         SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                  Max #
                                                General                             Of       Density
                                                                            Sq.
                                                  Plan             Height          Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.  Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                              Designation           Area            Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                  Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                         009 -
            2935
                         0698-                 Community          Height
MA-100      Telegraph          60,681    1.39               CC-2            375     162  115      115  160     160 Surface Parking
                         031-                  Commercial         Limit:60'
            Ave
                         00
                         012 -
            880 W
                         0959-                   Urban            Height
MA-101      Macarthur          16,120    0.37               RU-5            375     43     -        -   38      38 Vacant Lot
                         049-                  Residential        Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                         00
                         012 -
            731 W
                         0965-                   Urban             Height
MA-102      Macarthur          17,535    0.40               RU-5            375     47     -        -   38      38 Gas station
                         024-                  Residential        Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                         00
                         012 -
            398 W                             Neighborhood
                         0976-                                     Height
MA-103      Macarthur          13,175    0.30 Center Mixed  CN-3            375     35    40       60   12      18 Gas Station
                         016-                                     Limit:60'
            Blvd.                                 Use
                         00
                         012 -
                         0978-                   Urban             Height                                          Surface Parking
MA-104      391 40th St.       11,130    0.26               RU-5            375     30    40       60   10      16
                         002-                  Residential        Limit:60'                                        Lot
                         01
                         012 -
            3943         0982-                 Community           Height
MA-105                         20,778    0.48               CC-2            375     55    45       65   22      31 Gas Station
            Broadway     002-                  Commercial         Limit:60'
                         04
                         012 -
            230 W                             Neighborhood   CN-
                         0986-                                     Height
MA-106      Macarthur          11,614    0.27 Center Mixed  2/D-            550     21    45       65   12      18 Gas Station
                         025-                                     Limit:35'
            Blvd.                                 Use       KP-3
                         01
                         012 -
                                                                                                                   U-Haul Rental
            4045         1000-                 Community           Height
MA-107                         13,230    0.30               CC-2            375     35    45       65   14      20 & Auto Service
            Broadway     007-                  Commercial         Limit:60'
                                                                                                                   Center
                         01
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                            425
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                 ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                 General                              Of       Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                   Plan             Height           Units (units/acre)    # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone             ft. /
                                               Designation           Area             Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low     High   Low    High
                         013 -
                                                                                                                        Auto Parts One
            4366         1108-                  Community            Height
MA-108                         12,516     0.29               CC-2             450     28    45       65    13      19   Story Store &
            Broadway     024-                   Commercial          Limit:45'
                                                                                                                        Surface Parking
                         01
            3881 MLK     012 -
                                                Community            Height
MA-109      (39th &      0963-  6,382     0.15               CN-3             375     17    45       65     7      10   Vacant Lot
                                                Commercial          Limit:60'
            MLK)         001
            3924 MLK     012 -
                                                Community            Height
MA-110      (40th &      0969-  5,499     0.13                S-15            375     15     -        -     -       -   Vacant Lot
                                                Commercial          Limit:60'
            MLK)         029
                         012 -
                                                Community            Height
MA-110-A    645 40th St. 0969-  2,500     0.06                S-15            375      7     -        -     -       -   Vacant Lot
                                                Commercial          Limit:60'
                         030
                         012 -
                                                Community            Height
MA-110-B          -      0969-  2,310     0.05                S-15            375      6     -        -     -       -   Vacant Lot
                                                Commercial          Limit:60'
                         41-02
                               10,309     0.24                                        27    40       60    10      14
                         014 -
            5131                               Neighborhood
                         1216-                                       Height
MA-111      Shattuck           22,395     0.51 Center Mixed  CN-4             450     50    14       28     7      14   Gas Station
                         031-                                       Limit:45'
            Ave                                    Use
                         02
                         014 -
            5504
                         1224-                  Community            Height
MA-112      Telegraph          26,875     0.62               CC-2             450     60    14       28     9      17   Gas Station
                         010-                   Commercial          Limit:45'
            Ave
                         01
                         010 -
                                               Neighborhood
            350 Grand    0776-                                CN-    Height
OPDA-113                       15,292     0.35 Center Mixed                   450     34    90       90    32      32   Gas Station
            Ave          013-                                2/S-12 Limit:50'
                                                   Use
                         00
                         009 -                                                  1
                   th    0698-                    Urban                       unit/
OPDA-114    550 29 St.         10,757     0.25               RU-5                     13    40       40    10      10   Vacant Land
                         002-                   Residential                   800
                         03                                                    sf
426                                                                                             APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                   Max #
                                                 General                             Of       Density
                                                                             Sq.
                                                   Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location    APN   Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation          Area             Per
                                                                             Unit
                                                                                   Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                        013 -
            5433 San                            Community           Height
OPDA-115                1184-  20,034     0.46               CC-2            375     53    40       60   18      28 Vacant Land
            Pablo Ave                           Commercial         Limit:60'
                        001
                        016 -
            6101 San                            Community           Height                                          Auto Service
OPDA-116                1459-  12,927     0.30               CC-2            375     34    40       60   12      18
            Pablo Ave                           Commercial         Limit:60'                                        Center
                        004
                        015 -
                                               Neighborhood
            5714 San    1305-                                       Height
OPDA-117                       14,130     0.32 Center Mixed  CN-3            375     38    40       60   13      19 Surface Parking
            Pablo Ave   018-                                       Limit:60'
                                                   Use
                        01
                        016 -
            6100 San    1442-                   Community           Height
OPDA-118                       15,137     0.35               CC-2            375     40    40       60   14      21 One Story Store
            Pablo Ave   039-                    Commercial         Limit:60'
                        01
                        016 -
            6211 San    1455-                   Community           Height
OPDA-119                       13,529     0.31               CC-2            275     49    40       60   12      19 Gas station
            Pablo Ave   020-                    Commercial         Limit:75'
                        00
                        047 -
            10605
                        5594-                   Community           Height
OPDA-120    Foothill           13,878     0.32               CC-1            375     37    40       60   13      19 Open Space
                        001-                    Commercial         Limit:60'
            Blvd
                        00
                        048D-
            2240                               Neighborhood
                        7244-                                       Height
OPDA-121    Mountain           14,060     0.32 Center Mixed  CN-4            450     31    40       60   13      19 Gas Station
                        021-                                       Limit:45'
            Blvd                                   Use
                        06
                        048F-
                                               Neighborhood
            6125        7352-                                       Height
OPDA-122                       17,968     0.41 Center Mixed  CN-1            450     40     -        -    -       - Surface Parking
            Merced Ave  012-                                       Limit:45'
                                                   Use
                        01
                        048F-
                                               Neighborhood
OPDA-                   7352-                                       Height
                  -             5,998     0.14 Center Mixed  CN-1            450     13     -        -    -       - Surface Parking
122-A                   014-                                       Limit:45'
                                                   Use
                        01
                               23,966     0.55                                       53    14       28   8       15
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                             427
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                        Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION         SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                 ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                   Max #
                                                General                              Of       Density
                                                                             Sq.
                                                  Plan             Height           Units (units/acre)    # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location    APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone             ft. /
                                              Designation           Area             Per
                                                                             Unit
                                                                                   Zoning Low     High   Low    High
                        011 -
                                              Neighborhood
            3374 Grand  0836-                                       Height
OPDA-123                      14,809     0.34 Center Mixed  CN-2             450      33   40       60    14      20   Gas Station
            Ave         001-                                       Limit:45'
                                                  Use
                        01
                        010 -
            100
                        0812-                    Urban              Height
OPDA-124    Macarthur         15,780     0.36               CN-4             550     29    40       60    14      22   Gas Station
                        008-                   Residential         Limit:35'
            Blvd
                        01
                        001 -
                                                 Central
                        0167-                               CBD-                                                       Garage and
PPDA-125    610 Oak St.       12,500     0.29   Business               4      90     139  150      180    44      52
                        010-                                  X                                                        Surface Parking
                                                 District
                        00
                        010 -
                        0772-                    Urban       RU-                                                       Surface Parking
PPDA-126    Lenox Ave         14,978     0.34                          -     800      19   40       55    14      19
                        020-                   Residential  2/S-12                                                     Lot
                        01
                        010 -
                                              Neighborhood
            500 Grand   0780-                                CN-    Height                                             Surface Parking
PPDA-127                      11,707     0.27 Center Mixed                   450      26   90       90    24      24
            Ave         015-                                2/S-12 Limit:45'                                           Lot
                                                  Use
                        08
                        008 -
                                                 Central            Height
                        0667-                               D-BV-                                                      Surface Parking
PPDA-128    Webster St.       11,745     0.27   Business            Limit:    90     131   45       65    12      18
                        005-                                   2                                                       Lot
                                                 District            250'
                        03
            24th        008 -                    Central            Height
                                                            D-BV-
PPDA-129    /Webster/   0672-  6,250     0.14   Business            Limit:   450      14    -        -     -       -   Surface Parking
                                                               1
            Valdez      005                      District             45'
                        008 -
                                                 Central
PPDA-129-               0672-                               D-BV-   Height
                 -             3,125     0.07   Business                     375      8     -        -     -       -   Surface Parking
A                       007-                                   2   Limit:85'
                                                 District
                        01
                        008 -                    Central
PPDA-129-                                                   D-BV-   Height
                 -      0672-  4,177     0.10   Business                     375     11     -        -     -       -   Surface Parking
B                                                              2   Limit:85'
                        008                      District
428                                                                                            APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                           CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                              HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                   CURRENT ZONING               ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                  Max #
                                                General                             Of      Density
                                                                            Sq.
                                                  Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)  # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres              Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation         Area             Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                  Zoning Low    High  Low    High
                         008 -
                                                 Central
PPDA-129-   2406         0672-                              D-BV-  Height
                                7,706     0.18   Business                   375     21    -       -     -       - One Story Store
C           Webster      014-                                 2   Limit:85'
                                                 District
                         01
                         008 -                   Central
PPDA-129-                                                   D-BV-  Height                                         Hertz Car
            372 24th St. 0672-  5,861     0.13   Business                   375     16    -       -     -       -
D                                                             2   Limit:85'                                       Rental
                         015                     District
                         008 -                   Central                                                          One Story
PPDA-129-                                                   D-BV-  Height
                  -      0672-  6,245     0.14   Business                   375     17    -       -     -       - electronics
E                                                             2   Limit:85'
                         018                     District                                                         Store
                         008 -                   Central                                                          Two Story bike
PPDA-129-                                                   D-BV-  Height
                  -      0672- 12,491     0.29   Business                   450     28    -       -     -       - Store and AVIS
F                                                             1   Limit:45'
                         019                     District                                                         Car Rental
                               45,855     1.05                                      114  100     105  105     110
              th    th   008 -                   Central           Height
            24 /27                                          D-BV-
PPDA-130                 0671-  3,000     0.07   Business          Limit:   450      7    -       -     -       - Surface Parking
            /Valdez                                           1
                         024                     District           45'
                         008 -                   Central           Height
PPDA-130-                                                   D-BV-
                  -      0671-  5,000     0.11   Business          Limit:   450     11    -       -     -       - Surface Parking
A                                                             1
                         025                     District           45'
                         008 -                   Central           Height
PPDA-130-                                                   D-BV-
                  -      0671-  7,499     0.17   Business          Limit:   450     17    -       -     -       - Surface Parking
B                                                             1
                         026                     District           45'
                         008 -
                                                 Central           Height
PPDA-130-                0671-                              D-BV-
                  -             1,900     0.04   Business          Limit:   450      4    -       -     -       - Surface Parking
C                        027-                                 1
                                                 District           45'
                         02
                         008 -
                                                 Central           Height
PPDA-130-                0671-                              D-BV-
                  -             3,015     0.07   Business          Limit:   450      7    -       -     -       - Surface Parking
D                        031-                                 1
                                                 District           45'
                         02
                         008 -
                                                 Central           Height
PPDA-130-                0671-                              D-BV-
                  -             2,988     0.07   Business          Limit:   450      7    -       -     -       - Surface Parking
E                        032-                                 1
                                                 District           45'
                         02
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                           429
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                          Table C-6
                                        Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION         SITE SIZE                   CURRENT ZONING              ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                Max #
                                               General                            Of      Density
                                                                          Sq.
                                                 Plan            Height          Units (units/acre)   # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location    APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres              Zone           ft. /
                                              Designation         Area            Per
                                                                          Unit
                                                                                Zoning Low    High   Low    High
                        008 -
                                                Central           Height
PPDA-130-               0671-                              D-BV-
                 -             4,342     0.10   Business          Limit:  450     10    -       -      -       -   Surface Parking
F                       033-                                 1
                                                District           45'
                        02
                        008 -
                                                Central           Height
PPDA-130-               0671-                              D-BV-
                 -             5,170     0.12   Business          Limit:  450     11    -       -      -       -   Surface Parking
G                       034-                                 1
                                                District           45'
                        02
                        008 -
                                                Central           Height
PPDA-130-               0671-                              D-BV-
                 -             3,760     0.09   Business          Limit:  450      8    -       -      -       -   Surface Parking
H                       035-                                 1
                                                District           45'
                        02
                        008 -
                                                Central           Height
PPDA-130-               0671-                              D-BV-
                 -             3,232     0.07   Business          Limit:  450      7    -       -      -       -   Surface Parking
I                       037-                                 1
                                                District           45'
                        03
                        008 -
                                                Central           Height
PPDA-130-               0671-                              D-BV-
                 -             3,120     0.07   Business          Limit:  450      7    -       -      -       -   Surface Parking
J                       029-                                 1
                                                District           45'
                        02
                        008 -
                                                Central           Height
PPDA-130-               0671-                              D-BV-
                 -             3,016     0.07   Business          Limit:  450      7    -       -      -       -   Surface Parking
K                       030-                                 1
                                                District           45'
                        02
                        008 -
                                                Central           Height
PPDA-130-               0671-                              D-BV-
                 -             5,630     0.13   Business          Limit:  450     13    -       -      -       -   Surface Parking
L                       036-                                 1
                                                District           45'
                        02
                        008 -
                                                Central           Height
PPDA-130-               0671-                              D-BV-                                                   Acura Car
                 -            43,297     0.99   Business          Limit:  450     96    -       -      -       -
M                       023-                                 1                                                     Dealership
                                                District           45'
                        03
430                                                                                        APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                   CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                  Max #
                                                 General                            Of       Density
                                                                            Sq.
                                                   Plan           Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres              Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation         Area             Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                  Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                         008 -
                                                  Central          Height
PPDA-130-                0671-                              D-BV-                                                  Two Story
                   -            7,251     0.17   Business          Limit:   450     16     -        -    -       -
N                        004-                                 1                                                    Office
                                                  District          45'
                         02
                               102,220    2.34                                      227   90       90  211     211
            26th /27th   009 -
                                                  Central          Height
            /Broadway,   0685-                              D-BV-
PPDA-131                       47,686     1.09   Business          Limit:   450     106   90       90   99      99 Car Dealership
            2630         018-                                 1
                                                  District          45'
            Broadway     06
                         008 -                                                                                     Surface Parking
                                                  Central          Height
            2417         0674-                              D-BV-                                                  and Two Story
PPDA-132                       29,583     0.68   Business          Limit:   450     66    90       90   61      61
            Broadway     003-                                 1                                                    Commercial
                                                  District          45'
                         01                                                                                        Building
                         009 -                                                                                     Vacant Land
                                                                   Height
                         0684-                  Community   D-BV-                                                  and Two Story
PPDA-133    403 28th St.       13,049     0.30                     Limit:   275      47  150      150   45      45
                         037-                   Commercial    4                                                    Underutilized
                                                                    85'
                         01                                                                                        Building
                         009 -
                                                                   Height
            2710         0685-                  Community   D-BV-
PPDA-134                       12,731     0.29                     Limit:   275      46  150      150   44      44 Surface Parking
            Broadway     018-                   Commercial    3
                                                                    85'
                         04
                         009 -
                                                                   Height
            2855         0686-                  Community   D-BV-
PPDA-135                       17,196     0.39                     Limit:   275      63  150      150   59      59 Surface Parking
            Broadway     003-                   Commercial    3
                                                                    85'
                         00
                         009 -
                                                                   Height
            2910         0702-                  Community   D-BV-
PPDA-136                       29,017     0.67                     Limit:   275     106   45       65   30      44 Surface Parking
            Broadway     001-                   Commercial   3/N
                                                                    85'
                         02
                         009 -
            3030         0704-                  Community   D-BV-  Height                                          Enterprise Car
PPDA-137                       10,354     0.24                              450      23   45       65   11      16
            Broadway     016-                   Commercial    3   Limit:45'                                        Rental
                         01
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                            431
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                        Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION         SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING               ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                  Max #
                                                General                             Of     Density
                                                                            Sq.
                                                  Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.  Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                              Designation           Area            Per
                                                                            Unit
                                                                                  Zoning Low    High   Low    High
                         009 -
                                                                   Height
            3025         0705-                 Community    D-BV-
PPDA-138                       15,560    0.36                       Limit:  275     57    45      65    16      23   Car Dealership
            Broadway     006-                  Commercial    3/N
                                                                   85'/135'
                         00
                         009 -
                                                                   Height
            3401         0733-                 Community    D-BV-
PPDA-139                       27,978    0.64                       Limit:  200     140   45      65    29      42   Surface Parking
            Broadway     004-                  Commercial    3/N
                                                                  135'/200'
                         07
                         010 -
                                                                   Height
                         0798-                 Community    D-BV-
PPDA-140    296 27th St.       19,130    0.44                       Limit:  275     70   150     150    66      66   One Story Store
                         003-                  Commercial     3
                                                                     85'
                         07
                         014 -
            5211         1240-                 Community           Height                                            Fast Food and
PPDA-141                       18,223    0.42               CC-2            450     40    40     60     17      25
            Broadway     009-                  Commercial         Limit:45'                                          Surface Parking
                         01
                         014 -
                                              Neighborhood
            6029         1268-                                     Height
PPDA-142                       11,864    0.27 Center Mixed  CN-1            550     22    14      28     4       8   Gas Station
            College Ave  002-                                     Limit:35'
                                                  Use
                         00
                         016 -
            6407                              Neighborhood
                         1424-                                     Height
PPDA-143    Telegraph          13,445    0.31 Center Mixed  CN-2            450     30    14      28     4       9   Gas Station
                         022-                                     Limit:45'
            Ave                                   Use
                         05
                         048A-
            6201                              Neighborhood
                         7070-                                     Height
PPDA-144    Claremont          10,987    0.25 Center Mixed  CN-1            550     20    14      28     4       7   Gas Station
                         007-                                     Limit:35'
            Ave                                   Use
                         01
                         019 -
                                              Neighborhood
            825 E 12th   0034-                                     Height
PPDA-145                       14,736    0.34 Center Mixed  CN-3            450     33    20      30     7      10   Auto Service
            St.          003-                                     Limit:45'
                                                  Use
                         00
432                                                                                          APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                 General                              Of     Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                   Plan             Height           Units (units/acre)  # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.  Acres               Zone             ft. /
                                               Designation           Area             Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low    High  Low    High
                          019 -
                                               Neighborhood
            1035 E 12th   0036-                                      Height
PPDA-146                        10,425    0.24 Center Mixed  CN-3             450     23    20     30    5        7 Vacant Land
            St.           005-                                      Limit:45'
                                                   Use
                          02
                          019 -
                                               Neighborhood
            1111 E 12th   0037-                                      Height
PPDA-147                        15,625    0.36 Center Mixed  CN-3             450     35    20     30    7       11 Service Station
            St.           001-                                      Limit:45'
                                                   Use
                          01
                          020 -
                                               Neighborhood
            1118 E 12th   0118-                               CN-    Height
PPDA-148                        10,500    0.24 Center Mixed                   550     19    14     28    3        7 Auto Center
            St.           013-                               3/S-7  Limit:35'
                                                   Use
                          00
                          023 -
            2956                               Neighborhood
                          0419-                               CN-    Height
PPDA-149    Lakeshore           27,422    0.63 Center Mixed                   550     50    40     60    25      38 Vacant Land
                          001-                               3/S-12 Limit:35'
            Ave                                    Use
                          02
                          023 -
            Lake Shore
                          0415-                   Urban
PPDA-150    Ave at              12,295    0.28               RU-3             450     27    90     90    25      25 Vacant Land
                          001-                  Residential
            Boden
                          00
                          030 -
            4255                                 Detached
                          1981-                                      Height
PPDA-151    Macarthur           10,481    0.24     Unit      CN-2             450     23    14     28    3        7 Vacant Land
                          133-                                      Limit:45'
            Blvd.                               Residential
                          00
                          044 -
            9525
                          4968-                   Mixed              Height                                         Underutilized
PPDA-152    International       28,509    0.65               CN-3             375     76    45     65    29      42
                          003-                 Housing Type         Limit:60'                                       Building
            Blvd.
                          01
                          046 -
                                               Neighborhood
            1424 94th     5423-                                      Height
PPDA-153                        10,275    0.24 Center Mixed  CN-3             375     27    45     65    11      16 Surface Parking
            Ave           002-                                      Limit:60'
                                                   Use
                          02
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                              433
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                  General                             Of       Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                    Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)    # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                                Designation          Area             Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low     High   Low    High
                          047 -
            10400
                          5509-                  Community           Height
PPDA-154    International       10,400     0.24               CN-3            375     28    45       65    11      16   Surface Parking
                          039-                   Commercial         Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                          01
            10507-        045 -
            10511         5194-                  Community           Height
PPDA-155                        10,000     0.23               CC-2            375     27    45       65    10      15   One Story Store
            International 001-                   Commercial         Limit:60'
            Blvd.         00
                          047 -
            10102
                          5516-                  Community           Height                                             Auto sales and
PPDA-156    International       11,072     0.25               CC-2            375     30    45       65    11      16
                          017-                   Commercial         Limit:60'                                           Repair
            Blvd.
                          01
                          044 -
            9945-9959
                          4972-                  Community           Height
PPDA-157    International       10,393     0.24               CC-2            375     28    45       65    11      16   Surface Parking
                          006-                   Commercial         Limit:60'
            Blvd.
                          05
                          046 -
            9000-9012                           Neighborhood                                                            Vacant Land
                          5421-                                      Height
PPDA-158    International       10,071     0.23 Center Mixed  CN-3            375     27     -        -     -       -   with a Food
                          012-                                      Limit:60'
            Blvd.                                   Use                                                                 truck
                          01
                          046 -
                                                Neighborhood
PPDA-158-                 5421-                                      Height                                             One Story hair
                  -              3,780     0.09 Center Mixed  CN-3            375     10     -        -     -       -
A                         010-                                      Limit:60'                                           salon
                                                    Use
                          00
                                13,851     0.32                                       37    45       65    14      21
                          043 -
            8700          4580-                    Urban             Height
PPDA-159                        10,378     0.24               RU-5            375     28    45       65    11      16   Car Wash
            International 013-                   Residential        Limit:60'
            Blvd.         00
                          043 -
            8332                                Neighborhood
                          4551-                                      Height                                             Auto Repair
PPDA-160    International       12,890     0.30 Center Mixed  CN-3            375     34    45       65    14      20
                          011-                                      Limit:60'                                           Center
            Blvd.                                   Use
                          01
434                                                                                             APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                 ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                     Max #
                                                  General                              Of       Density
                                                                               Sq.
                                                    Plan            Height            Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#       Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone             ft. /
                                                Designation          Area              Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                     Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                                                                                 1
                          044 -
                                                                              unit/
                          5014-                  Community
PPDA-161    606 Clara St.        9,119     0.21               RM-4            1,100     8    14       28   3        6 Vacant Land
                          006-                   Commercial
                                                                              sf. of
                          03
                                                                               Lot
                                                                                 1
                          044 -
                                                                              unit/
            9418 Edes     5014-                  Community
PPDA-162                        17,414     0.40               RM-4            1,100     16   14       28   6       11 Vacant Land
            Ave           005-                   Commercial
                                                                              sf. of
                          00
                                                                                lot
                          023 -
            3600 Park     0476-                    Urban             Height                                           Closed Gas
PPDA-163                        16,137     0.37               CN-4             550      29   40       60   15      22
            Blvd.         021-                   Residential        Limit:35'                                         Station
                          01
            1100 8th Ave  019 -
                                                Housing and   HBX-                                                    One Story
PPDA-164    (at E. 11th   0034- 29,787     0.68                                930      32   20       30   14      20
                                                Business Mix    2                                                     Building
            St.)          010
                          001-
            601 Webster                            Central
*PPDA-                    0191-                               CBD-   Height                                           Developed Two
            St (LMSP            60,984     1.40   Business                      90     678    -        -  329     329
165                       007-                                P/CH   Area 4                                           Story Building
            Site #31)                              District
                          01
                          001-
                          0185-
                          014-
            726 Harrison                           Central
*PPDA-                    00,                                 CBD-   Height
            St. (LMSP           14,995     0.34   Business                      90     167    -        -   30      30 Parking
166                       001-                                  X    Area 6
            Site #28)                              District
                          0185-
                          026-
                          00
                          002-
            157 11th St.                           Central
*PPDA-                    0083-                               CBD-   Height
            (LMSP Site           5,747     0.13   Business                      90      64    -        -   13      13 Parking Lot
167                       006-                                  X    Area 5
            #18)                                   District
                          00
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                               435
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                   CURRENT ZONING              ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                 Max #
                                                General                            Of      Density
                                                                           Sq.
                                                  Plan            Height          Units (units/acre)    # Of Units   Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres              Zone           ft. /
                                               Designation         Area            Per
                                                                           Unit
                                                                                 Zoning Low    High   Low     High
                         002-
            149 11th St.                         Central
*PPDA-                   0085-                              CBD-   Height
            (LMSP Site         14,991     0.34   Business                   90     167   -       -       -       -
168                      001-                                X     Area 4
            #19)                                 District
                         00
                         002-
            138 10th St.                         Central
*PPDA-                   0085-                              CBD-   Height
            (LMSP Site          5,475     0.13   Business                   90      61   -       -       -       -
168-A                    006-                                X     Area 4
            #19)                                 District
                         00
                         002-
            128 10th St.                         Central
*PPDA-                   0085-                              CBD-   Height
            (LMSP Site          3,650     0.08   Business                   90      41   -       -       -       -
168-B                    005-                                X     Area 4
            #19)                                 District
                         00
                         002-
            102 10th St.                         Central
*PPDA-                   0085-                              CBD-   Height
            (LMSP Site         15,353     0.35   Business                   90     171   -       -       -       -
168-C                    004-                                X     Area 4
            #19)                                 District
                         00
                                                                                                                    Developed One
                               39,469     0.91                                     439   -       -     298     298
                                                                                                                    Story Building
                         002-
            963 Oak St                           Central
*PPDA-                   0085-                              CBD-   Height
            (LMSP Site          7,596     0.17   Business                   90      84   -       -       -       -
169                      011-                                X     Area 4
            #22                                  District
                         00
                         002-
            113 10th St.                         Central
*PPDA-                   0085-                              CBD-   Height
            (LMSP Site          7,583     0.17   Business                   90      84   -       -       -       -
169-A                    010-                                X     Area 4
            #22)                                 District
                         00
                         002-
            125 10th St.                         Central
*PPDA-                   0085-                              CBD-   Height
            (LMSP Site          5,000     0.11   Business                   90      56   -       -       -       -
169-B                    009-                                X     Area 4
            #22)                                 District
                         00
                               20,179     0.46                                     224   -       -     137     137
            800 Madison  001-
                                                 Central
*PPDA-      St. (LMSP    0171-                              CBD-   Height
                               60,984     1.40   Business                   90     678   -       -     142     142  BART Admin
170         Site = BART  001-                                X     Area 4
                                                 District
            Station)     00
436                                                                                         APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                               Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                      CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                       Max #
                                                   General                               Of      Density
                                                                                 Sq.
                                                     Plan              Height           Units (units/acre)  # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres                 Zone             ft. /
                                                Designation             Area             Per
                                                                                 Unit
                                                                                       Zoning Low    High  Low    High
                 th
            51 9 St.      001-
                                                    Central
*PPDA-      (LMSP Site    0169-                                 CBD-    Height
                                60,984     1.40    Business                       90     678   -       -   384     384 BART Parking
171         = BART        001-                                    X     Area 4
                                                   District
            Parking)      00
            107 8th St.   001-
                                                    Central
*PPDA-      (LMSP Site    0171-                                 CBD-    Height                                         MTC/ABAG
                                60,984     1.40    Business                       90     678   -       -   220     220
172         = MTC/        002-                                    X     Area 4                                         Office
                                                   District
            ABAG)         00
                          001-
            91 8th St.                              Central
*PPDA-                    0169-                                 CBD-    Height
            (LMSP Site           5,000     0.11    Business                       90      56   -       -     -       -
173                       002-                                    R     Area 4
            #38)                                   District
                          00
                          001-
            77 8th St.                              Central
*PPDA-                    0169-                                 CBD-    Height
            (LMSP Site           4,997     0.11    Business                       90      56   -       -     -       -
173-A                     003-                                    R     Area 4
            #38)                                   District
                          00
                                                                                                                       Developed 1-2
                                 9,997     0.22                                          111   -       -    30      30
                                                                                                                       Story
                          002-
            52 9th St.                              Central
*PPDA-                    0093-                                 CBD-    Height                                         One Story
            (LMSP Site           6,592     0.15    Business                       90      73   -       -     -       -
174                       006-                                    R     Area 4                                         Building
            #21)                                   District
                          01
                          002-
            Fallon St.                              Central
*PPDA-                    0093-                                 CBD-    Height
            (LMSP Site          10,376     0.24    Business                       90     115   -       -     -       - Parking
174-A                     005-                                    R     Area 4
            #21)                                   District
                          00
                                16,968     0.39                                          189   -       -   114     114
                          019-
            1105 2nd
*PPDA-                    0027-                                 S-2/S-
            Ave (LMSP           45,813     1.05  Institutional                   300     153   -       -   357     357 Vacant
175¹                      013-                                    4
            Site #44)
                          03
            229           020-
                                                                                                                       Parking and
*PPDA-      International 0127-                     Urban               Height
                                20,338     0.47                 RU-5             275      74   -       -    51      51 One Story
176         Blvd (LMSP    006-                    Residential          Limit:75'
                                                                                                                       Building
            Site #46)     03
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                                437

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                Table C-6
                                           Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION            SITE SIZE                      CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                       Max #
                                                   General                               Of       Density
                                                                                 Sq.
                                                     Plan              Height           Units (units/acre)     # Of Units   Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN   Sq. Ft.    Acres                 Zone            ft. /
                                                 Designation            Area             Per
                                                                                 Unit
                                                                                       Zoning Low     High   Low     High
                         020-
            1225 4th Ave                                                                                                   Parking and
*PPDA-                   0126-                                          Height
            (LMSP Site           86,321     1.98  Institutional  RU-5            225     384    -        -    203     203  One Story
177                      014-                                          Limit:90'
            #47)                                                                                                           Building
                         01
                         003 -
            800 W        0019-                    Community             Height
WO-178                           19,484     0.45                 CC-2            375     52     -        -      -       -  Vacant Lot
            Grand Ave    003-                     Commercial           Limit:60'
                         00
                         003 -
                         0019-                    Community             Height
WO-178-A         -                8,125     0.17                 CC-2            375     22     -        -      -       -  Vacant Lot
                         004-                     Commercial           Limit:60'
                         00
                                 27,609     0.62                                         74   100      115    62       71
             th          004 -
            7 St. b/t
                         0069-                    Community       S-    Height
WO-179      Mandela &            41,485     0.95                                 225     184   51       51    48       48  Vacant Lot
                         002-                     Commercial     15W   Limit:90'
            Kirkham
                         01
                         004 -                                          Height
                                                  Community       S-
WO-180      1395 7th St. 0069-   23,432     0.54                       Limit:16  225     104    -        -      -       -  Vacant Lot
                                                  Commercial     15W
                         001                                              0'
                         004 -
                                                                        Height
            533 Kirham   0069-                    Community       S-
WO-180-A                          9,165     0.21                       Limit:16  225      41    -        -      -       -  Vacant Lot
            St.          002-                     Commercial     15W
                                                                          0'
                         02
                                 32,597     0.75                                         145   74       74    56       56
                         004 -
            715 Center                            Community       S-    Height
WO-181                   0079-    1,448     0.03                                 375      4     -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
            St.                                   Commercial     15W   Limit:55'
                         012
                         004 -
                                                 Community        S-    Height                                             Vacant Land
WO-181-A    1452 7th St. 0079- 4,392       0.10                                  375     12     -        -      -       -
                                                 Commercial      15W   Limit:55'                                           and Store
                         013
                         004 -
                                                 Community        S-    Height
WO-181-B    1462 7th St. 0079- 2,526       0.06                                  375      7     -        -      -       -  Surface Parking
                                                 Commercial      15W   Limit:55'
                         014
438                                                                                                APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                           Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION            SITE SIZE                   CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                   General                            Of       Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                    Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN   Sq. Ft.    Acres              Zone            ft. /
                                                 Designation         Area             Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                         004 -
                                                 Community      S-   Height
WO-181-C    1470 7th St. 0079- 13,893      0.32                               375     37     -        -    -       - Surface Parking
                                                 Commercial   15W   Limit:55'
                         015
                         004 -
                                                                                                                     Surface Parking
                         0079-                   Community      S-   Height
WO-181-D    1484 7th St.       8,661       0.20                               375     23     -        -    -       - and One Story
                         017-                    Commercial   15W   Limit:55'
                                                                                                                     Store
                         01
                                 30,920     0.71                                      82    36       36   26      26
                         004 -
                                                  Community          Height
WO-182      1520 7th St. 0095-   12,422     0.29              CC-2            375     33     -        -    -       - Surface Parking
                                                  Commercial        Limit:60'
                         014
                         004 -
                                                  Community          Height
WO-182-A    1528 7th St. 0095-    2,471     0.06              CC-2            375      7     -        -    -       - Surface Parking
                                                  Commercial        Limit:60'
                         015
                         004 -
                                                  Community          Height
WO-182-B    1534 7th St. 0095-    2,656     0.06              CC-2            375      7     -        -    -       - Surface Parking
                                                  Commercial        Limit:60'
                         016
                         004 -
                                                  Community          Height
WO-182-C    1546 7th St. 0095-    2,774     0.06              CC-2            375      7     -        -    -       - Surface Parking
                                                  Commercial        Limit:60'
                         017
                                 20,323     0.47                                      54    65       65   31      31
                                                                                                                     Three Story
                         006 -
            707 Peralta                           Community    CC-   Height                                          Building with
WO-183                   0003-    5,666     0.13                              550     10     -        -    -       -
            St.                                   Commercial  2/S-7 Limit:35'                                        Store on 1st
                         018
                                                                                                                     floor
                         006 -
                                                  Community    CC-   Height
WO-183-A    1620 7th St. 0003-   10,136     0.23                              550     18     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                                                  Commercial  2/S-7 Limit:35'
                         019
                         006 -                                                                                       Two Story
                                                  Community    CC-   Height
WO-183-B    1626 7th St. 0003-    1,090     0.03                              550      2     -        -    -       - Office Suite and
                                                  Commercial  2/S-7 Limit:35'
                         020                                                                                         Retail
                         006 -                                                                                       Two Story
                                                  Community    CC-   Height
WO-183-C    1632 7th St. 0003-    5,374     0.12                              550     10     -        -    -       - Office Suite and
                                                  Commercial  2/S-7 Limit:35'
                         021                                                                                         Retail
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                               439
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                 ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                    Max #
                                                 General                              Of       Density
                                                                              Sq.
                                                  Plan             Height            Units (units/acre)     # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone             ft. /
                                               Designation          Area              Per
                                                                             Unit
                                                                                    Zoning Low     High   Low     High
                                                                                2
                                                                             units
                                                                               on
                         006 -
            718                                   Mixed                      Lots
WO-183-D                 0003-  4,406     0.10               RM-2                      2     -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
            Campbell St.                       Housing Type                  4,000
                         023
                                                                             sf or
                                                                             great
                                                                               er
                               26,672     0.61                                        42    51       51    31       31
             th          018-
            5 St. @                                                 Height                                              Underutilized
                         0390-                  Community     S-
WO-184      Mandela (SE        172,255    3.95                     Limit:14   225     766   35       35    138     138  Building and
                         010-                   Commercial   15W
            corner)                                                   0'                                                Surface Parking
                         07
                         006 -
            7th St. b/w
                         0017-                  Community           Height
WO-185      Willow and          4,985     0.11               CC-2             450     11     -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
                         022-                   Commercial         Limit:45'
            Campbell
                         00
                         006 -
                         0017-                  Community           Height
WO-185-A           -            5,944     0.14               CC-2             450     13     -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
                         021-                   Commercial         Limit:45'
                         00
                         006 -
                                                                                                                        Two Story
                         0017-                  Community           Height
WO-185-B           -            5,933     0.14               CC-2             450     13     -        -      -       -  Underutilized
                         020-                   Commercial         Limit:45'
                                                                                                                        Office Building
                         00
                         006 -
                         0017-                  Community           Height
WO-185-C           -            5,718     0.13               CC-2             450     13     -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
                         019-                   Commercial         Limit:45'
                         00
                         006 -
                         0017-                  Community           Height
WO-185-D           -            6,319     0.15               CC-2             450     14     -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
                         018-                   Commercial         Limit:45'
                         00
                               28,899     0.67                                        64    51       51    34       34
440                                                                                             APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                   CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                   Max #
                                                  General                            Of       Density
                                                                             Sq.
                                                   Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres              Zone            ft. /
                                                Designation         Area             Per
                                                                             Unit
                                                                                   Zoning Low     High  Low    High
                          004 -                                                                                     Vacant Land
            355 Mandela   0073-                  Community    S-    Height                                          with Temporary
WO-186                           7,511     0.17                              375     20    67       67   11      11
            Parkway       008-                   Commercial  15W   Limit:60'                                        Storage
                          00                                                                                        Structures
            5th St. & 7th
                          004-
            St. b/t                              Community    S-    Height
WO-187                    0077- 98,977     2.27                              375     264   23       23   52      52 Surface Parking
            Chester &                            Commercial  15W   Limit:60'
                          003
            Mandela
            7th St. b/t   004-
                                                 Community          Height                                          Two Story
WO-188      Henry &       0097-  5,033     0.12              CC-2            450     11     -        -    -       -
                                                 Commercial        Limit:45'                                        Building
            Peralta)      009
                          004-
                                                 Community          Height                                          Commercial
WO-188-A            -     0097-  5,079     0.12              CC-2            450     11     -        -    -       -
                                                 Commercial        Limit:45'                                        Building
                          010
                          004-
                                                 Community          Height                                          Two Story
WO-188-B            -     0097-  2,773     0.06              CC-2            450      6     -        -    -       -
                                                 Commercial        Limit:45'                                        Building
                          011
                          004-
                                                 Community          Height                                          Two Story
WO-188-C            -     0097-  2,092     0.05              CC-2            450      5     -        -    -       -
                                                 Commercial        Limit:45'                                        Building
                          012
                          004-
                                                 Community          Height
WO-188-D            -     0097-  2,092     0.05              CC-2            450      5     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                                                 Commercial        Limit:45'
                          013
                          004-
                                                 Community          Height
WO-188-E            -     0097-  2,093     0.05              CC-2            450      5     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                                                 Commercial        Limit:45'
                          014
                          004-
                                                 Community          Height
WO-188-F            -     0097-  3,238     0.07              CC-2            450      7     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                                                 Commercial        Limit:45'
                          015
                                22,400     0.52                                      50    24       24   12      12
            7318          040-
**COL-                                           Community
            International 3317-  3,688     0.08              CC-2   Height           13    40       60   3        5 Vacant Land
198                                              Commercial
            Blvd.         032                                      Limit:75' 275
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                             441
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                   Max #
                                                 General                             Of       Density
                                                                             Sq.
                                                   Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)     # Of Units   Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation          Area             Per
                                                                             Unit
                                                                                   Zoning Low     High   Low     High
                         002-
                                                  Central
            1260 M L     0027-                               CBD-   Height                                             Structured
**DJL-199                        140      0.00   Business                     90      2     -        -      -       -
            King Jr Way  006-                                  C    Area 4                                             Parking
                                                  District
                         03
                         002-
                                                  Central
**DJL-                   0027-                               CBD-   Height                                             Structured
                               78,055     1.79   Business                     90     867    -        -      -       -
199-A                    006-                                  C    Area 4                                             Parking
                                                  District
                         05
                               78,195     1.79                                       869   45       65     81     117
                         008-                     Central
                                                             CBD-   Height
**DJL-200   William St.  0716- 54,867     1.26   Business                     90     610    -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
                                                               R    Area 4
                         054                      District
                         008-                     Central
**DJL-                                                       CBD-   Height
            20th St.     0716- 73,877     1.70   Business                     90     821    -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
200-A                                                          R    Area 4
                         056                      District
                               128,744    2.96                                      1,430 150      180    444     533
                         008-
                                                  Central
                         0620-                               CBD-   Height                                             Structured
**DJL-201   524 16th St.        6,439     0.15   Business                     90      72  150      180     23      27
                         009-                                  C    Area 7                                             Parking
                                                  District
                         03
                         002-
                                                  Central
            1111         0051-                               CBD-   Height                                             Structured
**DJL-202                      37,920     0.87   Business                     90     421  150      180    131     157
            Franklin     013-                                  C    Area 7                                             Parking
                                                  District
                         01
                         002-                     Central
                                                             CBD-   Height                                             Structured
**DJL-203   9th St.      0101- 13,406     0.31   Business                     90     149  150      180     47      56
                                                             P/CH   Area 4                                             Parking
                         001                      District
            5859         038-                  Neighborhood
                                                                    Height
**ETC-204   Foothill     3182-  2,644     0.06 Center Mixed  CN-3            450      6     -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
                                                                   Limit:45'
            Blvd.        001                       Use
            5835         038-                  Neighborhood
**ETC-                                                              Height
            Foothill     3182-  2,543     0.06 Center Mixed  CN-3            450      6     -        -      -       -  Vacant Land
204-A                                                              Limit:45'
            Blvd.        024                       Use
442                                                                                            APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                   Max #
                                                 General                             Of       Density
                                                                             Sq.
                                                   Plan            Height           Units (units/acre)   # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location    APN   Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone            ft. /
                                               Designation          Area             Per
                                                                             Unit
                                                                                   Zoning Low     High  Low    High
            5847        038-                   Neighborhood
**ETC-                                                              Height
            Foothill    3182-   3,781     0.09 Center Mixed  CN-3            450      8     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
204-B                                                              Limit:45'
            Blvd.       025                        Use
            5851        038-                   Neighborhood
**ETC-                                                              Height
            Foothill    3182-   2,247     0.05 Center Mixed  CN-3            450      5     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
204-C                                                              Limit:45'
            Blvd.       026                        Use
                               11,215     0.26                                       25    40       60   10      16
              rd
            73 Ave &    039-
                                                Community           Height
**ETC-205   Foothill    3291-  53,155     1.22               CC-1            375     142   40       60   49      73 Vacant Land
                                                Commercial         Limit:60'
            Blvd        020
            8280        043A-                                                                                       Underutilized
                                                  Urban             Height
**ETC-206   MacArthur   4644-   6,722     0.15               RU-4            450      15    -        -    -       - residential
                                                Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.       026                                                                                         Building
            8296        043A-                                                                                       Underutilized
**ETC-                                            Urban             Height
            MacArthur   4644-   6,368     0.15               RU-4            450     14     -        -    -       - residential
206-A                                           Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.       028                                                                                         Building
                               13,090     0.30                                       29    14       28   4        8
            3614        032-
                                                  Urban             Height
**FDA-207   Foothill    2084-   5,015     0.12               RU-5            450      11    -        -    -       - Vacant Land
                                                Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.       050
                        032-
            3566
**FDA-                  2115-                     Urban             Height
            Foothill            6,474     0.15               RU-5            450     14     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
207-A                   037-                    Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                        01
                        032-
            3550
**FDA-                  2115-                     Urban             Height
            Foothill           11,375     0.26               RU-5            450     25     -        -    -       - Vacant Land
207-B                   038-                    Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                        01
                               22,864     0.98                                       94    40       60   39      59
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                             443
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                    CURRENT ZONING                 ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                     Max #
                                                  General                              Of       Density
                                                                               Sq.
                                                    Plan            Height            Units (units/acre)    # Of Units   Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone             ft. /
                                                Designation          Area              Per
                                                                              Unit
                                                                                     Zoning Low     High   Low    High
                          025-
            2759
                          0733-                    Urban             Height
**FDA-208   Foothill             2,092     0.05               RU-5             450      5    40       60     2       3   Vacant Land
                          008-                   Residential        Limit:45'
            Blvd.
                          03
                          025-
            3050
                          0719-                  Community           Height
**FDA-209   International       32,484     0.75               CC-2             275     118   40       60    30      45   Vacant Land
                          007-                   Commercial         Limit:75'
            Blvd.
                          01
                          .033-
            3229 San      2186-                 Housing and   HBX-
**FDA-210                        9,138     0.21                               1,000     9     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
            Leandro St.   003-                  Business Mix    1
                          01
                          033-
**FDA-      3301 San      2187-                 Housing and   HBX-
                                14,546     0.33                               1,000    15     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
210-A       Leandro St.   003-                  Business Mix    1
                          01
                                23,684     0.54                                         24   40       40    22      22
            9409          044-                  Neighborhood                                                             Two Story
**PPDA-                                                              Height
            International 4967-  6,364     0.15 Center Mixed  CN-3             375      17    -        -     -       -   Commercial
211                                                                 Limit:60'
            Blvd.         002                       Use                                                                  Building
            9415          044-                  Neighborhood                                                             Two Story
**PPDA-                                                              Height
            International 4967-  5,183     0.12 Center Mixed  CN-3             375      14    -        -     -       -   Commercial
211-A                                                               Limit:60'
            Blvd.         003                       Use                                                                  Building
                          044-
**PPDA-     1361 95th     4967-                    Mixed             Height
                                 3,151     0.07               CN-3             375      8     -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
211-B       Ave           004-                  Housing Type        Limit:60'
                          02
                          044-
            9423                                Neighborhood
**PPDA-                   4967-                                      Height
            International        5,041     0.12 Center Mixed  CN-3             375      13    -        -     -       -   Vacant Land
211-C                     004-                                      Limit:60'
            Blvd.                                   Use
                          03
            9431          044-                  Neighborhood                                                             One Story
**PPDA-                                                              Height
            International 4967-  2,519     0.06 Center Mixed  CN-3             375      7     -        -     -       -   Underutilized
211-D                                                               Limit:60'
            Blvd.         005                       Use                                                                  Building
444                                                                                              APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                               Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                      CURRENT ZONING                 ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                      Max #
                                                    General                             Of        Density
                                                                                Sq.
                                                      Plan            Height           Units  (units/acre)   # Of Units    Existing Use
  Site#      Location      APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres                 Zone            ft. /
                                                  Designation          Area             Per
                                                                                Unit
                                                                                      Zoning  Low     High  Low     High
                          044-
            9437                                  Neighborhood                                                             One Story
**PPDA-                   4967-                                        Height
            International        5,040      0.12  Center Mixed  CN-3            375      13     -        -    -        -   Underutilized
211-E                     007-                                        Limit:60'
            Blvd.                                     Use                                                                  Building
                          01
                          044-
**PPDA-                                              Mixed             Height                                              Surface Parking
            95th Ave      4967-  1,711      0.04                CN-3            375      5      -        -    -        -
211-F                                             Housing Type        Limit:60'                                            Lot
                          009
                                29,009      0.68                                         77    45       65   31       44
 TOTALS                         4,940,420  113.84                                      24,057              10,032   11,469
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                                    445
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
OPPORTUNITY SITES ZONED UNDER 30 UNITS PER ACRE
                                                            Table C-6
                                         Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION          SITE SIZE                      CURRENT ZONING                ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                       Max #
                                                 General                                 Of     Density
                                                  Plan              Height   Sq. ft. /  Units (units/acre)  # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN  Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone                        Per
                                               Designation           Area      Unit
                                                                                       Zoning Low     High Low    High
                         004 -                                                 1 unit
            1115         0033-                    Mixed       RM-           /2,500 sq.
DJL-189                        10,418     0.24                                            4    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a Vacant Land
            Adeline St.  007-                  Housing Type  2/S-20            ft. of
                         00                                                      lot
                         040A-                                                 1 unit
            7526-7540                             Mixed
                         3409-                                              /1,500 sq.
ETC-190     MacArthur          46,945     1.08 Housing Type  RM-3                        31    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a Vacant Land
                         001-                                                  ft. of
            Blvd.                               Residential
                         13                                                      lot
                         022 -                                                 1 unit
            2533 23rd
                         0351-                    Mixed                     /2,500 sq.
OPDA-191    Avenue and          9,375     0.22               RM-2                         4    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a Vacant Land
                         061-                  Housing Type                    ft. of
            E. 26th
                         00                                                      lot
                         021 -                                                 1 unit                                  Vacant Land
            1951 23rd    0248-                    Urban       RM-           /1,500 sf.                                 with a
PPDA-192                        9,113     0.21                                            6    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a
            Avenue       008-                   Residential   3/C                of                                    Temporary
                         01                                                      lot                                   structure
                                                                             1 unit on
                         021 -
                                                                                lots
            2057 23rd    0252-                    Urban       RM-
PPDA-193                        3,450     0.08                               less than    1    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a Vacant Land
            Avenue       001-                   Residential   3/C
                                                                               4,000
                         00
                                                                               sq. ft.
                         003 -
                                                                               1 unit
                      th 0055-                  Community     RM-
WO-194      2948 17 St.        11,528     0.26                              /1,500 sq.    8    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a Vacant Land
                         024-                   Commercial   3/S-20
                                                                                 ft.
                         01
                                                                             1 unit on
            7th St. b/t  004 -                                                                                         Vacant Land
                                                Community                     lot less
WO-195      Chester &    0079-  2,583     0.06               RM-2                         1    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a and One Story
                                                Commercial                 than 4,000
            Center       010                                                                                           Store
                                                                               sq. ft.
446                                                                                            APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table C-6
                                          Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
     SITE IDENTIFICATION           SITE SIZE                      CURRENT ZONING                 ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                         Max #
                                                  General                                  Of     Density
                                                   Plan              Height   Sq. ft. /   Units (units/acre)  # Of Units  Existing Use
  Site#      Location     APN   Sq. Ft.   Acres               Zone                         Per
                                                Designation           Area      Unit
                                                                                         Zoning Low     High Low    High
                                                                              1 unit on
                         004 -
                                                 Community                     lot less
WO-195-A          -      0079-   2,204     0.05               RM-2                          1    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a Vacant Land
                                                 Commercial                 than 4,000
                         011
                                                                                sq. ft.
                                 4,787     0.11                                             2    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a
            7th St. b/t   006 -                                                 1 unit
                                                 Community
WO-196      Campbell &   0003-   5,006     0.11               RM-2           /2,500 sq.     2    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a Vacant Land
                                                 Commercial
            Peralta        017                                                ft. of lot
                                                                              1 unit on
                         004-                                                    lots
                                                   Mixed                                                                 Two Story
WO-197            -      0097-   3,312     0.08               RM-2            less than     1    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a
                                                Housing Type                                                             Building
                         016                                                    4,000
                                                                                sq. ft.
                         004-
                                                                             1 primary                                   One Story
             th          0007-                     Urban
**WO-212    8 St.               12,594     0.29               RM-1             unit per     1    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a Building and
                         001-                    Residential
                                                                                  lot                                    Parking Lot
                         01
                                                                              1 unit on
                                                                                 lots
                                                                              less than
                                                                                4,000
                                                                            sf; 2 units
                                                                                  on
                         005-                                               lots 4,000
            1606                                   Urban       RM-
**WO-213                 0387-   1,510     0.03                               sq. ft. or    1    n/a     n/a  n/a    n/a Vacant Land
            Chestnut St.                         Residential  2/S-20
                         014                                                   greater.
                                                                              For 3 or
                                                                                more
                                                                               units, 1
                                                                               unit per
                                                                              2,500 sq.
                                                                              ft. of lot
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                                  447
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                           Table C-6
                                                    Additional Housing Opportunity Sites
      SITE IDENTIFICATION                   SITE SIZE                            CURRENT ZONING                             ESTIMATED BUILD-OUT
                                                                                                               Max #
                                                               General                                            Of         Density
                                                                Plan                  Height       Sq. ft. /    Units      (units/acre)   # Of Units Existing Use
   Site#       Location       APN        Sq. Ft.    Acres                     Zone                               Per
                                                             Designation                Area          Unit
                                                                                                               Zoning      Low     High  Low    High
                                                                                                   1 unit on
                                                                                                       lots
                                                                                                   less than
                                                                                                     4,000
                                                                                                   sq. ft.; 2
                                                                                                    units on
                             005-                                                                 lots 4,000
**WO-        1608                                               Urban         RM-
                             0387-        1,510      0.03                                          sq. ft. or      1       n/a     n/a    n/a    n/a Vacant Land
213-A        Chestnut St                                      Residential    2/S-20
                             015                                                                    greater.
                                                                                                   For 3 or
                                                                                                      more
                                                                                                    units, 1
                                                                                                    unit per
                                                                                                   2,500 sq.
                                                                                                   ft. of lot
                                          3,020      0.06                                                          2       n/a     n/a    n/a    n/a
                                                                                                  For 1 — 4
                                                                                                    units, 1
                                                                                                    unit per
                             025-
                                                                                                   1,100 sq.
                             0720-                            Community                                                                              Surface Parking
**FDA-214    Derby Street                 9,034      0.21                     RM-4                 ft. of lot;     8       n/a     n/a    n/a    n/a
                             002-                             Commercial                                                                             Lot
                                                                                                    only on
                             01
                                                                                                  lots 4,000
                                                                                                   sq. ft. or
                                                                                                    greater
 TOTALS                                 128,582      2.95                                                         70
* Based on Appendix A: Lake Merritt Station Area Plan Development Potential, Lake Merritt Station Area Plan Public Draft Review December 2012
** Based on Oakland Redevelopment Successor Agency’s (“ORSA”) Long Range Property Management Plan
448                                                                                                                         APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY

                                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                          HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                          Table C-6-a
                              Housing Opportunity Sites on the Local Register
                                        or in Historic Preservation Districts
                                                                              S-7 or S-20
         Address                APN          Current Improvement      API                      OCHS rating
                                                                                 zone
8th and Washington
                         001 -0201-008      Vacant                     x           x       n/a
(468 8th St.)
9th St. (near Jefferson) 001 -0211-004      Surface parking            x                   n/a
587 E 11th St.           002 -0035-005-02   Commercial, Parking lots   x                   n/a
13th/14th/Webster/Frankl                                                                   n/a
                         002 -0055-001      Parking structure          x
in
2948 17th St.            003 -0055-024-01   Vacant                                 x       n/a
1601 San Pablo Ave       003 -0065-002-00   Commercial, parking lots   x                   *1-
1115 Adeline St.         004 -0033-007-00   Surface parking lot                    x       n/a
1230 14th St.            005 -0377-019-01   Vacant gas station                     x       *3
1158 14th St.            005 -0378-017-01   Vacant, residential land               x       n/a
1431 Franklin St.        008 -0621-008-07   Surface parking lot        x                   n/a
1429 Alice St.           008 -0626-017-00   Commercial, parking lots   x                   n/a
1431 Jackson St.         008 -0627-015-01   Surface parking lot        x                   n/a
585 22nd St.             008 -0647-028-04   Commercial, parking lots   x                   n/a
1118 East 12th St.
(heritage property       020 -0118-013-00   Commercial                             x       Ca1+
demolished)
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                                 449
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                          Figure C-1
                    Priority Development Areas-Planning Area Boundary Map
450                                                                APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                               CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                          Figure C-2
             Market Rate Developments- Completed, Approved and Pre-development as
                                         of April 2014
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                           451
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                          Figure C-3
                       Market Rate Developments Central City Completed,
                                Approved and Pre-development
452                                                                APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                            HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                  Figure C-4
                             Affordable Housing Developments in Pre-development
                                        and Acquisition as of April 2014
APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY                                                                 453
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                           Figure C-5
                         Opportunity Sites for Residential Development
454                                                                  APPENDIX C: DETAILED SITE INVENTORY
                                                                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY
                                                                  Table D-1
                                              Housing Rehabilitation Programs
       NAME            PURPOSE           MAXIMUM             LOAN TERM           ELIGIBILITY/APPLICANT             PROPERTY             COMMENTS
1. HOME              To provide       Deferred loan:     No periodic             To be eligible applicants must  Owner-occupied      The primary purpose
   MAINTENANCE       loans to correct $75,000 for        payments and loan       be low or moderate income       single-family       of this loan is to
                     health and
   AND                                single family unit will be paid upon the   Oakland property owners         dwelling or up to   correct code
                     safety
   IMPROVEMENT       violations,      and $5,000 for     sale or transfer of     living in the unit to be        four units. One-    violations, but other
   PROGRAM (HMIP)    abate code       each additional    title of property or if rehabilitated or repaired.      unit structures     home maintenance
   (510) 238-3909    deficiencies     unit, up to four   property ceases to be                                   must be occupied    needs can be
                     and repair       units.             owner-occupied; 0%      0% Deferred loan:               by low- to          financed. May
                     major systems                       interest rate for low                                   moderate-income     include access
                                                                                 Annual Household Income
                     in danger of     Amortized loan:    income and 3%                                           households.         modifications.
                     failure.                                                    cannot exceed 50% of the
                                                         interest rate for                                       Two-unit
                                      $75,000 or the                             established for Alameda
                                                         moderate income                                         structures must
                                      cost of                                    County.
                                                         households. Loan is                                     have at least one
                                      rehabilitation,
                                                         secured by a Deed of                                    unit occupied by
                                      whichever is less.                         3% Deferred loan:
                                                         Trust.                                                  a low-moderate
                                                                                 Annual Household Income         income
                                                                                 cannot exceed 80% of the        household.
                                                                                 established for Alameda         Three-to-Four
                                                                                 County.                         unit structures
                                                                                                                 must have at
                                                                                                                 least 51% of the
                                                                                                                 units occupied by
                                                                                                                 low-moderate
                                                                                                                 income
                                                                                                                 households.
                                                                                                                 Located in one of
                                                                                                                 the Seven
                                                                                                                 Community
                                                                                                                 Development
                                                                                                                 Districts.
APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY                                                                                                                   455
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table D-1
                                             Housing Rehabilitation Programs
        NAME           PURPOSE         MAXIMUM           LOAN TERM     ELIGIBILITY/APPLICANT              PROPERTY            COMMENTS
2.  MINOR HOME       To provide     Maximum grant      Grant           Homeowners who are 62 years      Owner-occupied    The program is
    REPAIR           grants for     is $2,499 or                       or older or for people with      and located in    administered
    PROGRAM          emergency      actual cost of                     disabilities and not exceed      one of the Seven  through the County
    (Alameda County) home repairs   repairs,                           50% of the area median           Community         of Alameda.
    (510) 670-5398   for            whichever is less.                 income.                          Development
                     homeowners.                                                                        Districts.
3.  ACCESS           To provide     Grants of up to    Grant           Property owners of existing      1 to 4 unit       Grant funds may
    IMPROVEMENT      grants for     $15,000 or up to                   owner-occupied or rental         properties if     only be used for
    PROGRAM          accessibility  $24,000 with lift.                 housing.                         owner occupied.   accessibility
    (510) 238-3909   modifications  A maximum                          Property owners of new           Property must be  modifications to
                     for rental and grant of $4,000                    construction housing projects.   located in one of accommodate
                     owner occupied per unit or                        Family income cannot exceed      the 7 Community   wheelchairs, to
                     properties.    $16,000 per                        80% of the area median           Development       install a lift or ramp,
                                    property is                        income.                          Districts. The    and to undertake
                                    available                                                           property must be  other related access
                                    toward constructi                                                   in compliance     repairs. Property
                                    on                                                                  with health and   owner agrees to the
                                    of new accessible                                                   safety codes.     removal of
                                    units.                                                                                architectural barriers
                                                                                                                          and to rent property
                                                                                                                          to tenants with
                                                                                                                          disabilities for 5
                                                                                                                          years. Owner
                                                                                                                          occupied residents
                                                                                                                          must agree to
                                                                                                                          continue to reside in
                                                                                                                          unit.
456                                                                                             APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY
                                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                              Table D-1
                                            Housing Rehabilitation Programs
       NAME            PURPOSE         MAXIMUM           LOAN TERM         ELIGIBILITY/APPLICANT              PROPERTY             COMMENTS
4. EMERGENCY         Provides loan   Up to $15,000    No interest; no      Borrowers must be Oakland        1 to 4 unit         Loan funds can only
   HOME REPAIR       funds for home                   monthly payments.    property owners living in the    properties. Must    be used for
   PROGRAM           repairs that                     Loan will be paid    unit to be rehabilitated.        have a citation     emergencies such as
   (510) 238-3909    threaten the                     upon the sale or     Applicant’s annual household     issued by a Fire    roof , sewer,
                     health and                       transfer of title of income cannot exceed 50% of      Marshall, Health    electrical or
                     safety of the                    property. Secured    area median income.              Officer or Code     plumbing repairs, or
                     occupants.                       by Deed of Trust.                                     Enforcement         other major
                                                                                                            Officer.            mechanical system
                                                                                                                                problems that have
                                                                                                                                been or can be
                                                                                                                                verified by a health
                                                                                                                                and/or safety
                                                                                                                                official.
5. LEAD SAFE         To address lead Varies (based on Grant                Owner-occupied properties.       Property must be    Grant funds can only
   HOUSING AND       paint hazards   property).                            Borrower household income        located in one of   be used for exterior
   PAINT PROGRAM     and code                                              shall not exceed 50% area        the 7 Community     and interior painting
   (510) 238-3909    violations for                                        median income; Families with     Development         or soil lead hazard
                     deteriorated                                          children under age 6 may have    Districts. 1 to 4   abatement.
                     exterior paint                                        household income of up to        unit residential
                     of owner                                              80% area median income.          properties.
                     occupied                                              Must meet ONE of the
                     homes.                                                following: the head of
                                                                           household must be at least 62
                                                                           years of age; OR the resident
                                                                           has a physical disability that
                                                                           prevents him/her from doing
                                                                           the painting; OR a child under
                                                                           6 resides or visits frequently;
                                                                           OR an expectant mother
                                                                           resides at the property.
APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY                                                                                                             457

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table D-1
                                          Housing Rehabilitation Programs
        NAME         PURPOSE         MAXIMUM         LOAN TERM            ELIGIBILITY/APPLICANT               PROPERTY             COMMENTS
6.  NEIGHBORHOOD   Provides        Up to $150,000 0% interest if sold to  Borrowers must be                 Single-family      In general, loan
    HOUSING        financial       per property   a first-time            individuals, not partnerships,    dwelling or 1 to 4 funds are to be used
                   assistance to                                                                                               to cover the repair
    REVITALIZATION                                homebuyer with          corporations or non-profit        unit residential
                   correct code                                                                                                costs and related
    PROGRAM (NHRP)                                income less than        organizations. Borrowers must     building. Must be
                   violations and                                                                                              development costs
    (510) 238-3909 to eliminate                   120% of area            have title to the property at the vacant, blighted   associated with
                   safety and                     median. 10% simple      time of application. Borrowers    and have one or    repairing properties
                   health hazards.                interest if sold to any who are licensed contractors      more major code    to comply with code.
                                                  other household or      must agree to abide by the City   violations.        Loan funds must
                                                  maintained as rental    of Oakland Living Wage            Property must be   first be used to
                                                  property. No            Ordinance. Borrowers must         located in one of  correct code
                                                  periodic payments.      demonstrate credit worthiness,    the seven          violations necessary
                                                  Loan term is 24         financial capacity, and relevant  Community          to receive building
                                                                                                                               services approval.
                                                  months. Payments        past experience to undertake      Development
                                                                                                                               All work must be
                                                  are deferred with       the rehabilitation project.       Districts.
                                                                                                                               under the
                                                  principal and                                                                supervision of a
                                                  accrued interest due                                                         licensed general
                                                  and payable on or                                                            contractor in good
                                                  before expiration of                                                         standing with
                                                  the loan term.                                                               Contractors State
                                                  Secured by Deed of                                                           License Board
                                                  Trust.                                                                       (CSLB). The
                                                                                                                               proposed project
                                                                                                                               must meet the
                                                                                                                               Performance
                                                                                                                               Standards and
                                                                                                                               Specifications for
                                                                                                                               the Housing
                                                                                                                               Rehabilitation
                                                                                                                               Programs of the City
                                                                                                                               of Oakland and must
                                                                                                                               meet all applicable
                                                                                                                               building codes,
                                                                                                                               housing and
                                                                                                                               planning standards.
458                                                                                                APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY
                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                        Table D-1
                                            Housing Rehabilitation Programs
       NAME            PURPOSE         MAXIMUM       LOAN TERM    ELIGIBILITY/APPLICANT           PROPERTY          COMMENTS
7. WEATHERIZATIO     Provides loans  Up to $30,000 Loan           Oakland property owners       1 to 4 unit     Loan funds can only
   N AND ENERGY      for                                          living in the dwelling to be  properties      be used for a base
                     weatherization                                                                             energy efficiency
   RETROFIT                                                       modified. Borrower income     located in
                     services,                                                                                  package of
   PROGRAM                                                        cannot exceed 80% of area     Oakland.
                     including                                                                                  improvements such
   (510) 238-3909    baseline energy                              median income.                                as attic insulation,
                     efficiency                                                                                 caulking, weather-
                     upgrades                                                                                   stripping, water
                                                                                                                heater insulation,
                                                                                                                energy efficient light
                                                                                                                fixtures, furnace
                                                                                                                maintenance and
                                                                                                                energy saving
                                                                                                                appliances, as well
                                                                                                                as systems
                                                                                                                rehabilitation and
                                                                                                                replacement,
                                                                                                                included systems are
                                                                                                                the roof, furnace,
                                                                                                                windows, doors and
                                                                                                                water heater.
APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY                                                                                              459
 CITY OF O AKL AND
 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                           Table D-2
                                           First Time Homebuyer Programs
        NAME         PURPOSE         MAXIMUM           LOAN TERM         ELIGIBILITY/APPLICANT          PROPERTY         COMMENTS
8.  FIRST-TIME     To assist low  Loan amount is   No payments while    First-time homebuyers with    Single-family   In conjunction with
    HOMEBUYERS     and moderate   up to $75,000    the homebuyer lives  income at or below 100% of    dwellings only. participating
    MORTGAGE       income, first- for households   in the home. 3%      area median income.                           lenders, the City of
    ASSISTANCE     time           under 80% of     annual simple        Borrowers must be owner-      Must be owner-  Oakland offers free
    PROGRAM (MAP)  homebuyers to  AMI; and up to   interest due when    occupants.                    occupied.       Home Buyer
    (510) 238-6201 purchase       $50,000 for      loan is repaid.                                                    Education
                   homes in the   households       Loan is due in 30                                                  Workshops for
                   City of        between 80% -                                                       Property may be first-time
                                                   years OR when
                   Oakland.       100% of AMI.                                                        located         homebuyers.
                                                   borrower sells,
                                  In both cases,                                                      anywhere within
                                                   transfers,
                                  loan is not to                                                      the City of
                                                   refinances, or rents                                               Buyers must
                                  exceed 20% of                                                       Oakland.
                                                   the property. Loan                                                 contribute 3% of
                                  purchase price.  is secured with a                                                  the purchase price
                                                   Deed of Trust.                                     Purchase price  from their own
                                                                                                      cannot exceed   funds to pay for
                                                                                                      $450,000        down payment or
                                                                                                                      closing costs.
 460                                                                                         APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY
                                                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                               Table D-3
                                              Housing Development Programs
        NAME            PURPOSE          MAXIMUM            LOAN TERM          ELIGIBILITY/APPLICANT           PROPERTY           COMMENTS
9. AFFORDABLE         To provide     Up to 40% of       3% simple interest.  Non-profit and for-profit      Rental or         Funds are allocated
   HOUSING NEW        gap financing  total residential                       affordable housing             ownership         through annual
   CONSTRUCTION &     for affordable development        Rental projects:     developers, individuals, and   property          competitive funding
   SUBSTANTIAL        rental and     costs (50% for     55 year term,        general or limited             intended for      rounds.
   REHABILITATION     ownership      homeownership      payments deferred    partnerships. Applicants       occupancy by
                                     projects), as      except to the extent must demonstrate experience    lower income
   LOAN PROGRAM       housing                                                                                                 Eligible uses for
                                     approved by the    that they can be     and capacity in the            households.
   (510) 238-3502     development.                                                                                            City financing
                                     City.              paid from excess     development and
                                                        cash flow from the   management of affordable                         include acquisition,
                                                                                                            City-assisted
                                     For mixed-         project.             rental or ownership housing,   units must be     demolition,
                                     income or                               generally shown by the         occupied by       construction,
                                     mixed-use          Ownership            successful development of at   households that   rehabilitation,
                                     projects,          projects:            least three similar projects.  fit the income    related soft costs,
                                     assistance is      construction loan                                   guidelines.       and other costs as
                                     limited to 40%     for 48 months (4                                                      approved by the
                                     of the total costs years). Payments                                                      City.
                                                                             Funds are not disbursed        Owner-
                                     of the affordable  deferred until loan  without proof of financing                       Substantial other
                                                                                                            occupied
                                     housing portion    is due. Upon sale    commitments for total                            requirements apply.
                                     of the project.                                                        properties
                                                        of units, a portion  development cost.                                Details are
                                                                                                            cannot be         available in the
                                                        of the subsidy
                                                        converts to a grant                                 sublet.           most recent Notice
                                                        to write down the                                                     Of Funds
                                                        price to an                                                           Available.
                                                        affordable level.
APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY                                                                                                           461
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table D-3
                                           Housing Development Programs
         NAME        PURPOSE          MAXIMUM            LOAN TERM          ELIGIBILITY/APPLICANT           PROPERTY         COMMENTS
10. EXISTING       To provide     Maximum            3% simple            Property owners of existing    Rental property Funds are allocated
    AFFORDABLE     gap financing  income limits are  interest. Rental     affordable rental housing      intended for    through annual
    RENTAL HOUSING for capital    60% AMI. City      project: 55 year     developments that are at least occupancy by    competitive funding
    PRESERVATION   needs and      can provide up to  term, payments       10 years old, have City loans, lower income    rounds.
    AND            reserves for   100% of total      deferred except to   and still have a City          households.
                                  residential        the extent that they regulatory agreement in
    REHABILITATION existing                                                                                              Eligible uses for
                                  development        can be paid from     place. Applicants must         City-assisted
    LOAN PROGRAM   affordable                                                                                            City financing
                                  costs, as          excess cash flow     demonstrate experience and     units must be
    (510) 238-3502 rental housing                                                                                        include acquisition
                                  approved by the    from the project.    capacity in the development    occupied by
                   developments   City. However,                                                                         (on a case by case
                                                                          and management of              households that
                   that were      scope of work                                                                          basis),
                                                                          affordable rental housing.     fit the income
                   previously     must meet                                                                              rehabilitation,
                                                                                                         guidelines.
                   funded by the  urgency of needs                                                                       related soft costs,
                   City and that                                          Funds are not disbursed
                                  criteria in the                                                                        capitalized
                   have City                                              without proof of financing
                                  program                                                                                reserves, and other
                   regulatory                                             commitments for total
                                  guidelines.                                                                            costs as approved
                   agreements                                             development cost.
                                  All other internal                                                                     by the City.
                   secured        (refinancing of
                   against the    existing loans or
                   properties.    use of reserves)                                                                       Substantial other
                                  and external                                                                           requirements apply.
                                  financing                                                                              Details are
                                  sources must be                                                                        available in the
                                  used to the                                                                            most recent Notice
                                  extent feasible or                                                                     Of Funds Available
                                  available prior to                                                                     (NOFA).
                                  determination of
                                  the City subsidy
                                  amount.
462                                                                                             APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY
                                                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                             Table D-3
                                             Housing Development Programs
         NAME           PURPOSE          MAXIMUM          LOAN TERM          ELIGIBILITY/APPLICANT            PROPERTY             COMMENTS
11. PREDEVELOPMENT    To provide     $35,000 per      18 months at 6%      Nonprofit organizations with     Projects must     Eligible uses:
    LOAN PROGRAM      loans to non-  project          interest rate.       stable administrative structure  be located in     Appraisal fees,
    (510) 238-3502    profit housing (citywide) or    Payment of           and previous housing             Oakland and       financial packaging
                      developers to  $75,000 per      principal and        development experience.          have at least     fees, preliminary
                      cover pre-     project (Central Interest deferred    Applicants must secure           40% of units      architectural design
                      development    District), but   until receipt of     funding from other non-City      ear-marketed      work, engineering
                      costs          actual amount is project financing or sources for an amount equal      for households    fees, fees for toxics
                      (feasibility   limited to       the end of the 18-   to one-half the requested loan   with incomes      and asbestos
                      analyses and   amount needed    month period. Loan   amount.                          below 80% area    assessment studies,
                      preparation of to prepare       secured by Deed of                                    median income.    legal fees, permit
                      loan           applications for Trust on real                                         Both owner-       fees, consultant
                      applications)  projects         property,                                             occupied and      fees, option
                      and to cover   financing.       Unsecured loans                                       rental.           agreements,
                      costs of                        may be granted                                                          syndication
                      preparing                       where the borrower                                                      expenses,
                      projects for                    does not have any                                                       title/recording/escro
                      syndication.                    resources to secure                                                     w charges.
                                                      the loan.
APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY                                                                                                           463
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                               Table D-4
                                   Miscellaneous Housing Programs and Services
                  NAME                                                                   PURPOSE
12. COMMUNITY HOUSING SERVICES         The Community Housing Services Section of the Human Services Department administers programs that assist
    (510) 986-2721                     the homeless community in transitioning from homelessness to permanent and permanent supportive housing
                                       through the City’s Permanent Access to Housing (PATH) Strategy, outreach programs, Supportive Housing
                                       Programs, Housing for People With AIDS program, Hunger Programs and other support services to the
                                       homeless and low-income populations of Oakland.
13. FAIR HOUSING SERVICES              The city provides funding to four non-profit organizations for Fair Housing and housing related services: Eden
                                       Council for Hope and Opportunity (ECHO-Fair Housing), Causa Justa: Just Cause (CJJC), East Bay
    Dial : 2-1-1
                                       Community Law Center (EBCLC), and Centro Legal de la Raza (CLR). ECHO offers assistance with Fair
    ECHO: (510) 496-0496               Housing issues and investigates legal remedies for housing discrimination. The other organizations offer
    CJJC: (510) 836-2687 (“TENANTS”)   counseling and legal assistance to low income tenants and landlords for housing-related issues.
    EBCLC: (510) 548-4040
    CLR: (510) 437-1554
14. FORECLOSURE COUNSELING AND         Housing and Economic Rights Advocates (HERA) provides housing counseling and legal services for
    PREVENTION                         homeowners in foreclosure.
    HERA: (510) 271-8443
15. HOME PRESERVATION LOAN FUND        The Unity Council in in contract with the City of Oakland to provide up to $50,000 in forgivable loan funds for
    Unity Council: (510) 535-6943      distressed homeowners.
16. HOUSING ASSISTANCE CENTER          The City of Oakland’s Housing Assistance Center provides one-stop housing services and referrals, including
    (510) 238-6182                     accessing housing services and homeless & shelter placements.
464                                                                                                   APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY

                                                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                                    Table D-4
                                                Miscellaneous Housing Programs and Services
                       NAME                                                                                    PURPOSE
17. RENT ADJUSTMENT PROGRAM                              The Rent Adjustment Program administers a legal mechanism to prevent unreasonable residential rent increases,
     (510) 238-3721                                      and arbitrary evictions without unduly affecting a landlord’s rate of return on investment. It also works to
                                                         encourage open communication and to foster a climate of understanding between Oakland landlords and
                                                         tenants. If a landlord increases rents by more than the allowed annual adjustment, or more than once in a 12
                                                         month period, or provides decreased or inadequate services, the tenant may file a petition with the Rent
                                                         Adjustment Program. In most cases, tenants have 60 days to file after receiving a written notice or rent increase
                                                         from their landlord. Upon receipt of the petition, a staff member notifies the landlord of the tenant’s
                                                         complaint. Landlords are required to bring supportive information showing justification for the additional
                                                         increase. The justifications that will establish rental increases above the annual rental increase limits are: 1)
                                                         capital improvement costs; 2) increased housing service costs; 3) past history of rent increases; 4) uninsured
                                                         casualty losses; and 5) inadequate rate of return on investment. The Housing, Residential Rent, and Relocation
                                                         Board (HRRRB) hears appeals of Rent Adjustment decisions, decision of status for Just Cause for Evictions and
                                                         denials of Code Compliance Relocation benefits.
18. RELOCATION SERVICES                                  This program provides services to families who live in housing scheduled for demolition or rehabilitation and
     (510) 238-3721                                      who are forced to relocate due to City action. Relocation Services provides (1) referrals to available comparable
                                                         replacement housing, (2) relocation payments for those meeting eligibility conditions, (3) counseling and other
                                                         services. Recipients of public funds are strong encouraged to meet with Relocation Services Staff to assure
                                                         compliance with relocation laws.
19. RENTAL ASSISTANCE FUND                               The Rental Assistance Fund is designed to help people who have fallen behind in rental payments or who need
     Catholic Charities: (510) 768-3100                  money for a security deposit. The City provides money to a non-profit organization, Catholic Charities, which
                                                         draws up contracts between tenants and landlords to pay the amount owed in installments. The agreement is co-
                                                         signed by Catholic Charities.
Source: Directory of Housing Programs, City of Oakland, Department of Housing and Community Development, November 2014.
APPENDIX D: HOUSING PROGRAM DIRECTORY                                                                                                                                      465

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO
PUBLIC COMMENTS
An announcement of the preparation of the Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element was presented to the public
to gain feedback about the housing issues in Oakland and the effectiveness of existing housing policies.
The Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element was also presented to the public, as outlined below
The preparation of the Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element was presented at the following advisory board
meetings and public hearings:
February 19, 2014, City Planning Commission
March 5, 2014, Mayor’s Commission on Aging
March 25, 2014, CED Committee
April 14, 2014, Mayor’s Commission on Persons with Disabilities
The Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element was presented to City Planning Commission on May 7, 2014.
Affordable Housing Focus Group to discuss the Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element on June 11, 2014.
A survey on the constraints to developing housing in Oakland was sent to market rate housing developers.
A request for public comment was circulated via email and postings in newspapers and on the internet.
A discussion thread has been posted on the City’s social media site, “Engage Oakland” since March,
2014.
The draft Housing Element was published May 2, 2014 and was made available in both hard copy at the
City Planning Department public counter, at the City Clerk’s Office, at the main branch of the Oakland
Public Library, and on the City’s web site. Additionally, a Notice to Request Public Comment was
emailed to the City’s interested parties email list on May 19, 2014 which requested comments by June 16,
2014. Appendix E presents summary and responses to public comments received on Draft Housing
Element 2015-2023.
 466                                         APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                           HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                        Table E-1
                                       Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source       Topic                Comment                                                  Response
      ter
 1    BIA of the Email        Housing Element -    The element must identify and analyze potential and      Addressed in Chapter 6 of the Public Review Draft 2015-
      Bay Area   dated        Overview of the      actual governmental constraints to the maintenance,      22 Housing Element, May 2014. Chapter 6 of the Public
                 November     statutory provisions improvement, or development of housing for all           Review Draft 2015-22 Housing Element, May 2014
                 25,2013                           income levels, including housing for persons with        analyzes City policies and regulations that could
                                                   disabilities. The analysis should identify the specific  potentially constrain the City’s abilities to achieve its
                                                   standards and processes and evaluate their impact,       housing objectives. The chapter further presents a brief
                                                   including cumulatively, on the supply and                discussion of the City’s policy and regulatory context. The
                                                   affordability of housing. The analysis should            chapter also discussed the City of Oakland's efforts to
                                                   determine whether local regulatory standards pose an     reduce the impact of local government regulations and fees
                                                   actual constraint and must also demonstrate local        on the cost and availability of housing. Some of which
                                                   efforts to remove constraints that hinder a jurisdiction include increasing residential densities, creating new
                                                   from meeting its housing needs… The analysis of          mixed-use housing opportunities along major
                                                   potential governmental constraints should describe       transportation corridors and in the downtown, reducing
                                                   past or current efforts to remove governmental           open space requirements in high density residential zones
                                                   constraints. Where the analyses identifies that          in the Downtown and in the Transit Oriented Development
                                                   constraints exist, the element should include program    Zone (S-15), streamlining the environmental review
                                                   responses to mitigate the effects of the constraint.     process for downtown projects, adopting a Density Bonus
                                                   Each analysis should use specific objective data,        Ordinance, adopting a secondary unit ordinance and
                                                   quantified where possible. A determination should be     streamlining the process for approval, creating new fast-
                                                   made for each potential constraint as to whether it      track and streamlined permit processes, and adopting
                                                   poses as an actual constraint. The analysis should       Standard Conditions of Approval to, in part, streamline the
                                                   identify the specific standards and processes and        CEQA review process.
                                                   evaluate their impact, including cumulatively, on the
                                                   supply and affordability of housing.
 2    BIA of the Email        Specific constraints Did your jurisdiction commit to addressing specific      The City of Oakland's 2007-2014 Housing Element did not
      Bay Area   dated        as a condition of    constraints as a condition of HCD certification of the   have any specific constraints to the production of housing
                 November     HCD certification    existing housing element? If so, what was the            that it had to address as a condition of its certification by
                 25 2013 (&                        constraint and what has been done to address it?         CA State HCD.
                 letter dated
                 11/26/13)
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                                     467

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                      Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source       Topic               Comment                                                  Response
     ter
 3   BIA of the Email        Policy 2.2; Policy  Does your jurisdiction have a mandatory inclusionary     Addressed in Chapter 2 of the Public Review Draft 2015-
     Bay Area   dated        Action 2.2.6:       zoning policy? If so, has an analysis been done that     22 Housing Element, May 2014. In California,
                November     Inclusionary Zoning measures the economic impact? Does it contain            Inclusionary Zoning for rental housing was invalidated in
                25 2013 (&   New Construction    meaningful and regularly available incentives, and is    2009 by the California Court of Appeal for the Second
                letter dated of Ownership        its implementation flexible so that there are            Appellate District because it directly conflicted with a
                11/26/13)    Housing             alternatives to a “like for like must build requirement” provision of the state's Costa-Hawkins Rental Housing Act
                                                 such as payment of reasonable in lieu fees, land         of 1996 which specifically gave all landlords the right to
                                                 dedication, or acquisition and rehabilitation of         set the "initial rental rate" for new housing units. In
                                                 existing units with provision affordability covenants?   October 2013, California Governor Jerry Brown vetoed
                                                 Are such alternatives available at the developer’s       legislation that would reauthorize municipalities to adopt
                                                 option or with staff approval—but without need for       or continue implementing ordinances with inclusionary
                                                 Council or Board approval on a project-by-project        rental housing requirements for low income households.
                                                 basis?                                                   The legislation, AB 1229, would have overturned a 2009
                                                                                                          appellate court ruling known as the Palmer Decision,
                                                                                                          which held that state rent control law prohibited cities and
                                                                                                          counties from using inclusionary zoning practices. Given
                                                                                                          this, the City of Oakland does not intend to pursue
                                                                                                          inclusionary zoning as was originally imagined or amended
                                                                                                          by proposed AB1229.
 4   BIA of the Email        Density Bonus        Has your jurisdiction adopted a density bonus           In 2011, the Strategic Planning division began preparing an
     Bay Area   dated        ordinance           ordinance consistent with governing state law (Gov’t     ordinance to amend the Planning Code, adopting a revised
                November                         Code Section 65915)? Does the density bonus              density bonus. Expected public hearings and attempted
                25 2013 (&                       ordinance count mandatory inclusionary zoning units      adoption in 2014.
                letter dated                     toward the density bonus threshold as required by the
                11/26/13)                        recent court of appeal decision in Latinos Unidos del
                                                 Valle de Napa y Solano v. County of Napa, 217 Cal.
                                                 App. 4th 1160 (2013)?
468                                                                                          APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                      Table E-1
                                       Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source       Topic              Comment                                                Response
      ter
 5    BIA of the Email        Policy 3.3; Policy What is the cumulative fee and exaction burden on      Chapter 6 of the draft 2015-2023 Housing Element
      Bay Area   dated        Action 3.3.2 and   new housing in your jurisdiction? This analysis        documents the fees related to development. Those fees
                 November     Development        should include not only development fees that are      include planning permit fees and building permit fees.
                 25 2013 (&   Impact Fees (nexus “formally” reflected in published fee schedules, but   According to a study done by the California Department of
                 letter dated study)             also include exactions imposed via housing allocation  Housing and Community Development, these were not
                 11/26/13)                       program/ “beauty contests,” community                  considered to be a hindrance to development. Currently
                                                 benefits/amenities agreements, CFD annexation          the City of Oakland does not charge an impact fee for
                                                 requirements, and the like. The analysis should also   residential development.
                                                 include fees imposed by other agencies, for example
                                                 school fees, sewer and water fees, and fees imposed
                                                 pursuant to an applicable regional Habitat
                                                 Conservation Plan. The analysis should determine the
                                                 % of the sales of price of new housing in the
                                                 jurisdiction is represented by the cumulative
                                                 fee/exaction burden, as well as the % of costs for
                                                 rental housing units represented by the cumulative
                                                 fee/exaction burden.
 6    BIA of the Email        Policy 2.7; Policy Does your jurisdiction have any recently adopted,      The City of Oakland is planning to commission a nexus
      Bay Area   dated        Action 2.7.2:      proposed, or under consideration new or increased fee  study to determine if an affordable housing impact fee is
                 November     Housing Impact Fee or exaction, such as an affordable housing impact fee? supportable, given current market conditions, and if so,
                 25 2013 (&                                                                             what an appropriate fee structure would be given the
                 letter dated                                                                           housing demand and investment activity. Adoption of
                 11/26/13)                                                                              impact fees requires “nexus” study demonstrating the
                                                                                                        benefit of the facilities to new development and the
                                                                                                        proportional allocation of costs to be funded by the fees.
                                                                                                        Impact fees must be adopted by a majority of the
                                                                                                        legislative body of an entity with the power to impose land
                                                                                                        use regulatory measures (e.g., Oakland City Council).
                                                                                                        Impact fees are usually imposed either jurisdiction-wide or
                                                                                                        in other relatively large areas anticipating significant
                                                                                                        amounts of new development.
 7    BIA of the Email        Special tax for    Has your jurisdiction required new housing projects,   No, the City of Oakland does not require new housing
      Bay Area   dated        ongoing general    including multifamily/attached projects, to pay a fee  projects, including multifamily/attached projects, to pay a
                 November     governmental       or special tax for ongoing general governmental        fee or special tax for ongoing general governmental
                 25 2013 (&   service            services?                                              service.
                 letter dated
                 11/26/13)
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                              469

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source       Topic              Comment                                              Response
     ter
 8   BIA of the Email        PDA/Specific/Large Does your jurisdiction have a designated Priority    In February 2010, the Oakland City Council adopted
     Bay Area   dated        Development        Development Area (PDA)? Is it a “planned” or         Resolution No. 82526 designating six established transit-
                November     Planning           “potential” PDA? Have the number of residential      oriented development centers in Oakland as PDAs.
                25 2013 (&                      units and densities shown in the PDA application     Oakland designated PDAs at the area surrounding the
                letter dated                    been incorporated into the General Plan? Has the     Eastmont Transit Center (73rd Avenue and MacArthur
                11/26/13)                       CEQA process been completed for the PDA so that      Blvd), and the areas around the following BART stations:
                                                no additional CEQA review is necessary for a         12th/19th Streets (downtown), MacArthur, West Oakland,
                                                proposed project consistent with the PDA? Have       Fruitvale, and Airport/Coliseum. These PDAs are located
                                                development restrictions and processes been          in zones that have adopted new commercial and residential
                                                streamlined in the area covered by the PDA?          zoning to align with the City's General Plan that is very
                                                                                                     generous with regard to densities and FARs. There has not
                                                                                                     been a CEQA process for the adopted PDAs. The City's
                                                                                                     development restrictions and approval processes are
                                                                                                     streamlined and are detailed in Chapter 6 of the Public
                                                                                                     Review Draft 2015-22 Housing Element, May 2014.
470                                                                                      APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                           CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                       Table E-1
                                       Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source       Topic               Comment                                                Response
      ter
 9    BIA of the Email        Appendix C:         What were the sites relied on for the adequate sites   Addressed in Chapter4 of the Public Review Draft 2015-22
      Bay Area   dated        Detailed Site       compliance of the existing housing element? What       Housing Element, May 2014. Chapter 4 of the Housing
                 November     Inventory           has been the entitlement/development activity for      Element Update 2015-22, May 2014 presents an inventory
                 25 2013 (&                       these sites during the prior planning period? Were     of sites suitable for residential development in Oakland
                 letter dated                     any of the sites subject to “by right” development     within the planning period of the Housing Element. It
                 11/26/13)                        procedures?                                            demonstrates that the housing potential on land suitable for
                                                                                                         residential development is more than adequate to
                                                                                                         accommodate Oakland’s housing allocation under ABAG’s
                                                                                                         Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA). The City’s
                                                                                                         approach to identifying suitable sites involved two distinct
                                                                                                         exercises. First, the City looked at sites where there was a
                                                                                                         specific housing development identified for that site, and
                                                                                                         therefore it was possible to identify a specific number of
                                                                                                         housing units and the income level to which those units
                                                                                                         were targeted. Within this tier, there were three groups –
                                                                                                         projects already constructed, projects under construction or
                                                                                                         with planning approvals in place, and projects in
                                                                                                         predevelopment where a specific number of units has been
                                                                                                         proposed but had not yet been approved. Second, the City
                                                                                                         identified additional sites sufficient to accommodate the
                                                                                                         need for very low, low and moderate income units, in
                                                                                                         addition to sites for above-moderate income units to meet
                                                                                                         its RHNA. As a result, there is a second tier (“opportunity
                                                                                                         sites”) consisting of vacant and underutilized sites suitable
                                                                                                         for multifamily development that could accommodate
                                                                                                         affordable housing units. Appendix C presents the
                                                                                                         inventory of sites suitable for residential development in
                                                                                                         Oakland, as discussed and summarized in Chapter 4, Land
                                                                                                         Inventory. Background on assumptions and sources also
                                                                                                         are included.
 10   BIA of the Email        Housing             Does your jurisdiction have any type of cap or         No, the City of Oakland does not have a cap or limitation
      Bay Area   dated        Development -       limitation on the number or type of housing units that on the number or type of housing units that may be
                 November     "cap" linked to new may be permitted or constructed jurisdiction wide or   permitted or constructed jurisdiction wide or in specific
                 25 2013 (&   job creation        in specific areas of the jurisdiction—including a cap  areas of the jurisdiction—including a cap or limitation tied
                 letter dated                     or limitation tied to a specified level of new job     to a specified level of new job creation in the jurisdiction
                 11/26/13)                        creation in the jurisdiction?
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                                 471

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                       Table E-1
                                       Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source       Topic                 Comment                                                 Response
     ter
 11  BIA of the Email        Housing               Has your jurisdiction provided for “by right” housing   No, the City of Oakland does not provide for “by right”
     Bay Area   dated        Development - "By-    development in any areas?                               housing development in any areas within our jurisdiction.
                November     right”                                                                        Design review is required for all residential development.
                25 2013 (&
                letter dated
                11/26/13)
 12  BIA of the Email        Housing               Are there zoning or other development restrictions      Discretionary land use control in Oakland is exercised by
     Bay Area   dated        Development -         (such as voter approval requirements, density limits or the Planning Commission and the City Council, and
                November     impediments to        building height restrictions) that have impeded infill  administered by the Planning and Building Department,
                25 2013 (&   infill and/or transit and/or transit oriented development?                    Bureau of Planning. The City has not identified any
                letter dated oriented                                                                      specific constraints to the approval of housing resulting
                11/26/13)    development                                                                   from the application of the General Plan policies or current
                                                                                                           zoning.
 13  BIA of the Email        Compliance with       Has your jurisdiction consistently demonstrated         Addressed in Chapter 6 of the Public Review Draft 2015-
     Bay Area   dated        Permit Streamlining   compliance with both the letter and spirit of the       22 Housing Element, May 2014. Since the start of 2007,
                November     Act                   Permit Streamlining Act?                                the Design Review procedures in the Oakland Planning
                25 2013 (&                                                                                 Code have become more effective, streamlined, and
                letter dated                                                                               consistent throughout the City. There is now one unified
                11/26/13)                                                                                  residential design review program, in three parts: Regular
                                                                                                           Design Review, Small Project Design Review, and Design
                                                                                                           Review Exemption. As part of its streamlining efforts,
                                                                                                           applications for design review are now processed
                                                                                                           concurrently with other planning permits. Design review is
                                                                                                           triggered when an applicant is adding floor area or a
                                                                                                           secondary unit. Because of the new procedures and the
                                                                                                           efficiencies which they bring to the application process, the
                                                                                                           City staff considers the design review procedures as
                                                                                                           removing constraints to housing production.
472                                                                                          APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table E-1
                                       Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source       Topic              Comment                                             Response
      ter
 14   BIA of the Email        Historic           What are your jurisdiction’s historic preservation  The City of Oakland has a program for officially
      Bay Area   dated        Preservation -     policies and review procedures and have they had a  designating select Landmarks and Preservation Districts.
                 November     Citywide policy    significant impact on the permit and entitlement    The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
                 25 2013 (&                      processes for new development projects?             requires review of impacts on major historic resources.
                 letter dated                                                                        Demolition of a CEQA-level historic resource requires the
                 11/26/13)                                                                           preparation of an environmental impact review document.
                                                                                                     The City’s requirements are consistent with State law.
                                                                                                     Many housing development projects use Federal funds and
                                                                                                     require Section 106/NHPA review to avoid adverse effects
                                                                                                     on historic resources. The Landmarks Preservation
                                                                                                     Advisory Board or its staff reviews changes to any
                                                                                                     designated properties (about 160 individual landmarks and
                                                                                                     1500 buildings in districts out of 100,000 properties
                                                                                                     Citywide). The Board also advises on projects involving
                                                                                                     other historic properties. Design review for any
                                                                                                     modifications to these structures is conducted concurrently
                                                                                                     with the regular project review but may need to take into
                                                                                                     account the Board’s monthly meeting schedule. A project
                                                                                                     that respects the historic character of the resource, e.g. by
                                                                                                     following the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
                                                                                                     Rehabilitation, will have a faster and smoother review
                                                                                                     process. Design review fees are waived for Designated
                                                                                                     Historic Properties. The City also has other programs can
                                                                                                     assist with preservation though they are not restricted to
                                                                                                     historic properties. For homes in the Community
                                                                                                     Development Districts, several City and County grant and
                                                                                                     loan programs assist with access improvements, lead
                                                                                                     abatement, and emergency repairs. In addition, the City is
                                                                                                     authorized to offer financial assistance for seismic
                                                                                                     strengthening of existing residential buildings
 15   BIA of the Email        Credit for private Has your jurisdiction adopted an ordinance pursuant No, the City of Oakland has not adopted an ordinance
      Bay Area   dated        open space         to the Quimby Act that gives developers credit for  pursuant to the Quimby Act that gives developers credit for
                 November                        private open space?                                 private open space.
                 25 2013 (&
                 letter dated
                 11/26/13)
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                              473

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                        Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source       Topic                 Comment                                                Response
     ter
 16  BIA of the Email        Criteria for Parkland In implementing the Quimby Act, does your              These comments are beyond the scope of the Oakland
     Bay Area   dated        Dedication            jurisdiction provide for consistency between the       Housing Element 2015-23.
                November                           calculation of the existing neighborhood and
                25 2013 (&                         community park inventory, and the criteria and
                letter dated                       procedures for determining whether to accept land
                11/26/13)                          offered for parkland dedication or to give credit for
                                                   private open space? For example, has your
                                                   jurisdiction refused to accept an area in whole or in
                                                   partial satisfaction of the parkland dedication
                                                   ordinance on the basis that it is unsuitable for park
                                                   and recreational uses even though the area is
                                                   substantially similar to areas included in the overall
                                                   parkland inventory used to calculate the parkland
                                                   dedication requirement and fee
474                                                                                           APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table E-1
                                       Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source       Topic            Comment                                                  Response
      ter
 17   BIA of the Email        CEQA - Bay Area  In the project review process, has your jurisdiction     The City of Oakland uses CEQA Thresholds of
      Bay Area   dated        Air Quality      required developers to use the Bay Area Air Quality      Significance tailored to Oakland; an excerpt from this
                 November     Management       Management District’s CEQA Thresholds of                 document regarding TACs is included below:
                 25 2013 (&   District’s CEQA  Significance for Toxic Air Contaminants (TAC             4. For new sources of Toxic Air Contaminants (TACs),
                 letter dated Thresholds of    Receptor Thresholds)? Has your jurisdiction explored     during either project construction or project operation
                 11/26/13)    Significance for alternative procedures for addressing project siting     expose sensitive receptors to substantial levels of TACs
                              Toxic Air        and air quality concerns, such as in the general plan or under project conditions resulting in (a) an increase in
                              Contaminants     zoning code?                                             cancer risk level greater than 10 in one million, (b) a non-
                                                                                                        cancer risk (chronic or acute) hazard index greater than 1.0,
                                                                                                        or (c) an increase of annual average PM2.5 of greater than
                                                                                                        0.3 micrograms per cubic meter; or, under cumulative
                                                                                                        conditions, resulting in (a) a cancer risk level greater than
                                                                                                        100 in a million, (b) a non-cancer risk (chronic or acute)
                                                                                                        hazard index greater than 10.0, or (c) annual average
                                                                                                        PM2.5 of greater than 0.8 micrograms per cubic meter
                                                                                                        [NOTE: Pursuant to the BAAQMD CEQA Guidelines,
                                                                                                        when siting new TAC sources consider receptors located
                                                                                                        within 1,000 feet. For this threshold, sensitive receptors
                                                                                                        include residential uses, schools, parks, daycare centers,
                                                                                                        nursing homes, and medical centers. The cumulative
                                                                                                        analysis should consider the combined risk from all TAC
                                                                                                        sources.];
                                                                                                        5. Expose new sensitive receptors to substantial ambient
                                                                                                        levels of Toxic Air Contaminants (TACs) resulting in (a) a
                                                                                                        cancer risk level greater than 100 in a million, (b) a non-
                                                                                                        cancer risk (chronic or acute) hazard index greater than
                                                                                                        10.0, or (c) annual average PM2.5 of greater than 0.8
                                                                                                        micrograms per cubic meter [NOTE: Pursuant to the
                                                                                                        BAAQMD CEQA Guidelines, when siting new sensitive
                                                                                                        receptors consider TAC sources located within 1,000 feet
                                                                                                        including, but not limited to, stationary sources, freeways,
                                                                                                        major roadways (10,000 or greater vehicles per day), truck
                                                                                                        distribution centers, airports, seaports, ferry terminals, and
                                                                                                        rail lines. For this threshold, sensitive receptors include
                                                                                                        residential uses, schools, parks, daycare centers, nursing
                                                                                                        homes, and medical centers.]
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                                 475

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                 Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source       Topic           Comment                                                Response
     ter
 18  BIA of the Email        ECAP - Climate  Has your jurisdiction adopted a Climate Adaptation     Addressed in Chapter 9 of the Public Review Draft 2015-
     Bay Area   dated        Adaptation Plan Plan that is more stringent with respect to the per    22 Housing Element, May 2014. In an effort to reduce
                November                     capita GHG reductions for the land use                 energy consumption and GHG emissions in Oakland, the
                25 2013 (&                   sector/transportation sector than the equivalent per   Oakland Energy and Climate Action Plan (ECAP) was
                letter dated                 capita targets established for the region by CARB      adopted by the City Council on December 4, 2012.
                11/26/13)                    pursuant to SB 375?                                    Optimizing the use of energy and minimizing associated
                                                                                                    energy costs and GHG emissions are important
                                                                                                    components of Oakland's sustainable city vision. The
                                                                                                    ECAP establishes GHG reduction actions, as well as a
                                                                                                    framework for coordinating implementation and
                                                                                                    monitoring, and reporting on progress. The ECAP outlines
                                                                                                    a ten-year plan including more than 150 actions that will
                                                                                                    enable Oakland to achieve a 36% reduction in GHG
                                                                                                    emissions. The ECAP assists the City of Oakland in
                                                                                                    continuing its legacy of leadership on energy, climate and
                                                                                                    sustainability issues. Here is a link to the Plan, which
                                                                                                    discusses your
                                                                                                    question: http://www2.oaklandnet.com/oakca1/groups/pwa
                                                                                                    /documents/report/oak039056.pdf”
476                                                                                     APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                Table E-1
                                 Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen    Source     Topic           Comment                                               Response
      ter
 19   City      19-Feb-14                  Commissioners felt that important housing-related     The City’s new proposed context for the goals, policies and
      Planning                             issues in Oakland included housing cost, school       actions contained in Chapter 7 of the draft 2015-2023
      Commissio                            quality, neighborhood walkability, and access to      Housing Element includes new housing in the City’s
      n                                    public transit (including coordinating with AC        Priority Development Areas, or existing neighborhoods
                                           Transit). A suggestion was made to locate new         near transit that the City Council has designated as
                                           housing near transit oriented development areas, and  appropriate locations for future growth. As summarized in
                                           to balance land uses by planning for housing while    Chapter 6 of the draft 2015-2023 Housing Element, the
                                           respecting the importance of commercial and           City currently requires half a parking space in the two
                                           industrial land. Additionally, a suggestion was made  Transit-Oriented zones at the Fruitvale and West Oakland
                                           to offer leniency in the application of the City’s    BART Stations. Some zones in the downtown and other
                                           parking standards for housing when ample public       commercial areas have no parking requirements. While
                                           transportation options exist.                         some consider the residential parking and commercial
                                                                                                 parking standards of the City a constraint to new housing,
                                                                                                 the City routinely offers parking waivers, permits
                                                                                                 mechanical and stacked parking where feasible, encourages
                                                                                                 shared parking in mixed-use buildings and allows for
                                                                                                 “unbundling” — separating the cost of a new residential
                                                                                                 unit from the cost of a parking space. Additionally, the
                                                                                                 City’s Standard Conditions of Approval require
                                                                                                 transportation demand management measures be taken
                                                                                                 when new projects over 50 units are proposed that include
                                                                                                 things such as subsidized transit passes.
 20   City      19-Feb-14                  Commissioners felt it was important to increase the   Policy 2.2 in Chapter 7 of the draft 2015-2023 Housing
      Planning                             percentage of owner-occupied housing and to           Element contains the City’s policies on affordable
      Commissio                            concentrate on measures to maintain existing housing. ownership opportunities and maintaining the existing
      n                                                                                          housing stock. This policy has been revised given the
                                                                                                 dissolution of redevelopment, however, it is noted that the
                                                                                                 City’s First Time Homebuyer Program will be operated as
                                                                                                 funds are available and that a number of initiatives have
                                                                                                 been proposed to address neighborhood condition
                                                                                                 including foreclosure prevention and addressing abandoned
                                                                                                 properties. These programs include the Community
                                                                                                 Buying Program and Restoring Ownership Opportunities
                                                                                                 Together program (ROOT).
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                       477

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                         Table E-1
                               Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen    Source    Topic       Comment                                                Response
     ter
 21  City      19-Feb-14             Since there has been a decrease in household size, are Although there has been an overall decrease in household
     Planning                        we still going to keep as a policy units for Larger    size, as documented in Chapter 3 of the draft 2015-2023
     Commissio                       Families? Staff should work with Oakland Housing       Housing Element, Oakland continues to experience
     n                               Authority (OHA) on finding out what their market       overcrowding rates which are especially severe for large
                                     research has found out regarding the need for          families, regardless of income. This is due to an acute
                                     affordable large-size units (3+ bedrooms). It was also shortage of housing units with four or more bedrooms,
                                     noted that the OHA is shifting assets to non-profit    especially rental units. Thus, Policy 2.6, which encourages
                                     development and property management.                   the development of affordable rental and ownership
                                                                                            housing units that can accommodate large families, will be
                                                                                            retained
 22  City      19-Feb-14             There should be a policy around manufactured           Policy 1.5 in the draft 2015-2023 Housing Element
     Planning                        housing in residential districts.                      provides for the inclusion of manufactured housing in
     Commissio                                                                              appropriate locations, consistent with state mandates to
     n                                                                                      plan for a variety of housing types and income levels.
 23  City      19-Feb-14             Improve the current “mini-lots” policy to facilitate   Mini-lot development is allowed in all residential zones
     Planning                        homeownership.                                         and commercial zones that permit residential uses. The
     Commissio                                                                              City’s current standards are designed to encourage the
     n                                                                                      comprehensive planning of tracts of land; provide
                                                                                            flexibility in the application of certain regulations in a
                                                                                            manner consistent with the general purposes of the zoning
                                                                                            regulations; and to promote a harmonious variety of uses,
                                                                                            the economy of shared services and facilities, compatibility
                                                                                            with surrounding areas, and the creation of attractive,
                                                                                            healthful, efficient, and stable environments for living,
                                                                                            shopping, or working
 24  City      19-Feb-14             What is the City’s strategy for resiliency (climate    Chapter 7 of the draft 2015-2023 Housing Element
     Planning                        change and location, design of affordable housing)?    contains the City’s climate change policy as it relates to
     Commissio                                                                              housing issues. The chapter specifically addresses smart
     n                                                                                      growth principles and encourages development that
                                                                                            reduces carbon emissions. Also, new State law requires
                                                                                            the City to address flood management and flood hazards
                                                                                            and annually review flood maps. A flood hazard and land
                                                                                            management discussion is included in Chapter 9 of the
                                                                                            draft 2015-2023 Housing Element Housing Element.
478                                                                             APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                Table E-1
                                 Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source    Topic           Comment                                                 Response
      ter
 25   City       19-Feb-14                 The City needs a comprehensive citywide community       The new proposed Policy 1.1.5 Housing Incentive Zoning
      Planning                             benefits policy. This comprehensive strategy should     states that the City will explore the feasibility of
      Commissio                            be realistic and consider different market realities in developing Housing Incentive Zoning as a way of
      n                                    different areas of the City, rather than becoming an    incentivizing development to include community benefits,
                                           inflexible, blanket policy that may stifle certain      while considering the costs of those benefits (to
                                           districts, rather than improve them.                    developers) as well as the value of the benefit (to the
                                                                                                   community); and the economic feasibility of requiring
                                                                                                   community benefits in exchange for additional height or
                                                                                                   density, among other important considerations.
 26   City       19-Feb-14                 Commissioners were curious about the barriers to        With the publication of the Draft 2015-2023 Housing
      Planning                             building market-rate housing in the City. They were     Element, City staff will solicit feedback from the
      Commissio                            specifically interested in whether there were issues    investment and development community to understand any
      n                                    with planning/permitting; public safety (police and     barriers to housing and this feedback will be incorporated
                                           perceptions of crime); or the Oakland Unified School    into the Final Draft 2015-2023 Housing Element.
                                           District. Commissioners felt that input from the
                                           developer and investment community was critical to
                                           understanding such barriers.
 27   City       19-Feb-14                 Commissioners also had the following                    Chapter 2 of the final draft of the 2015-2023 Housing
      Planning                             information/text change requests:                       Element will include an evaluation of how the City
      Commissio                            • Include an update on housing production               performed in meeting the actions of the 2007-2014
      n                                    accomplishments from the last Regional Housing          Housing Element. As a place-holder, the contents of
                                           Needs Allocation (RHNA) period.                         Chapter 2 included in this draft are the 2013 Annual Report
                                           • Ideas for replacing Redevelopment Funding?            to California Housing and Community Development
                                           • Change references from “landscaping” to “planting”    Department on the 2007-2014 Housing Element.
                                                                                                   Additionally, Chapter 5 of the draft 2015-2023 Housing
                                                                                                   Element contains ideas for replacing former redevelopment
                                                                                                   funding. The references from landscaping to planting have
                                                                                                   been made.
 28   Mayor’s    5-Mar-14                  The advisory board members were interested in           The City relies on Alameda County data for the homeless
      Commissio                            various statistics about seniors and housing including  estimate. The County does not estimate the number of
      n on Aging                           the following:                                          homeless seniors, rather the age breakdown is generally
                                                                                                   people under 17, 18-24, and over 25 years of age.
                                           • Do you have statistics on homeless seniors (or an
                                           age distribution of the homeless)?
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                        479

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table E-1
                                Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source    Topic       Comment                                                  Response
     ter
 29  Mayor’s    5-Mar-14              • Is it possible to revise the age of a “senior” to      California Civil Code (section 51.3) defines senior citizen
     Commissio                        someone who is 55 (rather than the current 65)?          as a person 62 years or older. For state-funded or regulated
     n on Aging                                                                                affordable housing developments, the definition of a senior
                                                                                               citizen is 55 years or older (except for projects utilizing
                                                                                               federal funds whose programs have differing definitions
                                                                                               for senior projects that for many housing funding programs
                                                                                               is 62 years or older)
 30  Mayor’s    5-Mar-14              • Do you have data on seniors living alone?              Chapter 3 of the Housing Element contains data on seniors
     Commissio                                                                                 living alone. It is noted that “nearly 45 percent of senior-
     n on Aging                                                                                headed households consist of a single elderly person living
                                                                                               alone.”
 31  Mayor’s    5-Mar-14              • Do you have data on seniors with language              The City does not collect data on seniors with language
     Commissio                        isolation?                                               isolation as part of the Housing Element.
     n on Aging
 32  Mayor’s    5-Mar-14              • What rents are considered “affordable”?                It is generally accepted that spending 30% of household
     Commissio                                                                                 income on rent is considered affordable. Income and rents
     n on Aging                                                                                are discussed in Chapter 3 of the draft 2015-2023 Housing
                                                                                               Element.
 33  City       25-Mar-14             Need detailed plans and policies for how to address      The new proposed Policy 1.1.5 Housing Incentive Zoning
     Council                          affordable housing in PDAs. This could include           is designed as a way to investigate the feasibility of
     Community                        Public Benefits Zoning and Housing Impact Fees           incentivizing development to extract public benefits. The
     and                              (including a nexus study).                               policy indicates that the City will explore the feasibility of
     Economic                                                                                  developing Housing Incentive Zoning, while considering
     Developme                                                                                 the costs of benefits (to developers) as well as the value of
     nt (CED)                                                                                  the benefit (to the community); and the economic
     Committee                                                                                 feasibility of requiring community benefits in exchange for
     Meeting                                                                                   additional height or density, among other important
                                                                                               considerations. Policy 2.7.2 calls for the City to explore
                                                                                               implementing a housing impact fee and notes the
                                                                                               importance of funding a nexus study to determine the
                                                                                               feasibility of the fee, and an appropriate fee structure. The
                                                                                               City will be issuing a Request for Proposals (RFP) during
                                                                                               the Housing Element planning period for an impact fee
                                                                                               study that will consider transportation, infrastructure, and
                                                                                               affordable housing.
480                                                                                APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                Table E-1
                                 Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen    Source     Topic           Comment                                                  Response
      ter
 34   City      25-Mar-14                  Address the risks of displacement within the PDAs        Action 1.1.6 International Boulevard Community
      Council                              (look at policies to address displacement such as        Revitalization Without Displacement Initiative documents
      Community                            updating the Condominium Conversion Ordinance).          staff’s work with community members and large
      and                                  The City must also coordinate housing development        foundations to pilot a revitalization and anti-displacement
      Economic                             along AC Transit transfer hubs and high traffic routes.  planning initiative to improve transportation connections,
      Developme                            When focusing new housing in PDAs we must                housing economic development, and health and public
      nt (CED)                             consider bus transit routes as key access modes (not     safety along the corridor. Additionally, Policy 5.6 presents
      Committee                            just BART; that is for more affluent communities).       the City’s limitations on conversion of rental housing to
      Meeting                                                                                       condominiums. The extent of the condominium
                                                                                                    conversion impact area may be extended in some of the
                                                                                                    areas currently undergoing Specific Planning processes as
                                                                                                    a method to avoid displacement.
 35   City      25-Mar-14                  In Appendix C, the Site Inventory, identify affordable   The “opportunity sites” in Appendix C have been mapped
      Council                              housing sites located within Priority Development        according to PDA. City staff has emailed active
      Community                            Areas (PDAs) and work with non-profit developers to      Community Housing Development Organizations in the
      and                                  do preliminary Tax Credit Allocation Committee           City to partner with them to evaluate this list of opportunity
      Economic                             (TCAC)/Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC)             sites in light of TCAC/LIHTC funding potential.
      Developme                            scoring to see if any of these sites are appropriate for
      nt (CED)                             affordable housing development and would be
      Committee                            competitive for funding.
      Meeting
 36   City      25-Mar-14                  How well did we do with production in the past?          Chapter 2 of the final draft of the 2015-2023 Housing
      Council                                                                                       Element will include an evaluation of how the City
      Community                                                                                     performed in meeting the actions of the 2007-2014
      and                                                                                           Housing Element.
      Economic
      Developme
      nt (CED)
      Committee
      Meeting
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                           481

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table E-1
                                  Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen       Source    Topic       Comment                                                Response
     ter
 37  City         25-Mar-14             Consider the ABAG/Plan Bay Area Grant criteria         ABAG’s four-year $320 million One Bay Area Grant
     Council                            when developing new housing policies and locations     (OBAG) Program requires a City to have a Complete
     Community                          for housing                                            Streets Policy (which Oakland adopted in February of 2013
     and                                                                                       in Resolution 84204) and also requires a jurisdiction to
     Economic                                                                                  have a housing element adopted and certified by the State
     Developme                                                                                 Department of Housing and Community Development
     nt (CED)                                                                                  (completion of the 2015-2023 Housing Element is in
     Committee                                                                                 progress; final adoption is scheduled for January 2015 and
     Meeting                                                                                   will be on-time). OBAG funding is targeted toward
                                                                                               achieving local land-use and housing policies by
                                                                                               supporting the Sustainable Communities Strategy by
                                                                                               promoting transportation investment in PDAs. OBAG is
                                                                                               currently funding a variety of projects in the City’s PDAs
                                                                                               including local streets and road preservation, bicycle and
                                                                                               pedestrian improvements and safe routes to school. Since
                                                                                               the majority of opportunity sites are in PDAs, the City is
                                                                                               well positioned to leverage housing investment with areas
                                                                                               primed to receive transportation and infrastructure OBAG
                                                                                               funding (upon the submittal of successful grant proposals).
 38  City         25-Mar-14             Suggestion to circulate the 2015-2023 Housing          Staff sent out an announcement to all City Council
     Council                            Element announcement through City Council              members with a newsletter write up for distribution in e-
     Community                          members’ email lists and newsletters.                  newsletters
     and
     Economic
     Developme
     nt (CED)
     Committee
     Meeting
 39  Mayor’s      14-Apr-14             Homeownership policies should be encouraged and        Policies 2.2 and 4.1 cover homeownership and preservation
     Commissio                          the existing housing stock should be preserved. New    of the existing housing stock, respectively. Housing
     n on                               housing should be located near grocery stores and      opportunity sites are located near PDAs. These areas are
     Persons                            transit. Similarly, housing for people with            well served by public transportation and a mix of
     with                               developmental disabilities should be located near      commercial, civic and residential uses.
     Disabilities                       easily accessible public transit routes. Public safety
                                        response to emergency calls should be equal across all
                                        neighborhoods.
482                                                                                APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                 Table E-1
                                 Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen    Source     Topic           Comment                                                  Response
      ter
 40   Engage    Comments                   Newly developed affordable housing must be built         The housing opportunity sites identified the in the 2015-
      Oakland   received                   with a holistic lens, considering how this housing       2023 Housing Element are mostly in PDAs. These areas
                through                    integrates with public transit, fresh food availability, are well served by public transportation and have a mix of
                May 7,                     and proximity to community based resources.              commercial, civic and residential uses.
                2014                       Additionally, developers should solicit feedback from
                                           community based organizations serving the areas to
                                           be developed to better understand the needs of the
                                           community. In regard to individuals with disabilities,
                                           it is critical to ensure that affordable housing is
                                           developed in coordination with community service
                                           providers and in proximity to public transportation.
 41   Engage    Comments                   In Copenhagen, renters in apartment buildings have       Policy 5.6 in the draft 2015-2023 Housing Element
      Oakland   received                   first refusal on buying the building and turning it into discusses condominium conversions. Such an idea would
                through                    a Housing Cooperative (not to be confused with co-       need to be discussed within the larger condominium
                May 7,                     housing), which ensures that a constant stream of        conversion context.
                2014                       affordable housing enters the market, while raising
                                           the quality of living for the inhabitants. This program
                                           should be adopted in Oakland
 42   Engage    Comments                   We need to create more affordable housing--without       Policy 1.4 covers the City’s policy on secondary units. The
      Oakland   received                   destroying the look and feel of existing                 City uses both density (i.e., units per parcel) and
                through                    neighborhoods, and without adding high-rise luxury       development standards (setbacks, height) to regulate
                May 7,                     condos. This can be accomplished by promoting            development. The City has varying height limitations
                2014                       secondary/in-law units through improved permitting,      throughout the City based on surrounding context and State
                                           eliminate limits on the number of "units" per parcel     mandates to plan for a growing population.
                                           (instead, create standards for minimum unit size,
                                           parking availability, and building height), and
                                           standardizing height to five stories (similar to Paris)
                                           for an ideal balance of livable, walkable and
                                           economically vibrant neighborhoods.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                         483

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                  Table E-1
                                  Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source   Topic              Comment                                                Response
     ter
 43  Engage      Comments                    • Set schedules (5 to 7 days) for appropriate response These comments are beyond the scope of the Housing
     Oakland     received                    time of landlords to tenant inquiry or request.        Element 2015-23.
                 through                     • All residential properties should be furnished with
                 May 7,                      access to appropriate green waste disposal with
                 2014                        garbage pick-up and there should be more reasonable
                                             dumping/bulky pick up policies.
                                             • Require buildings housing 10 or more living units to
                                             have on-site maintenance (and provide on-site
                                             property managers with compensation i.e.,
                                             reduced/free rent).
                                             • Ensure all tenants of public housing have access and
                                             are trained to use internet at home for $10/month or
                                             less.
                                             • There should be fewer hurdles to evicting problem
                                             tenants.
 44  NCLT/OC     Comments Policy 2.4; Policy Increase the profile of community land trusts (CLTs)   Policy 2.4.1 cover's the City's policy on CLTs. The City
     LT          dated    Action 2.4.1       as affordable housing providers and long-term          commits to continuing support, to the extent feasible, of the
     (Northern   4/28/14  Community Land     stewards, and desirable community Investments.         existing CLTs in the City. The City will also support the
     CA Land              Trust Program                                                             expansion of CLTs in the City if land values make it
     Trust/Oakla                                                                                    financially feasible for the CLT and worthwhile for the
     nd                                                                                             homeowners. City staff will, to the extent feasible, attend
     Community                                                                                      any regional events related to CLTs.
     Land Trust)
484                                                                                     APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source   Topic           Comment                                               Response
      ter
 45   NCLT/OC     Comments Policy 2.2      Adapt first-time homebuyer programs to account for    The City's First-Time Homebuyer program is designed to
      LT          dated    Affordable      community land trust (CLT) homebuyer's particular     assisted low and moderate income homebuyers by bridging
      (Northern   4/28/14  Homeownership   needs, so as to avoid putting the homebuyer at a      the gap between market rate housing prices and what is
      CA Land              Opportunities - disadvantage due to the resale restrictions           affordable to the homebuyer. Resale price restricted
      Trust/Oakla          Community Land  incorporated into the land lease intended to maintain properties such as the CLTs should be priced to be
      nd                   Trusts          the unit's affordability.                             affordable to its target market in order to ensure
      Community                            1) Meet with representatives of local CLTs to discuss sustainability. The layering of recapture mechanism used
      Land Trust)                          how City programs affect CLT homebuyers, and          by the first-time homebuyer program and a price restriction
                                           propose solutions that would ensure CLT homes         makes it challenging for both the buyer and the City to
                                           remain affordable under the various programs and      recover their costs. This has been demonstrated by a
                                           avoid developing negative equity.                     sampling of transactions in the first-time homebuyer
                                           2) When developing new homeownership programs         portfolio. City Staff is currently working on a proposal to
                                           invite CLT staff to comment on the potential impact   resolve this issue for loans in the portfolio so that the buyer
                                           of CLT homeownership.                                 can recover its costs. Given the first time homebuyer
                                                                                                 program's limited resources, it would be difficult to justify
                                                                                                 focusing its resources on a subset of eligible low and
                                                                                                 moderate income first-time homebuyer. Additionally,
                                                                                                 some of the program's funding sources have specific
                                                                                                 recapture requirements that cannot be modified.
                                                                                                 In the future, City Staff recommend NCLT/OCLT proceed
                                                                                                 with developing projects using developer-side subsidies by
                                                                                                 applying for the annual competitive NOFA for affordable
                                                                                                 housing development funds in order to make a
                                                                                                 development feasible without buyer-side subsidies. City
                                                                                                 Staff welcome pre-NOFA project consultation with
                                                                                                 interested developers.
 46   NCLT/OC     Comments Policy 2.2      Increase the portfolios of community land trusts      1) See agenda report for June 6, 2014 City Council
      LT          dated    Affordable      (CLTs) in Oakland in order to provide more            Community Economic Development (CED) committee
      (Northern   4/28/14  Homeownership   permanent affordable housing for City residents, as   meeting--item on proposed modification to MAP program
      CA Land              Opportunities - well as improve the economies of scale for Oakland    loans. Staff proposes converting existing MAP loans
      Trust/Oakla          Community Land  based CLTs.                                           recorded against selected ownership projects with
      nd                   Trusts          1) Convert existing mortgage assistance program       affordability restrictions and that are currently facing
      Community                            (MAP) down payment assistance loans recorded          negative equity.
      Land Trust)                          against CLT units to shared appreciation mortgage     2) As noted above, it is more appropriate for the CLTs to
                                           (SAM) loans, made explicitly assumable by qualified   apply for funds under the City's NOFA. This will enable
                                           purchasers, in order to prevent negative equity for   the project to design a project specific mechanism for
                                           homeowners of limited appreciation CLT units.         maintaining affordability.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                          485
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                       Table E-1
                            Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen    Source Topic       Comment                                                Response
     ter
                                  2) Develop a new program in conjunction with CLT       3) Historically, very few developers have used the Density
                                  staff to allow the conversion of the City's down       Bonus Program in Oakland due to existing permissive
                                  payment assistance loans, including MAP and SAM,       densities. In any future housing developments where the
                                  into permanently affordable homes in the CLT model,    developer uses the City of Oakland's density bonus
                                  providing an option to purchase to CLTs and            program, City staff will consider, through a competitive
                                  leveraging loan forgiveness to preserve affordable     process, outside organizations as the recipient of the land
                                  homeownership opportunities for Oakland residents.     donation in exchange for ongoing monitoring of the density
                                  3) Identify Oakland-based CLTs as approved             bonus units.
                                  recipients of land donation under the updated Density  4) In the Housing Element 2015-23, Chapter 3 Needs
                                  Bonus Ordinance.                                       Assessment, Section J Analysis of Assisted, At-risk
                                  4) Provide an opportunity to identified CLTs to        Housing Projects, there is a table of all regulated units in
                                  purchase and steward affordable housing                the City of Oakland whose affordability agreements will
                                  developments with expiring affordability covenants in  expire in the next 10 years (Federal, State and local
                                  order to expand Oakland's existing stock of            regulatory agreements). There are very few units whose
                                  permanently affordable housing.                        affordability will expire in this period of time and none are
                                  5) Provide for CLT specific programs when              homeownership projects. Please refer to Table 3-54 for
                                  considering the adoption of an Inclusionary Zoning     more detail. Please also refer to another incomplete listing
                                  Ordinance.                                             of regulated ownership units as requires by State code per
                                  6) Subsidize CLT projects by donating land and         AB 987 for Redevelopment-funded units and their
                                  buildings from the municipality's own inventory to a   regulatory agreement expiration dates.
                                  CLT or by selling the properties to the CLT at a       (http://www2.oaklandnet.com/oakca1/groups/ceda/docume
                                  discounted rate.                                       nts/report/dowd008179.pdf)
                                                                                         5) At the moment, the City of Oakland does not have an
                                                                                         Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance.
                                                                                         6) City Staff do not have the authority to gift public funds
                                                                                         which includes land donations. City Staff will consider
                                                                                         proposals, in the context of a competitive bid process, for
                                                                                         the disposition of sites currently in their site acquisition
                                                                                         program--see Appendix C, Table C-4.
486                                                                          APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                               Table E-1
                                  Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen    Source      Topic          Comment                                                 Response
      ter
 47   Oakland   email dated                Changing lifestyle preferences is raising the demand    As outlined in Chapter 6, the City has generous density
      Resident  2/27/14                    for housing in the North Gate/Koreatown area, for       standards in many zoning districts, particularly near
                                           example. I encourage dense housing and cite the         downtown, and major transportation corridors.
                                           popularity of the Ellington and the Broadway Grand,
                                           for example.                                            Chapter 3 demonstrates the need for and advocates for
                                                                                                   larger units, which will continue to be pursued by the City.
                                           I encourage developments with units of a range of
                                           sizes, which would encourage economic diversity,        The City's policy of directing financial resources to Priority
                                           aside from any affordability requirement.               Development Areas will foster the development of mixed-
                                                                                                   income communities, as the development of mixed income
                                           I support meeting affordability requirements in or      communities is supported by Plan Bay Area, a significant
                                           near new market rate developments rather than being     grant source.
                                           pushed out to neighborhoods already facing economic
                                           challenges.
                                           New dense housing should be planned to allow
                                           nearby rich commercial and cultural experiences, so
                                           that the new residents can find the quality urban life
                                           they sought in Oakland
 48   Oakland   email dated                I have reservations about affordable housing            The City supports a variety of housing types and tenures,
      Resident  2/27/14                    ownership. It is not responsive to the dynamic nature   as required by State law.
                                           of the housing market. A young family may find
                                           affordable purchase attractive. But then as the family
                                           size or the family budget changes, they are constricted
                                           from moving by price controls, whereas if they were
                                           renters or market rate buyers, they would be more free
                                           to move if they wanted to.
 49   Oakland   email dated                I encourage strict enforcement of zoning so that so     The City adopted new residential and commercial zoning
      Resident  2/27/14                    that neighborhoods are not degraded by surreptitious    regulations in 2011 and will continue to implement these
                                           units built to respond to an otherwise unanswered       regulations into the future.
                                           housing pressure.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                          487
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source      Topic             Comment                                                 Response
     ter
 50  Oakland     email dated                   When considering the policy of rental assistance I ask  The City determines its rental subsidies based on need (of
     Resident    2/27/14                       that the City consider what percentage of Oakland       City residents) and subsidy availability.
                                               residents either receive some form of direct rental
                                               assistance or live in "affordable (subsidized) housing"
                                               of some sort or another. There should be a balance
                                               between helping working class people and people on
                                               fixed income on the one hand, and attracting an ever
                                               growing pool of low income residents through more
                                               and more subsidies. There should come a point where
                                               the city says, "We've done our share and more. Let
                                               other cities do their share."
 51  East Bay    Comment     Anti-displacement need an explicit anti-displacement goal to clarify that City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
     Housing     letter                        this is a major public policy need                      displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
     Organizatio received at                                                                           is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
     ns (EBHO)   6/11/14                                                                               strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                 focus group                                                                           policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                                                                       prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                                       preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                                       residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                                       housing that currently has affordable rents.
 52  East Bay    Letter      Anti-displacement Include programs and policies to monitor potential      City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
     Housing     dated                         and actual displacement of lower income renters.        displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
     Organizatio 6/16/14                                                                               is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
     ns (EBHO)                                                                                         strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                                                                                                       policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                                                                       prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                                       preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                                       residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                                       housing that currently has affordable rents.
488                                                                                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                        CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source       Topic             Comment                                                 Response
      ter
 53   Alameda    Email        Anti-displacement Establish strong anti-harassment policies to prevent    City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
      County     dated                          landlords to coercing tenants to leave their homes due  displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
      Public     6/16/2014                      to negligence, intimidation and buy-out option. Cities  is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
      Health                                    can prohibit tenant harassment by clearly defining      strengthening existing policies and introducing new
      Department                                harassment to include the following: failure to provide policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                housing services in line with housing, health, and      prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                safety laws; attempts to coerce tenants to vacate units preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                with intimidation and offers of payment; and            residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                interference of tenant’s right to quiet use and         housing that currently has affordable rents.
                                                enjoyment of rental housing.
 54   Enterprise Email        Anti-displacement We recommend that the City do more to track             City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
      Community  dated                          potential and actual displacement.                      displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
      Partners   6/24/14                                                                                is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
                                                                                                        strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                                                                                                        policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                                                                        prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                                        preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                                        residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                                        housing that currently has affordable rents.
 55   Oakland    Letter       Anti-displacement Anti-displacement strategies must occur now,            City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
      Heritage   dated                          simultaneously with approval, or at least be attached   displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
      Alliance   6/10/14                        to a timetable.                                         is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
      (OHA)      commentin                                                                              strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                 g on the                       Language existing in BVSP:                              policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                 Broadway                       Develop programs to support residents who are           prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                 Valdez                         displaced as a result of development in the Plan Area   preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                 Specific                       (replace with "City"?).                                 residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                 Plan--                                                                                 housing that currently has affordable rents.
                 requested                      Suggested added language:
                 that                           Identify which City department or group would
                 Housing                        develop the program. Program proposal must return to
                 Element                        the Planning Commission and City Council by
                 Staff accept                   December 1, 2014 for implementation by June 2015.
                 as public
                 comment                        Specifically referred to 94 units housing
                 on the                         approximately 300 people--there are currently no
                 Housing                        enforceable protections for these units and no
                 Element                        relocation plan.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                               489

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen    Source      Topic               Comment                                                    Response
     ter
 56  Larry     Emails      Appendix C:         As you may remember, I volunteered to look at a few        The estimate of build out potential for the opportunity sites
     Mayers    dated       Detailed Site       sites with an architect’s perspective relative to what’s   was intended to be conservative; staff could not do an
               6/12/14 and Inventory           allowed for a particular site by code. I recently          individual analysis (considering site specific
               6/17/14     (Opportunity Sites- looked at the site at 2330 Webster for Joel Devalcourt     circumstances) for each site.
                           Unit Yield          of the Better Broadway Coalition. While that
                           Estimates)          45,000+ sf site could theoretically yield as many as
                                               180 units just by height and density restrictions, other
                                               requirements, such as parking an usable open space,
                                               bring that number down to about 110 for family
                                               housing or 130 for senior housing. This is not
                                               factoring in possible increases due to density
                                               bonuses. Open space seems to be the most restrictive
                                               limiter.
                                               I looked for this site in the Housing Element Draft,
                                               but found only a site indicated as PPDA-127 (page
                                               322). The address is not given, but the zoning and
                                               height are the same. However, it is about ¼ of the full
                                               site in area.
                                               I am not sure if that is another site, or just part of the
                                               2330 site, but in any case, I am hard-pressed to figure
                                               out how that site would yield 52 units as indicated.
                                               And in response to his email on the City's
                                               methodology:
                                               There are some unknowns (possibility of parking
                                               reductions, adding balconies) which could boost the
                                               unit total back to 180—and even more depending on
                                               if it is a senior project. The efficacy of going above
                                               the high-rise limit would have to be checked, but note
                                               that would put even more strain on the other two
                                               limiters.
                                               A conservative approach would be to assume no high-
                                               rise, no balconies, but allow some reduction in
                                               parking since the project is pretty well located. That
                                               means 110 family units/130 senior units.
                                               So you can see other limiters reduce the buildable
                                               number of units. This is a much more realistic look.
490                                                                                         APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                 Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source      Topic          Comment                                                 Response
      ter
 57   BIA of the email dated Community      The Housing Element should be clear that the City       City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
      Bay Area   6/10/14     Benefits       will not attempt to extract "community benefits" or     resources for affordable housing. The following is the
                                            other exactions based on a City calculation of          stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
                                            developer profitability/feasibility. Fees and exactions affordable housing development and develop new sources
                                            should only be considered and assessed in order to      of funding. Per Policy Action 2.7.2, the City will consider
                                            mitigate the need for public facilities specifically    various types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                                            caused by the new development                           voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                                                                    housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                                                                    Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing
                                                                                                    development. Based on this study a comprehensive strategy
                                                                                                    will be devised based on current development economics.
 58   Enterprise Email       Community      It will be important to be clear and consistent with    City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
      Community  dated       Benefits       private developers what the fee or the community        resources for affordable housing. The following is the
      Partners   6/24/14                    benefit will be if these tools (inclusionary zoning and stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
                                            housing impact fees) are pursued. We encourage the      affordable housing development and develop new sources
                                            City to make it a policy to communicate with            of funding. Per Policy Action 2.7.2, the City will consider
                                            developers consistently and to prioritize key transit   various types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                                            corridors and/or PDAs for fees and/or community         voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                            benefit districts.                                      housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                                                                    Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing
                                                                                                    development. Based on this study a comprehensive strategy
                                                                                                    will be devised based on current development economics.
 59   Housing    Oral        Community      The City should adopt a Citywide Community              City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
      Element    comments    Benefits       Benefits Policy.                                        resources for affordable housing. The following is the
      Focus      during the                                                                         stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
      Group with focus group                                                                        affordable housing development and develop new sources
      Affordable held on                                                                            of funding. Per Policy Action 2.7.2, the City will consider
      Housing    6/11/14                                                                            various types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
      Advocates                                                                                     voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                                                                    housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                                                                    Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing
                                                                                                    development. Based on this study a comprehensive strategy
                                                                                                    will be devised based on current development economics.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                          491
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source      Topic          Comment                                                Response
     ter
 60  Housing     Oral        Community      We need a Citywide policy that will require            City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
     Element     comments    Benefits       developers to contribute to provision and/or           resources for affordable housing. The following is the
     Focus       during the                 preservation of affordable housing. Glad that          stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
     Group with  focus group                Housing Incentive Zoning is included but some          affordable housing development and develop new sources
     Affordable  held on                    elements need to be mandatory. (Not against higher     of funding. Per Policy Action 2.7.2, the City will consider
     Housing     6/11/14                    density bonus but they are not sufficient.)            various types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
     Advocates                                                                                     voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                                                                   housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                                                                   Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing
                                                                                                   development. Based on this study a comprehensive
                                                                                                   strategy will be devised based on current development
                                                                                                   economics.
 61  Housing     Oral        Community      Add Inclusionary Zoning Policy for ownership           City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
     Element     comments    Benefits       housing.                                               resources for affordable housing. The following is the
     Focus       during the                                                                        stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
     Group with  focus group                                                                       affordable housing development and develop new sources
     Affordable  held on                                                                           of funding. Per Policy Action 2.7.2, the City will consider
     Housing     6/11/14                                                                           various types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
     Advocates                                                                                     voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                                                                   housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                                                                   Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing
                                                                                                   development. Based on this study a comprehensive
                                                                                                   strategy will be devised based on current development
                                                                                                   economics.
 62  East Bay    Letter      Community      The City should add as a separate action Inclusionary  City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
     Housing     dated       Benefits       Zoning: The City will consider adoption of an          resources for affordable housing. The following is the
     Organizatio 6/16/14                    inclusionary zoning ordinance that requires new        stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
     ns (EBHO)                              ownership developments to include a specified          affordable housing development and develop new sources
                                            percentage of units with sales prices and resale       of funding. Per Policy Action 2.7.2, the City will consider
                                            restrictions that make such units permanently          various types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                                            affordable to low income households. The City will     voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                            also consider alternative compliance options, such as  housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                            deposit of an in-lieu fee to the City’s Affordable     Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing
                                            Housing Trust Fund, and dedication of land for         development. Based on this study a comprehensive
                                            development of affordable housing.                     strategy will be devised based on current development
                                                                                                   economics.
492                                                                                    APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                      Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source      Topic               Comment                                                  Response
      ter
 63   James      Email       Community           (Recommendation): The City should consider               City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
      Vann       dated       Benefits            aligning with legislative or legal actions that have the resources for affordable housing. The following is the
                 6/13/14 in                      objective of reinstating inclusionary zoning /           stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
                 response to                     inclusionary housing polices to mandate that portions    affordable housing development and develop new sources
                 Focus                           of multifamily rental developments be affordable.        of funding. Per Policy Action 2.7.2, the City will consider
                 Group Mtg                                                                                various types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                 6/11/14                                                                                  voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                                                                          housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                                                                          Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing
                                                                                                          development. Based on this study a comprehensive
                                                                                                          strategy will be devised based on current development
                                                                                                          economics.
 64   BIA of the email dated Height Restrictions The Housing Element should commit to revising            Planning staff will look into whether height limits in the
      Bay Area   6/10/14                         building height restrictions citywide so that they are   recently revised zoning constitute a constraint to
                                                 no longer a constraint to housing development.           development
                                                 Developers have specifically identified building
                                                 height limitations as a significant constraint and BIA
                                                 suggests that the Housing Element commit to address
                                                 this issue. Considering both construction cost and
                                                 building code issues, BIA recommends the following
                                                 height limitation categories:
                                                 o 35'-40' for 3 stories
                                                 o 65' for 5 over 1 story podium
                                                 o 85' for 5 over 2 story podium
                                                 o 120'
                                                 o Above 120'
                                                 o For every 1' of retail clear height above 12/, the
                                                 building height should increase a commensurate 1'
                                                 (e.g., if a developer proposes a 15' clear, then the
                                                 building height can increase by 3')
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                                 493
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                  Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen    Source       Topic            Comment                                                  Response
     ter
 65  Oakland   Letter       Historic         Firmer provisions concerning adaptive reuse of           See Broadway Valdez District Specific Plan adopted by
     Heritage  dated        Preservation -   historic buildings;                                      City Council June 17, 2014; Resolution number 85065
     Alliance  6/10/14      Residential                                                               C.M.S.
     (OHA)     commentin    Displacement/Com A section of the BVSP Area is a contiguous area of
               g on the     mercial Design   the potentially designated historic properties sites,
               Broadway                      that provides family housing and context and scale to
               Valdez                        the area's architectural fabric...it should not be wiped
               Specific                      out for some speculative future commercial
               Plan--                        development, on a street which historically has not
               requested                     been commercial, where nearby vacant land should be
               that                          so developed first;
               Housing
               Element                       A section of BVSP Area has ominous and unattractive
               Staff accept                  concepts and assumes demolition of B-rated cultural
               as public                     resources that could provide an attraction to the area
               comment                       more so than a large floorplate retail anchor.
               on the
               Housing
               Element
494                                                                                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen    Source     Topic              Comment                                               Response
      ter
 66   Oakland   Email      Housing            must have diverse housing for all income levels; need City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
      Resident  dated      Development -      rental stock for all income levels                    resources for affordable housing. The following is the
                6/15/14    Affordable Housing                                                       stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
                           Production                                                               affordable housing development and develop new sources
                                                                                                    of funding. Per Policy Action 2.7.2, the City will consider
                                                                                                    various types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                                                                                                    voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                                                                    housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                                                                    Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing
                                                                                                    development. Based on this study a comprehensive
                                                                                                    strategy will be devised based on current development
                                                                                                    economics.
                                                                                                    Additionally, City staff have added the following Policy
                                                                                                    4.4: Anti-displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The
                                                                                                    following is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
                                                                                                    strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                                                                                                    policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                                                                    prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                                    preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                                    residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                                    housing that currently has affordable rents.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                           495
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                    Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source      Topic              Comment                                                  Response
     ter
 67  James      Email       Housing            Whereas the HUD standard for housing is 30% of           City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
     Vann       dated       Development -      income, the median income of households in PDA           resources for affordable housing. The following is the
                6/13/14 in  Affordable Housing areas is $33,621; and, whereas 82% of Oakland            stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
                response to Production         households pay more than 30% of income for               affordable housing development and develop new sources
                Focus                          housing; and, whereas almost 60% of renter               of funding. Per Policy Action 2.7.2, the City will consider
                Group Mtg                      households pay 50% or more for housing [verify by        various types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                6/11/14                        Census or latest American Community Survey], the         voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                               City therefore establishes the provision, production,    housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                               and supply of rental housing, affordable at all income   Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing
                                               levels, but primarily for very low, and low income       development. Based on this study a comprehensive
                                               households as the highest priority for actions           strategy will be devised based on current development
                                               anticipated for this Housing Element.                    economics.
                                                                                                        Additionally, City staff have added the following Policy
                                                                                                        4.4: Anti-displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The
                                                                                                        following is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
                                                                                                        strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                                                                                                        policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                                                                        prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                                        preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                                        residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                                        housing that currently has affordable rents.
 68  Alameda    Email       Housing            1. Consider prioritizing the use of remaining funds for  1. See Policy 2.1 Affordable Housing Development
     County     dated       Development -      affordable housing development towards groups with       Programs with the stated policy goal to "provide financing
     Public     6/16/2014   Affordable Housing most extreme housing needs, i.e. individuals with        for the development of affordable housing for low- and
     Health                 Production         extremely low income, individuals living on fixed        moderate-income households. The City’s financing
     Department                                income ( seniors and disabled), and the households       programs will promote a mix of housing types, including
                                               that are currently homeless. This recommendation is      homeownership, multifamily rental housing, and housing
                                               based on significant reductions in available City Of     for seniors and persons with special needs. "Additionally,
                                               Oakland housing funding development.                     see Policy 2.9 Path Plan for the Homeless; with the stated
                                                                                                        policy goal to "expand the City’s Permanent Access to
                                               2. Unsold community land trust homes within the          Housing (PATH) Plan to prevent and end homelessness
                                               City could and should be made available to rental        and increase housing opportunities to the homeless through
                                               housing for extremely low income households.             acquisition, rehabilitation and construction of housing,
                                               Alameda County partnered with Hello Housing and          master leasing and short-term financial assistance."
                                               the Housing Consortium of East Bay on a model to
                                               convert foreclosed properties into rental properties for 2. City staff have requested that OCLT consider this
                                               this population. (report included in the email).         option.
496                                                                                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                      Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source      Topic              Comment                                                Response
      ter
 69   East Bay    Letter      Housing Element -  The City should include in the Housing Element a       The City has added Policy 6.5, Action 6.5.1: Submit, on an
      Housing     dated       Annual Progress    program that commits the City, by April 1 of each      annual basis by April 1, a report to the California
      Organizatio 6/16/14     Reporting          year, to prepare and submit to CA HCD an Annual        Department of Housing and Community Development on
      ns (EBHO)                                  Progress Report on the Housing Element in the format   progress made by the City of Oakland on policies adopted
                                                 prescribed by HCD. The City should also conduct        in the 2015-2023 Housing Element (as required by state
                                                 annual review public hearings before the Planning      law).
                                                 Commission and the City Council that will include
                                                 consideration of the Housing Element Progress
                                                 Report as defined in Government Code Section
                                                 65400(a)(2)(B)
 70   East Bay    Comment     Housing Element -  need a timeline for all policies and actions           See Table 7-1, Implementation Program; Column titled
      Housing     letter      Implementation                                                            "Approximate Timeline."
      Organizatio received at Schedule
      ns (EBHO)   6/11/14
                  focus group
 71   Housing     Oral        Housing Element -  All policies and actions should be prioritized into    See Table 7-1, Implementation Program; Column titled
      Element     comments    Implementation     short/medium and long term (particularly the new       "Approximate Timeline."
      Focus       during the  Schedule           initiatives).
      Group with  focus group
      Affordable  held on
      Housing     6/11/14
      Advocates
 72   Alameda     Email       Housing Element -  4. Review and update the table listing shelters and    4. City staff from the Human Service Department
      County      dated       suggested edits to transitional housing should be reviewed and updated.   recommended including shelters beyond the City of
      Public      6/16/2014   needs assessment   The list of shelters and transitional housing in the   Oakland boundaries since what commonly happens is that
      Health                                     report contains a list of programs residing outside of the homeless from Oakland are placed in shelters in
      Department                                 the City of Oakland.                                   surrounding cities. Staff feels that because this is
                                                                                                        explained in the text, it is okay to leave as is.
                                                 5. Correct incorrect references to Medicare. On page
                                                 134, the Draft erroneously refer to Medicare, which    5. Correction made to Housing Element 2015-23 Draft to
                                                 should be Medicaid funding for transitional housing.   CA HCD
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                            497
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source      Topic              Comment                                                   Response
     ter
 73  Alameda    Email       Housing Element -  1. Use up-to-date data on persons with disabilities.      1. See Footnote on the first page of Chapter 3 for the City's
     County     dated       suggested edits to The reports section on persons with disabilities uses     opinion of the American Community Survey Data. Staff
     Public     6/16/2014   needs assessment   2000 census data. More recent data for this               reviewed ACS 5-year for 2008-2012 for the City's Disabled
     Health                                    population should be available.                           population estimates (ACS ID# S1810 and S1811) and
     Department                                                                                          found that the data estimates are much reduced, down to
                                               2. Revise the following statement related to persons      approximately 38% of the 2000 Census figures, prompting
                                               with disabilities on p. 122:                              skepticism in using that data given it represents such a
                                               “The proportion of the population in Oakland with         dramatic decrease in Oakland's disabled population.
                                               disabilities is much greater than countywide due to
                                               the availability of social services, alternative housing, 2. Correction made to Housing Element 2015-23 Draft to
                                               income support, and relatively lower housing costs        CA HCD.
                                               than in other central Bay Area locations. These
                                               factors create a high demand for housing and services
                                               to meet the needs of persons with disabilities.”
                                               This statement implies a migration of disabled people
                                               in Oakland due to availability of resources and
                                               alternative housing rather than the establishment of
                                               social services, alternative housing, income support
                                               and relatively lower housing costs to meet the needs
                                               of persons with disabilities.
                                               A revision of the statement should be: “The
                                               proportion of the population in Oakland with
                                               disabilities is much greater than countywide. These
                                               factors create a high demand for affordable and
                                               alternative housing and support services to meet the
                                               needs of persons with disabilities.”
 74  Housing    Oral        Industrial Lands   Revisit the industrial lands conversion policy            This comment is beyond the scope of the Housing Element.
     Element    comments    Conversion Policy
     Focus      during the
     Group with focus group
     Affordable held on
     Housing    6/11/14
     Advocates
498                                                                                        APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                  HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                 Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source      Topic         Comment                                                 Response
      ter
 75   East Bay    Letter      Land banking  We urge the City to include the following language in   City of Oakland staff will be releasing an RFP for a Nexus
      Housing     dated                     Policy 1.3: The City will consider policies within      Study and Economic Feasibility Analysis for various
      Organizatio 6/16/14                   these areas that (a) promote land banking for           impact fees (see Policy Action 3.3.2) during the Summer of
      ns (EBHO)                             affordable housing development, (b) assist affordable   2014. Although "land banking (among other community
                                            housing developers to acquire sites, and (c) encourage  benefit suggestions) are not specifically cited in the RFP as
                                            and provide incentives to developers to make land       an area of study, City staff think that there will be other
                                            available within these areas for development of         opportunities to incorporate specific language into the final
                                            affordable housing.                                     contract for this study.
 76   East Bay    Letter      Land banking  Recommends the following language: The City will        City of Oakland staff will be releasing an RFP for a Nexus
      Housing     dated                     also consider programs for acquisition and land         Study and Economic Feasibility Analysis for various
      Organizatio 6/16/14                   banking of opportunity sites in these areas to ensure   impact fees (see Policy Action 3.3.2) during the Summer of
      ns (EBHO)                             that development of affordable housing takes place      2014. Although "land banking (among other community
                                            within the Plan Area and doesn't simply generate fee    benefit suggestions) are not specifically cited in the RFP as
                                            revenue that builds affordable housing elsewhere.       an area of study, City staff think that there will be other
                                                                                                    opportunities to incorporate specific language into the final
                                                                                                    contract for this study.
 77   Housing     Oral        Land banking  The City should adopt a Citywide Land Banking           City of Oakland staff will be releasing an RFP for a Nexus
      Element     comments                  Policy.                                                 Study and Economic Feasibility Analysis for various
      Focus       during the                                                                        impact fees (see Policy Action 3.3.2) during the Summer of
      Group with  focus group                                                                       2014. Although "land banking (among other community
      Affordable  held on                                                                           benefit suggestions) are not specifically cited in the RFP as
      Housing     6/11/14                                                                           an area of study, City staff think that there will be other
      Advocates                                                                                     opportunities to incorporate specific language into the final
                                                                                                    contract for this study.
 78   East Bay    Letter      Land-value    To the extent that the City's strategy includes the use City of Oakland staff will be releasing an RFP for a Nexus
      Housing     dated       Recapture     of voluntary incentives and bonuses, the Housing        Study and Economic Feasibility Analysis for various
      Organizatio 6/16/14                   Element should only allow greater height and density    impact fees (see Policy Action 3.3.2) during the Summer of
      ns (EBHO)                             (or other incentives and bonuses) if such changes are   2014. Although "land banking (among other community
                                            accompanied by provision of affordable housing.         benefit suggestions) are not specifically cited in the RFP as
                                                                                                    an area of study, City staff think that there will be other
                                                                                                    opportunities to incorporate specific language into the final
                                                                                                    contract for this study.
 79   BIA of the  email dated Parking Ratio The Housing Element should include an                   Staff plans to undertake a comprehensive citywide parking
      Bay Area    6/10/14     Requirement   implementation measure that commits to reducing         study as captured in Policy 3.2.3
                              Reductions    parking ratios wherever a TDM plan is required and
                                            for transit corridors and where care sharing programs
                                            exist
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                             499
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source      Topic              Comment                                                 Response
     ter
 80  BIA of the  email dated PDA/Specific/Large for those areas in the City that are Priority           The City of Oakland does not provide for “by right”
     Bay Area    6/10/14     Development        Development Areas (PDAs) in Plan Bay Area, BIA          housing development in any areas within our jurisdiction.
                             Planning           suggests that the Housing Element contain an            Design review is required for all residential development.
                                                implementation measure that commits to developing a
                                                program for development "by right" under appropriate
                                                circumstances. The appropriate circumstances could
                                                be fleshed out as part of developing the Housing
                                                Incentive Zoning program.
 81  EBALDC      Email       PDA/Specific/Large reconcile the discrepancies between the PDA map on      There is a website under the City Administrator's Office,
                 dated       Development        city's website and in Housing Element                   Division of Economic & Workforce Development that has
                 6/12/14     Planning                                                                   a page titled "Priority Development Areas. “ This webpage
                                                                                                        pre-dates the Region's and City's current Priority
                                                                                                        Development Area planning (even though there is a bit of
                                                                                                        overlap--it was unintended and reflects that the City's PDA
                                                                                                        planning supported some already ongoing efforts). City
                                                                                                        staff have requested that this website be renamed. City
                                                                                                        staff are also considering creating a new website to address
                                                                                                        the City's current Priority Development Area planning
                                                                                                        efforts.
 82  East Bay    Letter      PDA/Specific/Large The Housing Element should include specific             City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
     Housing     dated       Development        programs that will be undertaken to ensure inclusion    resources for affordable housing. The following is the
     Organizatio 6/16/14     Planning           of affordable units in the PDAs and other major         stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
     ns (EBHO)                                  development projects. This must beyond a simple         affordable housing development and develop new sources
                                                recitation of existing housing policies (most of which  of funding. Following is language added to Policy Action
                                                are inadequately funded, especially in the wake of the  2.7.2 "The City is committed to equitable development
                                                dissolution of redevelopment) and will make clear       Citywide—with a focus on Specific Plan Areas, Priority
                                                how and when affordable housing will be developed       Development Areas (PDAs) and large development
                                                within these areas. See recommendations for Policy      projects—that provides housing for a range of economic
                                                Actions 2.7.2 and 3.3.2.                                levels to ensure the development of thriving, vibrant and
                                                                                                        complete communities." Additionally, this Policy Action
                                                                                                        states that the City will consider various types of
                                                                                                        community benefits via mandatory and/or voluntary
                                                                                                        options for developer contributions to affordable housing
                                                                                                        development by conducting a Nexus Study and Economic
                                                                                                        Feasibility Study for affordable housing development.
                                                                                                        Based on this study a comprehensive strategy will be
                                                                                                        devised based on current development economics.
500                                                                                         APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source      Topic              Comment                                             Response
      ter
 83   East Bay    Letter      PDA/Specific/Large Recommends the following language: The City is      City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
      Housing     dated       Development        committed to equitable development in Specific Plan resources for affordable housing. The following is the
      Organizatio 6/16/14     Planning           Areas, Priority Development Areas (PDAs) and large  stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
      ns (EBHO)                                  development projects that provides housing for a    affordable housing development and develop new sources
                                                 range of economic levels to ensure the development  of funding. Following is language added to Policy Action
                                                 of thriving, vibrant, complete communities.         2.7.2 "The City is committed to equitable development
                                                                                                     Citywide—with a focus on Specific Plan Areas, Priority
                                                                                                     Development Areas (PDAs) and large development
                                                                                                     projects—that provides housing for a range of economic
                                                                                                     levels to ensure the development of thriving, vibrant and
                                                                                                     complete communities." Additionally, this Policy Action
                                                                                                     states that the City will consider various types of
                                                                                                     community benefits via mandatory and/or voluntary
                                                                                                     options for developer contributions to affordable housing
                                                                                                     development by conducting a Nexus Study and Economic
                                                                                                     Feasibility Study for affordable housing development.
                                                                                                     Based on this study a comprehensive strategy will be
                                                                                                     devised based on current development economics.
 84   Housing     Oral        PDA/Specific/Large The City should prioritize the development of       City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
      Element     comments    Development        affordable housing in PDAs.                         resources for affordable housing. The following is the
      Focus       during the  Planning                                                               stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
      Group with  focus group                                                                        affordable housing development and develop new sources
      Affordable  held on                                                                            of funding. Following is language added to Policy Action
      Housing     6/11/14                                                                            2.7.2 “The City is committed to equitable development
      Advocates                                                                                      Citywide—with a focus on Specific Plan Areas, Priority
                                                                                                     Development Areas (PDAs) and large development
                                                                                                     projects—that provides housing for a range of economic
                                                                                                     levels to ensure the development of thriving, vibrant and
                                                                                                     complete communities." Additionally, this Policy Action
                                                                                                     states that the City will consider various types of
                                                                                                     community benefits via mandatory and/or voluntary
                                                                                                     options for developer contributions to affordable housing
                                                                                                     development by conducting a Nexus Study and Economic
                                                                                                     Feasibility Study for affordable housing development.
                                                                                                     Based on this study a comprehensive strategy will be
                                                                                                     devised based on current development economics.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                          501

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                        Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source      Topic                Comment                                                   Response
     ter
 85  EBALDC      email dated PDA/Specific/Large   As the City considers amending its NOFA scoring           DHCD, Housing Development Services staff, prior to the
                 6/16/14     Development          criteria to reflect prioritization of projects located in annual release of the NOFA, review the guidelines and
                             Planning             Priority Development Areas (PDAs), we request that:       scoring mechanism to confirm that it is still aligned with
                                                  1. EBALDC projects located in close proximity to          City/DHCD affordable housing policy goals. The
                                                  existing PDAs, or within planned PDAs, will continue      City/DHCD’s NOFAs in recent years have included
                                                  to be considered for future funding allocations.          preference points for development proposals “on a major
                                                  2. The planned PDA along International Boulevard          thoroughfare that transverses residential communities and
                                                  between the Downtown/Jack London Square and               is in need of infill housing due to the decline of local retail
                                                  Fruitvale PDAs be included in future NOFA scoring         and/or commercial uses” and “contribute to an existing or
                                                  criteria. The City has placed a priority on the OSNI      planned pattern of targeted redevelopment (housing or
                                                  effort to provide affordable housing and this Planned     commercial development, streetscape improvements, etc.)
                                                  PDA includes a very important segment of                  occurring within 1/4 mile of the project site.” It is likely
                                                  International Blvd.                                       that sites within a Priority Development Area would
                                                                                                            receive points under the most recent NOFA’s scoring
                                                                                                            criteria. Housing Development staff will consider the
                                                                                                            request to specifically include PDAs in the upcoming
                                                                                                            NOFA. If any of the “Potential Planned PDAs” are
                                                                                                            adopted as a PDA, City staff will treat them as such unless
                                                                                                            there is specific language in the adoption of those PDAs
                                                                                                            that dictate that City policy treat those PDAs differently.
 86  East Bay    Letter      Policy 1.1; Policy   There is not provision for affordable housing in this     See added language to Policy Action 2.7.3 (formerly Policy
     Housing     dated       Action 1.1.3 Sale of policy. Note that State law requires cities to offer      Action 1.1.3 in Public Review Draft of the Housing
     Organizatio 6/16/14     City-owned           surplus property to affordable housing developers         Element) Sale of City-Owned Property for Housing: Solicit
     ns (EBHO)               Property for         first. We urge the City to include the following          Requests for Proposals (RFPs) from interested developers
                             Housing              language: In disposing of City-owned properties, the      to construct housing on City-owned sites. RFPs will be
                                                  City will give first priority to affordable housing on    posted on the City’s website and distributed directly to
                                                  these sites. For those sites that are sold without        developers, including nonprofit housing providers. In
                                                  affordable housing requirements, 25% of the proceeds      disposing of City-owned surplus properties, the City will
                                                  of such sales shall be deposited to the Affordable        give first consideration to affordable housing developers
                                                  Housing Trust Fund.                                       per the California Surplus Lands Act, Government Code
                                                                                                            54220 et seq. For those sites that are sold without
                                                                                                            affordable housing requirements, the City should consider
                                                                                                            depositing 25% of the proceeds of such sales to the
                                                                                                            Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
502                                                                                            APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                       HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                      Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source      Topic                Comment                                                Response
      ter
 87   James      Email       Policy 1.1; Policy   (Recommendation): Any City-owned property in           See added language to Policy Action 2.7.3 (formerly Policy
      Vann       dated       Action 1.1.3 Sale of areas zoned for multi-family housing sold for          Action 1.1.3 in Public Review Draft of the Housing
                 6/13/14 in  City-owned           development must include an equitable share of         Element) Sale of City-Owned Property for Housing: Solicit
                 response to Property for         affordable rental or for-sale housing in the           Requests for Proposals (RFPs) from interested developers
                 Focus       Housing              development.                                           to construct housing on City-owned sites. RFPs will be
                 Group Mtg                                                                               posted on the City’s website and distributed directly to
                 6/11/14                                                                                 developers, including nonprofit housing providers. In
                                                                                                         disposing of City-owned surplus properties, the City will
                                                                                                         give first consideration to affordable housing developers
                                                                                                         per the California Surplus Lands Act, Government Code
                                                                                                         54220 et seq. For those sites that are sold without
                                                                                                         affordable housing requirements, the City should consider
                                                                                                         depositing 25% of the proceeds of such sales to the
                                                                                                         Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
 88   BIA of the email dated Policy 1.1; Policy   BIA supports Policy 1.1.5 calling for creation of a    Policy Action 1.1.5 from the Public Review Draft of the
      Bay Area   6/10/14     Action 1.1.5:        Housing Incentive Zoning program; program should       Housing Element was folded into Policy Action 2.7.2 with
                             Housing Incentive    be approached differently than currently described.    the following title: Consider Implementing Mandatory
                             Zoning               This type of program is especially important for the   and/or Voluntary Options for Developer Contributions to
                                                  areas Oakland has designated as Priority               Affordable Housing Development by Conducting a Nexus
                                                  Development Areas (PDAs) in Plan Bay Area, as the      Study and Economic Feasibility Study for Affordable
                                                  purpose of PDAs is to identify areas where             Housing (among other areas studied—see Policy Action
                                                  development will be streamlined and encouraged         3.3.2).
                                                  through the removal of building constraints because it
                                                  is in the appropriate location and of the proper place
                                                  type. The purpose of PDA designations is not to
                                                  impose additional fees or extractions on PDAs in
                                                  "exchange" for developing at the height and density
                                                  that makes sense economically and environmentally
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                               503

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                Table E-1
                                 Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source  Topic              Comment                                                 Response
     ter
 89  East Bay    Letter  Policy 1.1; Policy Reliance on incentives alone is unlikely to be          Policy Action 1.1.5 from the Public Review Draft of the
     Housing     dated   Action 1.1.5:      successful. This has already been confirmed by the      Housing Element was folded into Policy Action 2.7.2 with
     Organizatio 6/16/14 Housing Incentive  City's own consultant on the Downtown Development       the following title: Consider Implementing Mandatory
     ns (EBHO)           Zoning             Feasibility Study, AECOM, in its letter dated March     and/or Voluntary Options for Developer Contributions to
                                            2014, which explicitly recommends establishment of      Affordable Housing Development by Conducting a Nexus
                                            a citywide development fee rather than use of           Study and Economic Feasibility Study for Affordable
                                            incentives and bonuses. City staff admits that existing Housing (among other areas studied—see Policy Action
                                            density bonuses have not really been effective and      3.3.2).
                                            incentivizing affordable housing. In the context of
                                            multiple Specific Plans that will provide additional
                                            height and density to existing zoning, there are even
                                            fewer prospects for meaningful and effective
                                            incentives and bonuses.
504                                                                                   APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                       CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                    Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen    Source      Topic              Comment                                                 Response
      ter
 90   Greenbelt email dated Policy 1.1; Policy Feasibility analysis of the Housing Incentive Zoning    Policy Action 1.1.5 from the Public Review Draft of the
      Alliance  6/16/14     Action 1.1.5:      should consider the following criteria: (language       Housing Element was folded into Policy Action 2.7.2 with
                            Housing Incentive  should be coordinated with Specific Plans):             the following title: Consider Implementing Mandatory
                            Zoning                                                                     and/or Voluntary Options for Developer Contributions to
                                               1. Determine geographic area program will target.       Affordable Housing Development by Conducting a Nexus
                                               Different parts of the city will have different market  Study and Economic Feasibility Study for Affordable
                                               conditions. In order to develop an effective policy,    Housing (among other areas studied—see Policy Action
                                               areas where the bonus program will apply should be      3.3.2).
                                               identified up front. As any development in an area
                                               may show its effects on the surrounding areas, the
                                               policy will be applied on a city level but will also be
                                               considering the local area specific feasibility and
                                               market conditions. The policy will have clear
                                               direction on the relationship between city-wide
                                               mechanisms and the implementation in PDA specific
                                               plans, such as BVDSP, West Oakland, Lake Merritt,
                                               etc.
                                               2. Conduct community process to determine public
                                               benefits. The community benefits that will be
                                               incentivized through this program will be established
                                               through a robust community process, engaging
                                               residents in each neighborhood where the program
                                               will be in effect. This will help to identify community
                                               benefits upfront, or an effective “points” system for
                                               individual developments, so that benefits are
                                               conferred in a timely manner after development is
                                               approved.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                           505

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source      Topic               Comment                                                  Response
     ter
 91  Housing    Oral        Policy 1.1; Policy  Update language to reflect community involvement;        Policy Action 1.1.6 language changed to the following:
     Element    comments    Action 1.1.6:       "Revitalization" implies that this part of the City is   An inter-departmental City team is working with residents,
     Focus      during the  International Blvd  depressed/not vital--implies top-down planning and       businesses, community groups, County and other public
     Group with focus group Community           gentrification.                                          agencies, foundations, private industry and other partners
     Affordable held on     Revitalization                                                               to improve International Blvd Corridor’s housing,
     Housing    6/11/14     Without                                                                      economic development, health, transportation, and public
     Advocates              Displacement                                                                 safety conditions, as well as develop strategies to prevent
                            Initiative                                                                   the displacement of long-time residents and small
                                                                                                         businesses. Key parts from the City’s award-wining
                                                                                                         International Boulevard Transit Oriented Development
                                                                                                         Plan will be implemented.
                                                                                                         Additionally, staff underscored that there is a strong
                                                                                                         community development process happening in this
                                                                                                         neighborhood precised meant to counter gentrification.
                                                                                                         Commenter was invited to participate in the community
                                                                                                         development process.
 92  James      Email       Policy 1.2; Policy  (Recommendation): The City shall prioritize              City of Oakland staff will be releasing an RFP for a Nexus
     Vann       dated       Action 1.2.1: Land  opportunities to receive, acquire, develop, obtain land, Study and Economic Feasibility Analysis for various
                6/13/14 in  Inventory           and landbank sites suitable for development of           impact fees (see Policy Action 3.3.2) during the Summer of
                response to (Opportunity Sites) affordable rental or for-sale housing, and to dispose of 2014. Although "land banking (among other community
                Focus                           such sites as to best attain this objective.             benefit suggestions) are not specifically cited in the RFP as
                Group Mtg                                                                                an area of study, City staff think that there will be other
                6/11/14                                                                                  opportunities to incorporate specific language into the final
                                                                                                         contract for this study.
506                                                                                          APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                            CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                         Table E-1
                                       Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source      Topic                Comment                                                 Response
      ter
 93   East Bay    Letter      Policy 1.3:          There is no language included in this Policy's Action   City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
      Housing     dated       Appropriate          items that ensure development of affordable housing     resources for affordable housing. The following is the
      Organizatio 6/16/14     Locations and        (with the exception of the Brooklyn Basin plan--and     stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
      ns (EBHO)               Densities for        that plan is not feasible). The City should identify    affordable housing development and develop new sources
                              Housing              specific actions that would ensure that sites are not   of funding. Following is language added to Policy Action
                                                   just adequately zoned for affordable housing, but that  2.7.2 “The City is committed to equitable development
                                                   they will in fact be available for affordable housing   Citywide—with a focus on Specific Plan Areas, Priority
                                                   development.                                            Development Areas (PDAs) and large development
                                                                                                           projects—that provides housing for a range of economic
                                                                                                           levels to ensure the development of thriving, vibrant and
                                                                                                           complete communities." Additionally, this Policy Action
                                                                                                           states that the City will consider various types of
                                                                                                           community benefits via mandatory and/or voluntary
                                                                                                           options for developer contributions to affordable housing
                                                                                                           development by conducting a Nexus Study and Economic
                                                                                                           Feasibility Study for affordable housing development.
                                                                                                           Based on this study a comprehensive strategy will be
                                                                                                           devised based on current development economics.
 94   James       Email       policy 1.3; Policy   (Recommendation): The City should vigorously            The City of Oakland’s Development
      Vann        dated       Action 1.3.6:        promote the inclusion of 15% of the 3100 units          Agreement/Cooperation Agreement for the Brooklyn Basin
                  6/13/14 in  Promote new          planned for the Brooklyn Basin Project (formerly Oak    Project has a requirement of 15% affordable units to be
                  response to housing              to Ninth) to be affordable as required by               included in the development, although in the wake of
                  Focus       opportunities in the Redevelopment law, and should strongly encourage        Redevelopment’s dissolution, there is limited funding
                  Group Mtg   Estuary Area         the developer to provide the units as an integral       available to develop those units and there are fairly
                  6/11/14                          component of the development.                           minimal requirements for the developer to contribute to the
                                                                                                           development of the affordable units. The City cannot re-
                                                                                                           open the development agreement to change its current
                                                                                                           language. The City of Oakland’s challenge will be to help
                                                                                                           secure funding for those approximately 465 units.
 95   James       Email       Policy 1.4:          (Recommendation): The City should assess the            City staff will continue to consider the concept of
      Vann        dated       Secondary Units      possibility and potential of "grandfathering" currently legalizing existing secondary units built without permits;
                  6/13/14 in                       occupied secondary units, as-is. Such units are         however, due to code enforcement and building inspections
                  response to                      presently classified by the Rent Adjustment Program     priorities and workload, this will not be an action included
                  Focus                            as rental units if rent is paid for the housing.        in the 2015-23 Housing Element.
                  Group Mtg
                  6/11/14
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                                  507

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                       Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source      Topic                 Comment                                                Response
     ter
 96  Housing    Oral        Policy 1.4:           Expand the supply of affordable housing by             City staff will continue to consider the concept of creating
     Element    comments    Secondary Units       supporting added development of secondary units by     a new program to fund the construction of new secondary
     Focus      during the                        creating a loan program that could be a hybrid of the  units; however, because the current DHCD Residential
     Group with focus group                       residential lending program and the foreclosure        Lending program is over-subscribed, this will not be an
     Affordable held on                           prevention loans.                                      action included in the 2015-23 Housing Element.
     Housing    6/11/14
     Advocates
 97  James      Email       Policy 2.1:           (Recommendation): The City will encourage the          City staff will send comment to Oakland Housing
     Vann       dated       Affordable Housing    Oakland Housing Authority to retain in its ownership   Authority for their response.
                6/13/14 in  Development           and management as much as possible of its Title 1
                response to Programs              Housing Units, as public housing is the only available
                Focus                             resource for persons and households of no or very low
                Group Mtg                         income.
                6/11/14
 98  EAH        Email       Policy 2.10; Policy   2.10.1 is a bit unclear – are these areas with low     Areas with low concentrations of poverty are identified
     Housing    dated       Action 2.10.1:        concentrations of poverty going to be part of the      each year in the NOFA and in 2013 it was based on
                6/12/14     Provide incentives    PDAs identified? And will there be some regulations    American Community Survey 2006-10 (5 year estimate)
                            for location of City- in place to ensure homeless, at-risk, extremely low    Data. The City's current policy is to award points to
                            assisted              and very low income populations will have access to    affordable housing developments that are located in census
                            developments in       such developments, along with low and moderate? In     tracts with low concentrations of poverty--as an incentive
                            areas of low          other words, will these projects be mixed-income so a  to support equity Citywide for the location of affordable
                            concentration of      high concentration of one population over another      housing. The City's DHCD staff determination of areas of
                            poverty               doesn’t occur?                                         low concentration of poverty is independent of the City's
                                                                                                         determination of PDA areas. There has not been an
                                                  2.10 in general, what about areas with high            analysis of PDA areas to determine how many census
                                                  concentrations of poverty, in terms of future          tracts with low concentrations of poverty fall within those
                                                  development and incentives for equity?                 areas. Please see responses under topic "PDA Planning" for
                                                                                                         more detail on planning for affordable housing in PDAs.
508                                                                                          APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                     CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                               Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source    Topic           Comment                                                  Response
      ter
 99   Adam       Email and Policy 2.2:     As currently written, none of the action items in        Policy 2.2: Affordable Homeownership Opportunities has
      Maloon,    Document  Affordable      section 2.2 explicitly discuss how they achieve any      goal language as follows: Develop and promote programs
      Northern   submitted Homeownership   degree of affordability. They read simply as             and mechanisms to expand opportunities for lower-income
      California 6/12/14   Opportunities   homeownership-oriented programs                          households to become homeowners. It is the intent and the
      Land Trust                                                                                    current implementation of existing programs of this policy
      and Bay                                                                                       goal that all the City's Affordable Homeownership
      Area                                                                                          programs listed in this section target lower-income
      Consortium                                                                                    households if they receive public funds.
      of Land
      Trust                                                                                         Additionally, commenter submitted specific text edits for
                                                                                                    this section which have been incorporated where possible.
 100  Oakland    Email     Policy 2.2:     Policy 2.2 AFFORDABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP                      Regarding lease-to-own programs, please City Policy
      Resident   dated     Affordable      OPPORTUNITIES                                            Action 2.2.2 and 4.3.4.
                 6/13/14   Homeownership   Action 2.2.x
                           Opportunities   (Recommendation): The City will seek out and, as         Regarding landbanking sites, City of Oakland staff will be
                                           feasible, will cooperate with, and encourage             releasing an RFP for a Nexus Study and Economic
                                           participation in Least-to-Own programs to assist the     Feasibility Analysis for various impact fees (see Policy
                                           furtherance of homeownership.                            Action 3.3.2) during the Summer of 2014. Although "land
                                                                                                    banking (among other community benefit suggestions) are
                                           Action 2.2.x                                             not specifically cited in the RFP as an area of study, City
                                           (Recommendation): The City shall prioritize              staff think that there will be other opportunities to
                                           opportunities to receive, acquire, develop, or obtain    incorporate specific language into the final contract for this
                                           land in order to landbank sites suitable for             study.
                                           development of affordable rental or for-sale housing,
                                           and to dispose of such sites as to best attain this      Regarding long-term price and resale restrictions on
                                           objective.                                               properties that benefit from City financial or material
                                                                                                    assistance, Policy 2.2 Affordable Homeownership
                                           Action 2,2.x                                             Opportunities has goal language as follows: Develop and
                                           (Recommendation): The City shall require long-term       promote programs and mechanisms to expand
                                           price and resale restrictions on properties that benefit opportunities for lower-income households to become
                                           from City financial or material assistance.              homeowners. It is the intent and the current
                                                                                                    implementation of existing programs of this policy goal
                                                                                                    that all the City's Affordable Homeownership programs
                                                                                                    listed in this section target lower-income households if they
                                                                                                    receive public funds.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                           509
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source    Topic              Comment                                                  Response
     ter
 101 East Bay    Letter    Policy 2.2:        Increase the supply of permanently affordable            Policy 2.2: Affordable Homeownership Opportunities has
     Housing     dated     Affordable         homeownership opportunities available to low-            goal language as follows: Develop and promote programs
     Organizatio 6/16/14   Homeownership      income residents and retain the public's investment in   and mechanisms to expand opportunities for lower-income
     ns (EBHO)             Opportunities      affordable housing, we urge the City to assure that      households to become homeowners. It is the intent and the
                                              long-term affordability of these properties though the   current implementation of existing programs of this policy
                                              use of effective resale restrictions in partnership with goal that all the City's Affordable Homeownership
                                              local community land trust or through other means.       programs listed in this section target lower-income
                                                                                                       households if they receive public funds.
                                              Insure the long-term affordability of assets in ROOT,
                                              Community Buying Program, and Scattered-Site             Additionally, there have been specific text edits around
                                              Acquisition and Rehab Fund                               affordability in specific programs that have been
                                                                                                       incorporated where possible.
 102 Adam        Verbal at Policy 2.2:        The current housing element does not directly            Policy 2.2: Affordable Homeownership Opportunities has
     Maloon,     Special   Affordable         incorporate the aspiration for affordable housing        goal language as follows: Develop and promote programs
     Northern    Community Homeownership      ownership into the policy goal of its homeownership      and mechanisms to expand opportunities for lower-income
     California  and       Opportunities      opportunities.                                           households to become homeowners. It is the intent of this
     Land Trust  Economic                                                                              policy goal that all the City's Affordable Homeownership
     and Bay     Developme                                                                             programs listed in this section target lower-income
     Area        nt                                                                                    households if they receive public funds.
     Consortium  Committee
     of Land     Meeting                                                                               Additionally, commenter submitted specific text edits for
     Trust       dated                                                                                 this section which have been incorporated where possible.
                 6/10/2014
 103 Adam        Email and Policy 2.2; Policy Suggested change in language:                            City staff made the changes made to language in Policy
     Maloon,     Document  Action 2.2.2:      City staff will consider developing a program to         Action 2.2.2 Scattered-Site Single Family Acquisition and
     Northern    submitted Scattered-Site     address vacant or abandoned housing due to               Rehabilitation Program:
     California  6/12/14   Single Family      foreclosures or property tax liens. Funds for this       City staff and non-profit partners have developed the
     Land Trust            Acquisition and    program would need to be identified. Funding would       Oakland Community Buying Program that will address
     and Bay               Rehabilitation     be used to address blight caused by these abandoned      vacant or abandoned housing due to foreclosures or
     Area                  Program            homes. Once funds have been secured, they will be        property tax liens. Start-up funds for this program have
     Consortium                               used to purchase and rehabilitate single family homes    been identified. Funding will be used to provide long term
     of Land                                  for re-sale, lease-to-own, or for rent, and will partner affordability of new housing developed. The final housing
     Trust                                    with community land trusts or otherwise incorporate      products will be single family homes for re-sale, lease-to-
                                              resale restrictions to preserve the public’s investment  own, or for rent and if financially viable and operational
                                              and ensure affordability for a 99 year term (see also    capacity exists, will partner with community land trusts or
                                              Action 4.3.5).                                           otherwise incorporate resale restrictions to preserve
                                                                                                       affordability for Oakland residents (see also Action 4.3.5).
510                                                                                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                        CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source      Topic              Comment                                                 Response
      ter
 104  Housing    Oral        Policy 2.2; Policy Commenter thought that the last sentence of this        Staff removed last sentence of Policy Action 2.2.3 as it was
      Element    comments    Action 2.2.3:      policy action, "Root sells the note to a private        no longer accurate given program changes.
      Focus      during the  Foreclosure        lender.”, sounded as though the City would wipe its
      Group with focus group Mitigation Pilot   hands free of loan at this point and leave program
      Affordable held on     Loan Program       participants/buyers vulnerable to continued
      Housing    6/11/14                        foreclosure actions.
      Advocates
 105  Adam       Email and   Policy 2.2; Policy Suggested change in language:                           City staff made the changes made to language in Policy
      Maloon,    Document    Action 2.2.4       The Community Buying Program seeks to assist            Action 2.2.4 Community Buying Program:
      Northern   submitted   Community Buying   Oakland residents (either those people who have lost    The Community Buying Program seeks to assist Oakland
      California 6/12/14     Program            their homes to foreclosure or tenants residing in       residents (either those people who have lost their homes to
      Land Trust                                foreclosed properties or who have been unable to        foreclosure or tenants residing in foreclosed properties or
      and Bay                                   compete with all cash investors on the open market)     who have been unable to compete with all cash investors
      Area                                      to purchase properties from the Scattered-Site Single   on the open market) to purchase properties from the
      Consortium                                Family Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program           Scattered-Site Single Family Acquisition and
      of Land                                   (Action 2.2.2 above) or other similar foreclosed        Rehabilitation Program (Action 2.2.2 above) or other
      Trust                                     housing. The city would assure the long-term            similar foreclosed housing. Should public funds be utilized,
                                                affordability of these properties through the use of    the city would assure the long-term affordability of these
                                                effective resale restrictions in partnership with local properties through the use of effective resale restrictions in
                                                community land trusts. Assistance to Oakland            partnership with nonprofit organizations with sufficient
                                                residents could include the use of loan products such   operational capacity, including possibly local community
                                                as the Federal Housing Authority 203K loan or other     land trusts. Assistance to Oakland residents could include
                                                funds available to the City, such as housing            the use of loan products such as the Federal Housing
                                                rehabilitation or down-payment assistance funds. In     Authority 203K loan or other funds available to the City,
                                                addition, the program will build upon the National      such as housing rehabilitation or down-payment assistance
                                                Community Stabilization Trust’s First Look program.     funds. In addition, the program will build upon the
                                                                                                        National Community Stabilization Trust’s First Look
                                                                                                        program.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                               511

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source    Topic              Comment                                               Response
     ter
 106 Adam        Email and Policy 2.4         Suggested change in language:                         Policy 2.2: Affordable Homeownership Opportunities has
     Maloon,     Document  Permanently        Promote and expand programs that increase the         goal language as follows: Develop and promote programs
     Northern    submitted Affordable         supply of permanently affordable homeownership        and mechanisms to expand opportunities for lower-income
     California  6/12/14   Homeownership      opportunities available to low-income residents and   households to become homeowners. Policy 2.2: Affordable
     Land Trust                               retain the public’s investment in affordable housing. Homeownership Opportunities has goal language as
     and Bay                                  Develop mechanisms for ensuring that assisted         follows: Develop and promote programs and mechanisms
     Area                                     homeownership developments remain permanently         to expand opportunities for lower-income households to
     Consortium                               affordable to lower-income households to promote a    become homeowners. It is the intent and the current
     of Land                                  mix of incomes.                                       implementation of existing programs of this policy goal
     Trust                                                                                          that all the City's Affordable Homeownership programs
                                                                                                    listed in this section target lower-income households if they
                                                                                                    receive public funds.
 107 Steve Cane, Verbal at Policy 2.4; Policy Consider stronger language around supporting land     Policy 2.4.1 cover's the City's policy on CLTs. The City
     Board of    Special   Action 2.4.1       trust going forward, particularly considering the key commits to continuing support, to the extent feasible, of the
     the         Community Community Land     element of the sustainable housing strategy going     existing CLTs in the City. The City will also support the
     Community   and       Trust Program      forward                                               expansion of CLTs in the City if land values make it
     Land Trust  Economic                                                                           financially feasible for the CLT and worthwhile for the
                 Developme                                                                          homeowners. City staff will, to the extent feasible, attend
                 nt                                                                                 any regional events related to CLTs.
                 Committee
                 Meeting
                 dated
                 6/10/2014
 108 Adam        Verbal at Policy 2.4; Policy Encourage using the housing element to outline        Policy 2.4.1 cover's the City's policy on CLTs. The City
     Maloon,     Special   Action 2.4.1       certain strategies to improve affordable home         commits to continuing support, to the extent feasible, of the
     Northern    Community Community Land     ownership through the Community Land Trust            existing CLTs in the City. The City will also support the
     California  and       Trust Program      housing model. Community Land Trust model is most     expansion of CLTs in the City if land values make it
     Land Trust  Economic                     enforceable method due to strength of the land lease  financially feasible for the CLT and worthwhile for the
     and Bay     Developme                    as well as the duration of 99 years.                  homeowners. City staff will, to the extent feasible, attend
     Area        nt                                                                                 any regional events related to CLTs.
     Consortium  Committee
     of Land     Meeting
     Trust       dated
                 6/10/2014
512                                                                                     APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                         CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                    Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source    Topic              Comment                                                  Response
      ter
 109  Junius      Verbal at Policy 2.4; Policy Utilize Community land trust as a foundational           Policy 2.4.1 cover's the City's policy on CLTs. The City
      Williams,   Special   Action 2.4.1       element of the housing strategy.                         commits to continuing support, to the extent feasible, of the
      Urban       Community Community Land                                                              existing CLTs in the City. The City will also support the
      strategies  and       Trust Program                                                               expansion of CLTs in the City if land values make it
      Council     Economic                                                                              financially feasible for the CLT and worthwhile for the
      and the     Developme                                                                             homeowners. City staff will, to the extent feasible, attend
      Board of    nt                                                                                    any regional events related to CLTs.
      the Land    Committee
      Trust       Meeting
                  dated
                  6/10/2014
 110  East Bay    Letter    Policy 2.4; Policy Explicitly support and encourage permanently             Policy 2.4.1 cover's the City's policy on CLTs. The City
      Housing     dated     Action 2.4.1       affordable home ownership through support and            commits to continuing support, to the extent feasible, of the
      Organizatio 6/16/14   Community Land     coordination with Community Land Trusts, limited         existing CLTs in the City. The City will also support the
      ns (EBHO)             Trust Program      equity cooperatives, and other models.                   expansion of CLTs in the City if land values make it
                                                                                                        financially feasible for the CLT and worthwhile for the
                                                                                                        homeowners. City staff will, to the extent feasible, attend
                                                                                                        any regional events related to CLTs.
 111  Adam        Email and Policy 2.4; Policy Suggested change in language:                            Policy 2.4.1 cover's the City's policy on CLTs. The City
      Maloon,     Document  Action 2.4.1       Continue support of existing Community Land Trust        commits to continuing support, to the extent feasible, of the
      Northern    submitted Community Land     Programs by assisting with the promotion of public       existing CLTs in the City. The City will also support the
      California  6/12/14   Trust Program      information and outreach activities, consulting with     expansion of CLTs in the City if land values make it
      Land Trust                               staff when developing new homebuyer programs.            financially feasible for the CLT and worthwhile for the
      and Bay                                  Support expansion of land trusts units if land values    homeowners. City staff will, to the extent feasible, attend
      Area                                     make it financially feasible by provision of land or     any regional events related to CLTs.
      Consortium                               housing obtained through the Scattered-Site Single
      of Land                                  Family Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program, the
      Trust                                    Community Buying Program, tax liens, blight
                                               abatement, or other such methods and the
                                               incorporation of an Inclusionary Zoning
                                               Homeownership Program. Ownership of the land by a
                                               community-based land trust ensures that the housing
                                               remains permanently affordable, retaining the subsidy
                                               for the city in perpetuity, rather than benefitting only
                                               the initial homebuyer.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                               513
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                    Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source      Topic               Comment                                              Response
     ter
 112 Adam       Email and   Policy 2.4; Policy  Suggested change in language:                        City staff have made changes to Policy 2.2.2 that
     Maloon,    Document    Action 2.4.2 Resale Continue to utilize financing agreements for City-   incorporate language regarding resale restrictions:
     Northern   submitted   Controls            assisted ownership development projects to ensure    City staff and non-profit partners have developed the
     California 6/12/14                         that units remain permanently affordable through     Oakland Community Buying Program that will address
     Land Trust                                 covenants running with the land, including the       vacant or abandoned housing due to foreclosures or
     and Bay                                    Scattered-Site Single Family Acquisition and         property tax liens. Start-up funds for this program have
     Area                                       Rehabilitation Program (Action 2.2.2 above).         been identified. Funding will be used to provide long term
     Consortium                                                                                      affordability of new housing developed. The final housing
     of Land                                                                                         products will be single family homes for re-sale, lease-to-
     Trust                                                                                           own, or for rent and if financially viable and operational
                                                                                                     capacity exists, will partner with community land trusts or
                                                                                                     otherwise incorporate resale restrictions to preserve
                                                                                                     affordability for Oakland residents (see also Action 4.3.4).
 113 EAH        Email       Policy 2.5: Seniors 2.5 More specific language that encompasses lower    Requested consideration from DHCd, Housing
     Housing    dated       and Other Persons   income to very low income senior housing preferred   Development Section management to change to more
                6/12/14     with Special Needs                                                       specific language.
 114 James      Email       Policy 2.7: Expand  Add language: "FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING" to            City staff changed the title of Policy 2.7 to the following:
     Vann       dated       Local Funding       the title                                            Expand local resources for affordable housing. The
                6/13/14 in  Sources                                                                  following is the stated policy goal: Increase local resources
                response to                                                                          to support affordable housing development and develop
                Focus                                                                                new sources of funding
                Group Mtg
                6/11/14
 115 EAH        Email       Policy 2.7; Policy  2.7.2 We support the expedited commission of an      City staff have made changes to Policy 2.7: Expand local
     Housing    dated       Action 2.7.2:       affordable housing impact fee nexus study, and       resources for affordable housing. The following is the
                6/12/14     Housing Impact Fee  subsequent adoption by Oakland, as surrounding       stated policy goal: Increase local resources to support
                                                jurisdictions such as Berkeley, San Francisco and    affordable housing development and develop new sources
                                                Emeryville either have the fee or have completed a   of funding. Per Policy Action 2.7.2, the City will consider
                                                nexus study and are implementing                     various types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                                                                                                     voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                                                                     housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                                                                     Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing
                                                                                                     development. Based on this study a comprehensive strategy
                                                                                                     will be devised based on current development economics.
514                                                                                      APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                          CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                      HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source      Topic              Comment                                                Response
      ter
 116  BIA of the  email dated Policy 2.7; Policy BIA opposes including a reference to studying an       City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
      Bay Area    6/10/14     Action 2.7.2:      affordable housing impact fee in the Housing           public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
                              Housing Impact Fee Element. Including this measure in the Housing         has been changed to the following title: Consider various
                                                 Element sends precisely the wrong signal to private    types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                                                 developers looking to invest in Oakland. These fees    voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                 are effectively taxes on new housing construction and  housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                 are strongly opposed by the building industry.         Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                                                                                                        other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                                                                                                        comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                                                                                                        that will among other things examine current real estate
                                                                                                        development economics.
                                                                                                        City staff believe that by conducting this study the
                                                                                                        following principles will be achieved: 1) certainty in the
                                                                                                        development approval timeline, process, and required
                                                                                                        outcomes; 2) consistency in the application of standards
                                                                                                        across the City rather than being subject to shifting
                                                                                                        political factors; 3) fairness of the requirements especially
                                                                                                        as regarding economic feasibility of the requirements and
                                                                                                        also differentials in project scope and location; 4) advance
                                                                                                        notice sufficient to accommodate project pro formas and
                                                                                                        financing; and 5) achievement of desired community
                                                                                                        benefits.
 117  East Bay    Comment     Policy 2.7; Policy need a citywide policy that will require developers to City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
      Housing     letter      Action 2.7.2:      contribute to provision and or preservation of         public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
      Organizatio received at Housing Impact Fee affordable housing. Some elements of housing           has been changed to the following title: Consider various
      ns (EBHO)   6/11/14                        incentive zoning need to be mandatory.                 types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                  focus group                                                                           voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                                                                        housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                                                                        Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                                                                                                        other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                                                                                                        comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                                                                                                        that will among other things examine current real estate
                                                                                                        development economics.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                               515
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source      Topic              Comment                                              Response
     ter
 118 East Bay    Comment     Policy 2.7; Policy need a timeline in the impact fee/nexus study piece  City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
     Housing     letter      Action 2.7.2:                                                           public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
     Organizatio received at Housing Impact Fee                                                      has been changed to the following title: Consider various
     ns (EBHO)   6/11/14                                                                             types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                 focus group                                                                         voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                                                                     housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                                                                     Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                                                                                                     other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                                                                                                     comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                                                                                                     that will among other things examine current real estate
                                                                                                     development economics.
                                                                                                     The RFP requests that this study be completed by
                                                                                                     December 31, 2014.
 119 Housing     Oral        Policy 2.7; Policy Revisit the existing Jobs/Housing Impact Fee and     City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
     Element     comments    Action 2.7.2:      update fee schedule if nexus study shows that it is  public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
     Focus       during the  Housing Impact Fee necessary.                                           has been changed to the following title: Consider various
     Group with  focus group                                                                         types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
     Affordable  held on                                                                             voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
     Housing     6/11/14                                                                             housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
     Advocates                                                                                       Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                                                                                                     other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                                                                                                     comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                                                                                                     that will among other things examine current real estate
                                                                                                     development economics.
                                                                                                     The RFP requests that this study review the Jobs/Housing
                                                                                                     Impact fees in light of other development fees in the
                                                                                                     analysis. Although this is specifically delineated in the RFP
                                                                                                     as an area of study, City staff think that there will be other
                                                                                                     opportunities to incorporate specific language into the final
                                                                                                     contract for this study.
516                                                                                      APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                        CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                      Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source    Topic                 Comment                                              Response
      ter
 120  East Bay    Memo      Land banking          Request that the City consider programs for          City of Oakland staff will be releasing an RFP for a Nexus
      Housing     dated                           acquisition and land banking of opportunity sites in Study and Economic Feasibility Analysis for various
      Organizatio 5/24/2014                       PDAs/Specific Plan Areas/Large Developments to       impact fees (see Policy Action 3.3.2) during the Summer of
      ns (EBHO)                                   ensure that development of affordable housing takes  2014. Although "land banking (among other community
                                                  place within the Plan Area, and doesn't simply       benefit suggestions) are not specifically cited in the RFP as
                                                  generate fee revenue that builds affordable housing  an area of study, City staff think that there will be other
                                                  elsewhere.                                           opportunities to incorporate specific language into the final
                                                                                                       contract for this study.
 121  East Bay    Memo      Anti-displacement     Adopt policies to show that the City will take       City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
      Housing     dated     in transit-rich areas measures to ensure that higher density and mixed-use displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
      Organizatio 5/24/2014                       development close to transit avoids displacement of  is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
      ns (EBHO)                                   existing lower income communities and preserves      strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                                                  existing affordable housing resources.               policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                                                                       prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                                       preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                                       residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                                       housing that currently has affordable rents.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                                517
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen    Source      Topic              Comment                                                Response
     ter
 122 Greenbelt email dated Policy 2.7; Policy 3. Conduct a market study to determine the type and    City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
     Alliance  6/16/14     Action 2.7.2:      level of incentive. Conduct a financial feasibility    public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
                           Housing Impact Fee study to determine the value of different types and    has been changed to the following title: Consider various
                                              levels of incentives, and the costs of providing the   types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                                              desired benefits. Note that incentives may include     voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                              increases in project height, density, and/or FAR, as   housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                              well as other incentives such as expedited permitting  Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                                              process, waived impact fees, or reduced parking        other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                                              requirements.                                          comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                                                                                                     that will among other things examine current real estate
                                              4. Select an appropriate policy mechanism to           development economics.
                                              implement program. Work with residents, potential
                                              developers, and other stakeholders to create a process City staff think that there will be other opportunities to
                                              that is transparent, predictable, and expedient. The   incorporate specific language into the final contract for this
                                              bonus program may be implemented through a variety     study.
                                              of ways, including a tiered system, using points or
                                              percentages, establishing a fixed price of additional
                                              FAR/height for purchase, or creating a marketplace
                                              for FAR/height to be bid on. Depending on the
                                              structure of the program, certain additional studies,
                                              such as a nexus study, may be necessary.
                                              5. Develop a process to revise program as needed.
                                              The incentive program should include a transparent
                                              and predictable process to allow changes to both the
                                              type and level of benefits and bonuses over time, to
                                              allow for changes in market conditions, public needs,
                                              and other possible changes.
518                                                                                      APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                               HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                 Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen    Source     Topic              Comment                                            Response
      ter
 123  Councilme Verbal at  Policy 2.7; Policy Question about the status and timeline for Impact  City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
      mber      Special    Action 2.7.2:      Fees Nexus Study                                   public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
      Schaaf    Community  Housing Impact Fee                                                    has been changed to the following title: Consider various
                and                                                                              types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                Economic                                                                         voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                Developme                                                                        housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                nt                                                                               Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                Committee                                                                        other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                Meeting                                                                          comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                dated                                                                            that will among other things examine current real estate
                6/10/2014                                                                        development economics.
                                                                                                 The RFP requests that this study be completed by
                                                                                                 December 31, 2014.
 124  Councilme Verbal at  Policy 2.7; Policy Request expedition of the Impact fees Nexus Study  City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
      mber      Special    Action 2.7.2:      and have proposal to the Council by December 2014. public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
      Mcelhaney Community  Housing Impact Fee                                                    has been changed to the following title: Consider various
                and                                                                              types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                Economic                                                                         voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                Developme                                                                        housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                nt                                                                               Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                Committee                                                                        other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                Meeting                                                                          comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                dated                                                                            that will among other things examine current real estate
                6/10/2014                                                                        development economics.
                                                                                                 The RFP requests that this study be completed by
                                                                                                 December 31, 2014.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                       519
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                 Table E-1
                                  Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source    Topic              Comment                                                Response
     ter
 125 Council    Verbal at Policy 2.7; Policy Supports the idea of having an impact fees regardless  City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
     President  Special   Action 2.7.2:      of the height of the building                          public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
     Patricia   Community Housing Impact Fee                                                        has been changed to the following title: Consider various
     Kernighan  and                                                                                 types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                Economic                                                                            voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                Developme                                                                           housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                nt                                                                                  Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                Committee                                                                           other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                Meeting                                                                             comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                dated                                                                               that will among other things examine current real estate
                6/10/2014                                                                           development economics.
 126 Enterprise Email     Policy 2.7; Policy In San Mateo County, we seeded a county-wide study     City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
     Community  dated     Action 2.7.2:      led by Strategic Economics for fourteen jurisdictions  public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
     Partners   6/24/14   Housing Impact Fee – in several months each city will have a data-heavy,  has been changed to the following title: Consider various
                                             legally defensible case for why impact fees can be     types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                                             implemented or raised – it is a valuable tool in the   voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                             effort to create opportunities for lower-income        housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                             families in our urban cities. We applaud the City of   Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                                             Oakland’s commitment to conducting a nexus study       other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                                             and we highly encourage you to do it immediately       comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                                             (before missing the market opportunities) and with     that will among other things examine current real estate
                                             other cities in Alameda County. Conducting a           development economics.
                                             county-wide assessment will result in a much more
                                             powerful and informative tool for the department to    City staff believe that it is imperative to proceed with the
                                             use in bringing staff and decision makers along, than  Nexus Study immediately without waiting to partner with
                                             doing one just for Oakland. We are happy to connect    other local jurisdictions for fear that this will further delay
                                             you with the consultant team working in San Mateo if   progress of this effort.
                                             you are interested.
520                                                                                     APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                        CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                      Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source      Topic              Comment                                               Response
      ter
 127  East Bay    Letter      Policy 2.7; Policy Recommends the following language: The City           City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
      Housing     dated       Action 2.7.2:      intends, as part of a citywide community benefits     public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
      Organizatio 6/16/14     Housing Impact Fee policy, to require developers in Specific Plan Areas, has been changed to the following title: Consider various
      ns (EBHO)                                  PDAs and large development projects to make           types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                                                 contributions to assist in the development of         voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                                 affordable housing, through options that may include  housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                                 impact fees, land dedication and inclusionary zoning. Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                                                 Among other actions, the City will conduct a nexus    other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                                                 study and an economic feasibility study to evaluate   comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                                                 new programs to achieve this objective, including     that will among other things examine current real estate
                                                 inclusionary zoning and impact fees for new housing   development economics.
                                                 development. The study will be completed no later
                                                 than December 31, 2014.                               The RFP requests that this study be completed by
                                                                                                       December 31, 2014.
 128  Housing     Oral        Policy 2.7; Policy The City needs a timeline on the impact fee/nexus     City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
      Element     comments    Action 2.7.2:      study.                                                public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
      Focus       during the  Housing Impact Fee                                                       has been changed to the following title: Consider various
      Group with  focus group                                                                          types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
      Affordable  held on                                                                              voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
      Housing     6/11/14                                                                              housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
      Advocates                                                                                        Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                                                                                                       other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                                                                                                       comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                                                                                                       that will among other things examine current real estate
                                                                                                       development economics.
                                                                                                       The RFP requests that this study be completed by
                                                                                                       December 31, 2014.
 129  James       Email       Policy 2.8: Rental Suggested change in Policy 2.8 language to: "Rental   City staff did not believe it necessary to include the word
      Vann        dated       Assistance         Financial Assistance"                                 "financial" in this policy goal language as the actions listed
                  6/13/14 in                                                                           under this policy goal imply that the programs listed are
                  response to                                                                          financial assistance programs.
                  Focus
                  Group Mtg
                  6/11/14
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                               521
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table E-1
                                    Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source      Topic              Comment                                                   Response
     ter
 130 Menaka     Email       Policy 3.3; Policy 1. Supports Oakland for conducting a nexus study to       City staff have made changes to Policy Action 2.7.2. In the
     Mohan      dated       Action 3.3.2 and   charge impact fees for infrastructure as well as          public review draft it was titled "Housing Impact Fee." It
                6/17/2014   Development        affordable housing                                        has been changed to the following title: Consider various
                            Impact Fees (nexus                                                           types of community benefits via mandatory and/or
                            study)             2. Encourages the council to think more about the         voluntary options for developer contributions to affordable
                                               high rise options. The high rise option would provide     housing development by conducting a Nexus Study and
                                               much needed supply of housing to Oakland and help         Economic Feasibility Study for affordable housing (among
                                               with the overall streetscape of the downtown streets.     other areas studied -- see also Policy Action 3.3.2). A
                                               Many are wide and hard to navigate and they often         comprehensive strategy will be devised based on this study
                                               "feel wider" due to the low building scale. As SF         that will among other things examine current real estate
                                               becomes more and more expensive and pushes people         development economics.
                                               to Oakland, the City of Oakland should start to
                                               seriously address the issue of supply of housing, and
                                               incorporating the recommendations of this plan would
                                               be a great start.
 131 BIA of the email dated Policy 3.3; Policy With respect to exploration of developing a formal        See Policy Action 3.3.2 Development Impact Fees.
     Bay Area   6/10/14     Action 3.3.2 and   transportation impact fee program, BIA is generally
                            Development        supportive of this approach as it allows for individual
                            Impact Fees        projects to pay their fair share of needed infrastructure
                            (transportation)   improvements in an efficient manner. The fee
                                               program should be supported by a rigorous nexus
                                               study and environmental review (so that it can satisfy
                                               CEQA case law on the use of fee programs to
                                               mitigate project and cumulative transportation
                                               impacts).
522                                                                                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                           CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                         HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                       Table E-1
                                       Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source      Topic               Comment                                                  Response
      ter
 132  Alameda     Email       Policy 4.3: Housing Use a proactive rental inspection policy to improve      See Policy Action 4.3.4 Proactive Rental Inspection Policy.
      County      dated       Preservation and    habitability of existing housing to identify, document,
      Public      6/16/2014   Rehabilitation      and address code violations in rental housing on a
      Health                                      regular basis. The City should work with Community-
      Department                                  based organizations and health department to
                                                  prioritize violations that are hazardous to health,
                                                  particularly for residents that are elderly, disabled,
                                                  pregnant women, children and chronically ill. In the
                                                  meantime code enforcement staffing should be
                                                  increased particularly for neighborhoods with old
                                                  housing stock and high concentration of poverty.
                                                  Before undertaking a proactive inspection policy, the
                                                  City should ensure that tenant protection is in place to
                                                  prevent eviction or displacement due to code
                                                  violations and provide relocation benefits.
 133  East Bay    Letter      Policy 4.3: Housing Recommends the following language: The City will         City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
      Housing     dated       Preservation and    require one-for-one replacement, with units of           displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
      Organizatio 6/16/14     Rehabilitation      comparable size and affordability, of any housing        is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
      ns (EBHO)                                   units lost to demolition, conversion or new              strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                                                  development.                                             policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                                                                           prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                                           preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                                           residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                                           housing that currently has affordable rents.
                                                                                                           One-for-one replacement of units could be considered in
                                                                                                           this policy reevaluation.
 134  Housing     Oral        Policy 4.3; Policy  Seismic retrofit policies should be all inclusive (not   Policy Action 4.3.9 Seismic Safety Retrofit Policy has been
      Element     comments    Action 4.3.9:       just soft story)                                         added to the Housing Element. Following is the policy
      Focus       during the  Seismic Safety                                                               language:
      Group with  focus group Retrofit Policy                                                              Develop a new seismic retrofit policy, coupled with tenant
      Affordable  held on                                                                                  protections, to preserve about 14,000 soft story housing
      Housing     6/11/14                                                                                  units in Oakland’s flatland neighborhoods at risk for
      Advocates                                                                                            destruction in a major earthquake. A low interest loan fund
                                                                                                           may be possible through combining available public
                                                                                                           monies with private capital or alternatively through issuing
                                                                                                           a new bond, which would require voter approval.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                                  523

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source      Topic            Comment                                                 Response
     ter
 135 BIA of the  email dated Policy 5.3: Rent The Housing Element should commit to seek a             Rent Adjust Program policies were revisited and revised in
     Bay Area    6/10/14     Adjustment       balance between the respective rights of tenants, their 2014. No further changes to this program are anticipated at
                             Program          neighbors, and building owners/landlords with respect   this time.
                                              to significantly disruptive tenants. A lack of balance
                                              between tenant due process and the peace and
                                              enjoyment rights of other building residents is a
                                              constraint to the development of additional market
                                              rate rental housing.
 136 East Bay    Letter      Policy 5.3: Rent Strengthen anti-displacement programs such as rent      City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
     Housing     dated       Adjustment       stabilization in various ordinances including Condo     displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
     Organizatio 6/16/14     Program          Conversion, Ellis Act, Housing Code Enforcement         is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
     ns (EBHO)                                Relocation, and SRO Conversion                          strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                                                                                                      policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                                                                      prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                                      preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                                      residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                                      housing that currently has affordable rents.
                                                                                                      Policy Action 4.4.1 Consider Developing a Standard City
                                                                                                      Tenant Relocation Policy and Fund City Program
                                                                                                      Operations has the following policy action language:
                                                                                                      The City has a number of ordinances that have tenant
                                                                                                      relocation assistance requirements, including under code
                                                                                                      enforcement activities, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just
                                                                                                      Cause for evictions, and SRO conversions. City of
                                                                                                      Oakland will consider 1) establishing one standard policy
                                                                                                      across tenant relocation requirements, such as code
                                                                                                      enforcement, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just Cause for
                                                                                                      evictions and SRO conversions, 2) explore new strategies
                                                                                                      to fund and recover relocation costs, and 3) allocate and
                                                                                                      fund adequate staffing to monitor relocation programs and
                                                                                                      recover costs from responsible landlords.
 137 Enterprise  Email       Policy 5.3: Rent We recommend that the City do more strengthen its       Rent Adjust Program policies were revisited and revised in
     Community   dated       Adjustment       rent stabilization (policies).                          2014. No further changes to this program are anticipated at
     Partners    6/24/14     Program                                                                  this time.
524                                                                                     APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                 HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                  Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source      Topic            Comment                                                Response
      ter
 138  Alameda    Email       Policy 5.3: Rent Continue to implement and improve Rent Adjustment      Rent Adjust Program policies were revisited and revised in
      County     dated       Adjustment       Ordinance, including the rent amendment approved       2014. No further changes to this program are anticipated at
      Public     6/16/2014   Program          by City Council to cap all rent increase to 10 percent this time.
      Health                                  annually, eliminate debt services, and reduce the
      Department                              allowable amount of capital improvement pass-
                                              through 70 percent.
 139  James      Email       Policy 5.3: Rent (Recommendation): The City will continue to            Rent Adjust Program policies were revisited and revised in
      Vann       dated       Adjustment       evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of the       2014. No further changes to this program are anticipated at
                 6/13/14 in  Program          program and the obstacles to and difficulty of its use this time.
                 response to                  by tenants -- only about one-half of 1% of covered
                 Focus                        tenants use the tenant-complaint based system.
                 Group Mtg
                 6/11/14
 140  James      Email       Policy 5.3: Rent (Recommendation): The City will evaluate the           Rent Adjust Program policies were revisited and revised in
      Vann       dated       Adjustment       program for needed revisions to protect against        2014. No further changes to this program are anticipated at
                 6/13/14 in  Program          unlawful harassment, retaliation, displacement, and    this time.
                 response to                  constructive eviction.
                 Focus
                 Group Mtg
                 6/11/14
 141  James      Email       Policy 5.3: Rent (Recommendation): The City will review and adjust      Rent Adjust Program policies were revisited and revised in
      Vann       dated       Adjustment       its policies on payments and reimbursement to tenants  2014. No further changes to this program are anticipated at
                 6/13/14 in  Program          for owner-driven permanent or temporary relocation     this time.
                 response to                  of tenants.
                 Focus
                 Group Mtg
                 6/11/14
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                         525
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                              Table E-1
                               Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen    Source  Topic             Comment                                                Response
     ter
 142 Karen     Email   Policy 5.6:       strengthen existing condo conversion policy;           The public review draft language for Policy Action 5.6.1
     Kunze     dated   Limitations on    eliminate ability to purchase conversion credits;      was amended to the following based on comments
               6/15/14 Conversion of     provide relocation assistance that is consistent with  received:
                       Rental Housing to current relocation costs; drop lifetime leases in      The City will review the existing Condominium
                       Condominiums      exchange for protecting any tenant who cannot afford   Conversion Ordinance and consider changes that: 1)
                                         to purchase their unit                                 considers an annual conversion cap, 2) eliminates the
                                                                                                exemption for 2-4 unit buildings in the non-Impact Areas,
                                                                                                3) creates opportunities for tenant purchase and affordable
                                                                                                homeownership for low to moderate income households,
                                                                                                and 4) has strong tenant protection measures. Changes to
                                                                                                this ordinance may only be made if adopted by the City
                                                                                                Council and following appropriate public notice and
                                                                                                debate.
 143 Karen     Email   Policy 5.6:       The "remainder" parcel on Lake Merritt Blvd. near      The public review draft language for Policy Action 5.6.1
     Kunze     dated   Limitations on    12th Street should not be allowed to generate condo    was amended to the following based on comments
               6/15/14 Conversion of     conversion credits. A moratorium on conversions        received:
                       Rental Housing to should be put in place until the ordinance is properly The City will review the existing Condominium
                       Condominiums      strengthened to protect the housing diversity and      Conversion Ordinance and consider changes that: 1)
                                         eliminate the loopholes described by EBHO              considers an annual conversion cap, 2) eliminates the
                                                                                                exemption for 2-4 unit buildings in the non-Impact Areas,
                                                                                                3) creates opportunities for tenant purchase and affordable
                                                                                                homeownership for low to moderate income households,
                                                                                                and 4) has strong tenant protection measures. Changes to
                                                                                                this ordinance may only be made if adopted by the City
                                                                                                Council and following appropriate public notice and
                                                                                                debate.
526                                                                                 APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                       CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                     Table E-1
                                      Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source      Topic             Comment                                                Response
      ter
 144  James       Email       Policy 5.6:       Policy 5.6 LIMITATIONS ON CONVERSION OF                The public review draft language for Policy Action 5.6.1
      Vann        dated       Limitations on    RENTAL HOUSING TO CONDOMINIUMS                         was amended to the following based on comments
                  6/13/14 in  Conversion of     Action 5.6.x                                           received:
                  response to Rental Housing to (Recommendation): The City will review the 1981        The City will review the existing Condominium
                  Focus       Condominiums      Condominium Ordinance for needed updates to better     Conversion Ordinance and consider changes that: 1)
                  Group Mtg                     correlate with subsequent related laws and ordinances, considers an annual conversion cap, 2) eliminates the
                  6/11/14                       namely Costa-Hawkins, Ellis Act, Rent Adjustment       exemption for 2-4 unit buildings in the non-Impact Areas,
                                                Program revisions.                                     3) creates opportunities for tenant purchase and affordable
                                                                                                       homeownership for low to moderate income households,
                                                Action 5.6.x                                           and 4) has strong tenant protection measures. Changes to
                                                (Recommendation): The City will assess the need to     this ordinance may only be made if adopted by the City
                                                continue the amendment that exempted certain unit      Council and following appropriate public notice and
                                                types from control, including the effect of the        debate.
                                                exemptions on the balance of available housing types
                                                in the general inventory of rental units.
                                                Action 5.6.x
                                                (Recommendation): The City will access the concept
                                                and practice of "condominium conversion credits,"
                                                and whether this policy which provides no financial
                                                returns to the City should be continued.
 145  East Bay    Letter      Policy 5.6:       Strengthen anti-displacement programs such as          The public review draft language for Policy Action 5.6.1
      Housing     dated       Limitations on    condominium conversion controls in various             was amended to the following based on comments
      Organizatio 6/16/14     Conversion of     ordinances including Condo Conversion, Ellis Act,      received:
      ns (EBHO)               Rental Housing to Housing Code Enforcement Relocation, and SRO           The City will review the existing Condominium
                              Condominiums      Conversion                                             Conversion Ordinance and consider changes that: 1)
                                                                                                       considers an annual conversion cap, 2) eliminates the
                                                                                                       exemption for 2-4 unit buildings in the non-Impact Areas,
                                                                                                       3) creates opportunities for tenant purchase and affordable
                                                                                                       homeownership for low to moderate income households,
                                                                                                       and 4) has strong tenant protection measures. Changes to
                                                                                                       this ordinance may only be made if adopted by the City
                                                                                                       Council and following appropriate public notice and
                                                                                                       debate.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                            527
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source    Topic             Comment                                                 Response
     ter
 146 Enterprise  Email     Policy 5.6:       We recommend that the City do more to strengthen its    The public review draft language for Policy Action 5.6.1
     Community   dated     Limitations on    condominium conversion controls.                        was amended to the following based on comments
     Partners    6/24/14   Conversion of                                                             received:
                           Rental Housing to                                                         The City will review the existing Condominium
                           Condominiums                                                              Conversion Ordinance and consider changes that: 1)
                                                                                                     considers an annual conversion cap, 2) eliminates the
                                                                                                     exemption for 2-4 unit buildings in the non-Impact Areas,
                                                                                                     3) creates opportunities for tenant purchase and affordable
                                                                                                     homeownership for low to moderate income households,
                                                                                                     and 4) has strong tenant protection measures. Changes to
                                                                                                     this ordinance may only be made if adopted by the City
                                                                                                     Council and following appropriate public notice and
                                                                                                     debate.
 147 Alameda     Email     Policy 5.6:       Continue to implement and consider strengthening the    The public review draft language for Policy Action 5.6.1
     County      dated     Limitations on    Condominium Conversion Ordinance in order to            was amended to the following based on comments
     Public      6/16/2014 Conversion of     minimize loss of affordable rental housing. Eligibility received:
     Health                Rental Housing to for conversion could be based on factors such as code   The City will review the existing Condominium
     Department            Condominiums      violation history and eviction history, and regulations Conversion Ordinance and consider changes that: 1)
                                             should specify tenant protections including right of    considers an annual conversion cap, 2) eliminates the
                                             first refusal for existing tenants and relocation       exemption for 2-4 unit buildings in the non-Impact Areas,
                                             benefits.                                               3) creates opportunities for tenant purchase and affordable
                                                                                                     homeownership for low to moderate income households,
                                                                                                     and 4) has strong tenant protection measures. Changes to
                                                                                                     this ordinance may only be made if adopted by the City
                                                                                                     Council and following appropriate public notice and
                                                                                                     debate.
 148 East Bay    Letter    Policy 5.6:       Recommends the following language: The City will        The public review draft language for Policy Action 5.6.1
     Housing     dated     Limitations on    review the existing Condominium Ordinance and           was amended to the following based on comments
     Organizatio 6/16/14   Conversion of     consider changes that include all 2-4 unit buildings    received:
     ns (EBHO)             Rental Housing to within the scope of the ordinance, ensure that          The City will review the existing Condominium
                           Condominiums      "conversion credits" are provided only by projects      Conversion Ordinance and consider changes that: 1)
                                             that permanently add rental units to the housing        considers an annual conversion cap, 2) eliminates the
                                             supply after an application for a proposed              exemption for 2-4 unit buildings in the non-Impact Areas,
                                             condominium conversion is submitted, and that           3) creates opportunities for tenant purchase and affordable
                                             specify requirements for Tenant Assistance Plans that   homeownership for low to moderate income households,
                                             that provide security of tenure and stability of rents  and 4) has strong tenant protection measures. Changes to
                                             for existing occupants.                                 this ordinance may only be made if adopted by the City
                                                                                                     Council and following appropriate public notice and
528                                                                                      APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                   HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                    Table E-1
                                     Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source    Topic              Comment                                                Response
      ter
                                                                                                      debate.
 149  Alameda     Email     Policy 6.1; Policy The Housing Assistance Center is a very positive       DHCD, Housing Assistance Center staff will continue to
      County      dated     Action 6.1.4:      approach towards coordinating support for Oakland      foster and enhance relationships with area housing service
      Public      6/16/2014 Housing Assistance residents with housing crisis. The Center should       agencies. City staff continues to pursue funding support in
      Health                Center             continue create linkages with other cities and         order to continue and sustain the HAC operations.
      Department                               countywide efforts designed to assist Oakland
                                               residents with housing crisis. In particular, we
                                               recommend enhancing working relationships with
                                               organizations focused on landlord-tenant law, fair
                                               housing, healthy housing/code enforcement, homeless
                                               services, disability rights. We also recommend
                                               increased support for the Housing assistance Center
                                               and the tracking and reporting of Center User data as
                                               one of the methods for tracking City resident housing
                                               needs over time.
 150  EAH         Email     Policy 7.2; Policy 7.2.4. (City staff correction of comment--this policy  Request sent to Public Works Department, Energy and
      Housing     dated     Action 7.2.5       action should be number 7.2.5.) Will goals and rules   Climate Action Plan staff for response to comments.
                  6/12/14   Promote Water      in the housing element for promotion of water
                            Conservation and   conservation include new city-wide rebate programs?
                            Efficiency
 151  East Bay    Letter    Policy 7.3; Policy We applaud the City's commitment to using land use     Request sent to Public Works Department, Energy and
      Housing     dated     Action 7.3.2 and   and development policy to reduce Greenhouse Gas        Climate Action Plan staff for response to comments.
      Organizatio 6/16/14   7.3.3 Transit      (GHG) emissions by encouraging higher density
      ns (EBHO)             Oriented           housing close to transit. This section should
                            Development and    acknowledge that greater reductions are possible if
                            SB 375             affordable housing is included in TODs and PDAs,
                            Implementation     since lower income households are heavier users of
                                               transit. See recent study:
                                               http://www.transformca.org/sites/default/files/Afforda
                                               bleTODResearch051514.pdf
 152  EAH         Email     Policy 7.3; Policy 7.3/7.3.5 According to report by the California        Request sent to Public Works Department, Energy and
      Housing     dated     Action 7.3.5       Housing Partnership Corporation, AFFORDABLE            Climate Action Plan staff for response to comments.
                  6/12/14   Encourage new      transit-oriented development would have the greatest
                            housing at a range impact on reducing carbon emissions and this section
                            of prices          should include an action specific to affordable TOD,
                                               not just TOD. See report here:
                                               http://www.chpc.net/dnld/AffordableTODResearchEx
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                           529
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                Table E-1
                                 Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source  Topic               Comment                                            Response
     ter
                                             ecSummary.pdf
 153 East Bay    Letter  Relocation Benefits Strengthen anti-displacement programs such as      City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
     Housing     dated                       relocation requirements                            displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
     Organizatio 6/16/14                                                                        is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
     ns (EBHO)                                                                                  strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                                                                                                policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                                                                prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                                preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                                residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                                housing that currently has affordable rents.
                                                                                                Policy Action 4.4.1 Consider Developing a Standard City
                                                                                                Tenant Relocation Policy and Fund City Program
                                                                                                Operations has the following policy action language:
                                                                                                The City has a number of ordinances that have tenant
                                                                                                relocation assistance requirements, including under code
                                                                                                enforcement activities, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just
                                                                                                Cause for evictions, and SRO conversions. City of
                                                                                                Oakland will consider 1) establishing one standard policy
                                                                                                across tenant relocation requirements, such as code
                                                                                                enforcement, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just Cause for
                                                                                                evictions and SRO conversions, 2) explore new strategies
                                                                                                to fund and recover relocation costs, and 3) allocate and
                                                                                                fund adequate staffing to monitor relocation programs and
                                                                                                recover costs from responsible landlords.
530                                                                                 APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                      CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source   Topic               Comment                                                Response
      ter
 154  East Bay    Letter   Relocation Benefits Require developers - particularly in PDAs, Specific    City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
      Housing     dated                        Plan Areas, and other areas targeted for development - displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
      Organizatio 6/16/14                      to adhere to the same relocation and replacement       is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
      ns (EBHO)                                housing requirements that applied to the               strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                                               Redevelopment Agency prior to dissolution of           policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                               redevelopment. The City through its land use           prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                               regulations and investments in infrastructure and      preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                               other improvements is actively targeting areas of the  residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                               City for development of market-rate housing. These     housing that currently has affordable rents.
                                               actions have the potential to displace lower income
                                               residents. For example, the Broadway-Valdez            Policy Action 4.4.1 Consider Developing a Standard City
                                               Specific Plan would destroy 94 units of existing       Tenant Relocation Policy and Fund City Program
                                               modestly priced housing, displace the current          Operations has the following policy action language:
                                               residents, and break-up a healthy community.           The City has a number of ordinances that have tenant
                                                                                                      relocation assistance requirements, including under code
                                                                                                      enforcement activities, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just
                                                                                                      Cause for evictions, and SRO conversions. City of
                                                                                                      Oakland will consider 1) establishing one standard policy
                                                                                                      across tenant relocation requirements, such as code
                                                                                                      enforcement, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just Cause for
                                                                                                      evictions and SRO conversions, 2) explore new strategies
                                                                                                      to fund and recover relocation costs, and 3) allocate and
                                                                                                      fund adequate staffing to monitor relocation programs and
                                                                                                      recover costs from responsible landlords.
                                                                                                      One-for-one replacement of units could be considered in
                                                                                                      this policy reevaluation.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                             531
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table E-1
                                Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source  Topic          Comment                                               Response
     ter
 155 East Bay    Letter  Replacement    Include programs and policies to assess the risk of   City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
     Housing     dated   Housing Policy loss of affordable market-rate housing, and programs  displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
     Organizatio 6/16/14                and policies to either prevent such losses or replace is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
     ns (EBHO)                          such housing with comparable affordable housing,      strengthening existing policies and introducing new
                                        above and beyond any net additions to the housing     policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                        supply                                                prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                              preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                              residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                              housing that currently has affordable rents.
                                                                                              Policy Action 4.4.1 Consider Developing a Standard City
                                                                                              Tenant Relocation Policy and Fund City Program
                                                                                              Operations has the following policy action language:
                                                                                              The City has a number of ordinances that have tenant
                                                                                              relocation assistance requirements, including under code
                                                                                              enforcement activities, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just
                                                                                              Cause for evictions, and SRO conversions. City of
                                                                                              Oakland will consider 1) establishing one standard policy
                                                                                              across tenant relocation requirements, such as code
                                                                                              enforcement, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just Cause for
                                                                                              evictions and SRO conversions, 2) explore new strategies
                                                                                              to fund and recover relocation costs, and 3) allocate and
                                                                                              fund adequate staffing to monitor relocation programs and
                                                                                              recover costs from responsible landlords.
                                                                                              One-for-one replacement of units could be considered in
                                                                                              this policy reevaluation.
532                                                                               APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                                                                CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                              HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                               Table E-1
                                  Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen     Source    Topic           Comment                                              Response
      ter
 156  Alameda    Email     Replacement     Implement a no-net loss policy to require all        City staff have added the following Policy 4.4: Anti-
      County     dated     Housing Policy  affordable units lost through renovation, conversion displacement of City of Oakland Residents. The following
      Public     6/16/2014                 or demolition to be replaced within the same         is the stated policy goal: The City will consider
      Health                               neighborhood if possible and within the same city at strengthening existing policies and introducing new
      Department                           the minimum.                                         policies or policy terms to current City policies to help
                                                                                                prevent displacement of current Oakland residents and to
                                                                                                preserve existing housing affordable to low income
                                                                                                residents, including both publicly-assisted and non-assisted
                                                                                                housing that currently has affordable rents.
                                                                                                Policy Action 4.4.1 Consider Developing a Standard City
                                                                                                Tenant Relocation Policy and Fund City Program
                                                                                                Operations has the following policy action language:
                                                                                                The City has a number of ordinances that have tenant
                                                                                                relocation assistance requirements, including under code
                                                                                                enforcement activities, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just
                                                                                                Cause for evictions, and SRO conversions. City of
                                                                                                Oakland will consider 1) establishing one standard policy
                                                                                                across tenant relocation requirements, such as code
                                                                                                enforcement, condo conversions, Ellis Act, Just Cause for
                                                                                                evictions and SRO conversions, 2) explore new strategies
                                                                                                to fund and recover relocation costs, and 3) allocate and
                                                                                                fund adequate staffing to monitor relocation programs and
                                                                                                recover costs from responsible landlords.
                                                                                                One-for-one replacement of units could be considered in
                                                                                                this policy reevaluation.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                                       533
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                   Table E-1
                                   Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen     Source    Topic               Comment                                                 Response
     ter
 157 Alameda    Email     Supportive Housing, 1. Revise the planning code associated with             1. The Planning Code has been revised to address
     County     dated     Transitional        supportive housing and transitional housing so that     transitional and supportive housing. The City Council’s
     Public     6/16/2014 Housing and         this type of housing in a residential zone does not     second reading of the ordinance adopting these changes is
     Health               Shelters            require conditional use permit. The City should do      scheduled for July 15; these changes will become effective
     Department                               this as indicated in the draft document.                on August 15.
                                              2. Identify locations in City of Oakland for emergency  2.     The City Council passed the first reading of an
                                              shelters that will not require conditional use permit.  ordinance that would permit emergency shelters in 8
                                              Since the closure of winter shelter location in Oakland locations throughout Oakland, along with objective
                                              it is increasingly required for the city. These zones   development standards. The second reading of the
                                              should be located in areas without health hazards,      ordinance will be on July 15 and the ordinance will become
                                              e.g., away from industrial zones.                       effective on August 15.
                                              3. Proposed rapid re-housing and winter shelter         3. This comment is beyond the scope of the Housing
                                              funding should be re-evaluated in context of several    Element; however, we will pass this comment onto the
                                              emergency housing programs in Oakland with a            City's Human Services Department (responsible for the
                                              shortage of funding for next fiscal year. The City      winter shelter program).
                                              should explore partnership with the County to
                                              leverage federal Medicaid dollars for these programs
                                              if the source of City funding used is non-federal
                                              dollars.
534                                                                                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS

                                                                                                                                 CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                                                                HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                                Table E-1
                                  Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No   Commen      Source    Topic          Comment                                                 Response
      ter
 158  Jeff Levin, Verbal at                1. Urges the city to have mandatory requirements for    See various responses above to EBHO comments.
      EBHO        Special                  developer contributions to affordable through a
                  Community                combination of inclusionary zoning and housing
                  and                      impact fees
                  Economic                 2. Need to address the threat of displacement and
                  Developme                policies to help people who are being displaced as
                  nt                       well as prevent displacement and prevent the loss of
                  Committee                what we call naturally affordable housing.
                  Meeting                  3. Draw attention to the following policies in Housing
                  dated                    Element:
                  6/10/2014                a. Page 234, action 1.13 talks about sale of city owned
                                           property for housing however there is no requirement
                                           that any units built on city owned housing be
                                           affordable
                                           b. Action 1.15 speaks about housing incentives. The
                                           City’s consultant stated that incentive program often
                                           does work, Oakland’s experience with a density
                                           bonus, it's rarely used for exactly the same reasons.
                                           Up zone areas makes incentives and bonuses harder to
                                           use.
                                           c. Page 236, policy 1.3 outlines that thousands of
                                           units will be developed in the priority development
                                           areas; however there is no requirement for affordable
                                           housing in those areas. There are no plans or policies
                                           to make that happen.
                                           d. Policy 2.7 – a k 2.72 and this is echoed in 3.3, is
                                           about the nexus study and the housing impact fee.
                                           Need to have a firm date for the completion of the
                                           study. Also, as per a requirement under housing
                                           element law the programs should have a time frame.
                                           Urge to complete this report by December of this year
                                           and get moving on consideration of the policy itself.
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                                                                                              535

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                                            Table E-1
                                 Summary of Public Comments and Responses
 No  Commen      Source    Topic       Comment                                                 Response
     ter
 159 Jeff Levin, Verbal at             e. On page 247 about housing preservation and           See various responses above to EBHO comments.
     EBHO        Special               rehabilitation, there is no discussion and no
                 Community             plan or policy for addressing the loss of privately
                 and                   financed housing that might be demolished by private
                 Economic              action, even though housing element law require there
                 Developme             be such a policy in the implementation plan.
                 nt                    f. Policy 5.6 on condominium conversion should be
                 Committee             strengthened.
                 Meeting               g. Policy 7.3 encourages developments that reduces
                 dated                 car and is emissions. Would like to note the heavier
                 6/10/2014             users of public transit are low-income people. If it is
                                       desired that the housing plan helps reduce greenhouse
                                       gas emissions, then consider locating affordable
                                       housing close to transit.
536                                                                               APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         537
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
538                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         539
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
540                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         541
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
542                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         543
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
544                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         545
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
546                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         547
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
548                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         549
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
550                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         551
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
552                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         553
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
554                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         555
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
556                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                             CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                    HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS                         557
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
558                       APPENDIX E: SUMMARY AND RESPONSE TO PUBLIC COMMENTS
                                                                                       CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                        HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX F: EMERGENCY SHELTERS
Oakland Emergency Shelter regulations
The Oakland Planning Code was updated in July, 2014, to comply with California State Law Senate Bill
2, to permit emergency shelters by-right in at least one zoning district, and also modify the definitions for
transitional and supportive housing, to streamline the approval process for the establishment of future
shelters, and transitional and supportive housing development.
The Ordinance adopted on July, 15, 2014 (C.M.S. 13248) amended the Oakland Planning Code to:
     a) Permit emergency shelters by right (without a conditional use permit or other discretionary
         action) in limited areas of the following specified zoning districts: residential mixed use, urban
         residential, neighborhood center, community commercial, Broadway Valdez District Mixed Use
         Commercial Zone - 4, medical center, housing and business mix, and the CIX-1, CIX2, IG and IO
         industrial zones. See Figure F-1, below.
     b) Additionally, the ordinance modified existing definitions for transitional and supportive housing
         to be considered as residential uses of the property, subject only to those restrictions that apply to
         other residential uses in the same zone. The primary change is a text amendment that makes
         explicit how the Planning Code treats transitional housing and supportive housing as residential
         uses, thus demonstrating compliance with SB 2. Any facilities serving six (6) or fewer persons
         are currently permitted as of right. Further revisions to this newly adopted regulation are being
         considered by the City, and are expected to be presented to the Planning Commission and City
         Council before December, 2015.
Areas permitting shelters as of right are distributed throughout the City to prevent over-concentration
within any one area or neighborhood of the City, or any selected commercial or industrial corridors.
Areas selected for emergency shelters have proximity to job centers and schools for families experiencing
momentary lapse of housing, as well as to hospitals for those homeless who need medical services. To
identify the appropriate sites, a number of factors were considered by the Planning Commission and City
Council, including: a) the location of sensitive uses (i.e. parks, public schools) and support services such
as community care facilities and hospitals; b) the location of residentially- zoned properties and zoning
districts that currently conditionally permit emergency shelters; c) the presence of large floor plate
buildings suitable for conversion to emergency shelters; d) the proximity to retail areas and public
transportation; and e) the compatibility with surrounding uses.
A detailed description of each zone and its characteristics is included with Table F-1, below.
APPENDIX F: EMERGENCY SHELTERS                                                                              559
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                           Figure F-1
               City Council Approved Locations for Permitting Emergency Homeless
                                        Shelter By-Right
560                                                                    APPENDIX F: EMERGENCY SHELTERS
                                                                                   CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
                                               Table F-2
    Characteristics of approved locations for permitting emergency
                                 homeless shelters by-right
   Area    Name                          Acres       Zoning                      Primary Land Use
  1        MLK Jr Way North                   20     RM-2, RU-3, CN-3, S-1       High density residential
                                                                                 & commercial
  2        San Pablo (53rd to 67th St.)       42      CC-2, CN-3                 High density residential
                                                                                 & commercial
  3        Pill Hill                          36     S-1, CC-2, D-BV-4           Commercial
  4        San Pablo (Grand Ave to            34     RU-5, CC-2                  High density residential
           I-580)                                                                & commercial
  5        3rd St Corridor                    80     CIX-1A, CIX-1B, CIX-1C,     Industrial
                                                     IG, M-30, C-40
  6        12th St Corridor                   37      CIX-2, CIX-2/ S-19, HBX-2  Industrial
  7        MacArthur (Fruitvale to            68     RM-3, RM-4, RU-4, RU-5,     High density residential
           High St.)                                 CN-1, CN-2                  & commercial
  8        Coliseum Way Area                227      CIX-2, IG                   Industrial
Emergency Shelters Permitted By-Right Areas
   1. That portion of Martin Luther King Jr. Way lying between the 51th Street and the City of Oakland
       City Limits (Area 1):
       Parcels in this 20-acre North Oakland area are zoned mainly for residential, commercial and
       medical uses (RM-2, RU-3, CN-3, S-1). The average parcel size is 0.3 acres. AC Transit bus
       stops for lines 12 and 18 service this portion of Martin Luther King Jr. Way, while the MacArthur
       BART station is located approximately a half mile to the south of this area. Essential commercial
       and community care services include Children’s Hospital facilities at 51st and Martin Luther King
       Jr. Way and a therapeutic nursery school. Emergency shelters in this area would be more
       appropriate for serving families, due to its vicinity to Sankofa Academy elementary school on 61st
       Street, Oakland International High School on 45th Street and Emerson Elementary School on
       Lawton Ave. There are no identified opportunity sites for new construction in this area, however,
       there might be capacity to reuse buildings. Neighborhoods around the area are zoned mainly for
       Mixed Residential Uses (RM-1, RM-2, RM-3).
   2. That portion of San Pablo Avenue between 53rd Street and the City of Oakland City Limits (Area
       2):
       This 42-acre North Oakland area is a commercial and residential district, currently zoned for
       community commercial and neighborhood center uses (CC-2 and CN-3). There is an average
APPENDIX F: EMERGENCY SHELTERS                                                                           561

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
       parcel size of 0.2 acres. The area is served by AC Transit via the 72 bus line, and hosts a variety
       of commercial activities and core social services (i.e. the Golden Gate Branch Library, Greater
       Gospel Church food pantry) along the San Pablo Ave corridor. The Aspire Berkeley Maynard
       Academy and the Golden Gate Playground are located within this zone, making the area suitable
       for homeless families. There are five identified opportunity sites for new construction in this
       segment ranging from surface lots to underutilized buildings. The surrounding neighborhoods are
       zoned for Mixed Residential Uses (RM-2, RM-3, RM-4) and Housing and Business Mix (HBX-
       2).
    3. That portion of the area surrounding Webster Street, bounded by 29th Street to the south, the I-580
       overpass to the north, Elm Street to the west and Webster Street (parcels fronting Webster Street)
       to the east (Area 3):
       This 36-acre area lies in the “Pill Hill” neighborhood, a commercial and medically - zoned area
       (CC-2, S-1, D-BV-4). The average parcel size is 0.4 acres. It is very well-served by transit, with
       numerous AC Transit routes running along Broadway corridor, which is a block away, and
       Telegraph Avenue, two blocks away. The segment’s northern-western corner is 0.7 miles, or a
       17-minute walk, from MacArthur BART station. This area is in close proximity to Downtown
       Oakland and particularly well-located for medical care services with the Sutter/Alta Bates and
       Kaiser Permanente hospitals within a few minutes’ walk. This zone would be rather appropriate
       to serve families in a transitional phase because of its proximity to West Lake Middle School on
       Harrison Street, Street Academy Alternative School on 29th Street and community care facilities
       such as the Oakland Early Head Start on Broadway. There are no identified opportunity sites for
       new construction in this segment, however, there might be capacity to reuse buildings. The
       neighborhoods bounding the area are zoned mainly for Retail and Community Commercial uses
       (D-BV, CC-2) as well as Urban Residential (RU-2).
    4. That portion of San Pablo Avenue, lying between Grand Avenue and I-580 (Area 4):
       This 34-acre West Oakland area is in a high-density residential and commercially-oriented zone
       (RU-5, CC-2). The average parcel size is 0.2 acres. It is centrally located along AC Transit bus
       lines on San Pablo Ave, Market Street and Martin Luther King Jr. Way. Two BART stations,
       19th Street and 12th Street, are within 12 minutes and 15 minutes walking distance (respectively)
       from this area’s southern edge. This area is in close proximity to commercial areas and support
       services like the Society of St. Vincent de Paul. Emergency shelters in this zone would be
       appropriate for homeless families with children since there are three schools in immediate
       vicinity (McClymonds High School, Hoover Elementary and Lafayette Elementary School) and
       surrounding community care facilities focus on supporting children needs (i.e. YMCA of the East
       Bay, St. Mary’s Center Preschool, Programs for Exceptional Children and Oakland Head Start).
       Vacant parcels and underutilized buildings of large floor plates could be potential emergency
       shelter locations. There are two identified opportunity sites for new construction in this segment.
       The neighborhoods bounding the area are zoned mainly for Mixed Housing Type Residential
       Uses (RM-2, RM-4).
    5. That area surrounding Third Street bounded by Martin Luther King Jr. Way to the east Fifth
       Street to the north, Embarcadero West to the south and Union Street to the west (Area 5):
       This 80-acre West Oakland area along the Third Street industrial corridor is zoned for a variety of
       industrial uses (CIX-1, IG, M-30) and for Community Thoroughfare Commercial (C-40), with an
       average parcel size of 0.5 acres. It is near transit with West Oakland BART station being an 8-
       minute walk (0.4 miles) away from the area’s northern-western corner and AC Transit serving 7th
562                                                                    APPENDIX F: EMERGENCY SHELTERS

                                                                                    CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
      Street, two blocks away from its northern boundary (5th Street). The area is located relatively
      close to downtown social services like New Horizons West, St. Vincent’s Day Home, Thurgood
      Marshall Early Head Start and a food pantry on 10th Street and Adeline. Although some parcels
      are zoned for heavy industry, this area has opportunities for new shelters, due to the presence of
      large floor plate buildings, as well as surface parking and vacant lots. There is currently one
      identified opportunity site for new construction in this segment. The surrounding area is zoned
      mainly for Industrial Uses (IG, M-30, M-40).
   6. That portion of E. 12th Street between 14th Avenue and 23rd Avenue (Area 6):
      This 37-acre area in Central Oakland is zoned primarily for industrial uses (CIX-2, HBX-2) with
      an average parcel size of 0.4 acres. AC Transit buses service the area along 12th Street and
      International Blvd, a block away. Commercial and community services are located nearby
      including schools such as Garfield Elementary School, International Community School, Rubicon
      Special Education School and Franklin Elementary School as well as Head Start facilities. There
      are no identified opportunity sites for new construction in this segment. However, due to the
      area’s somewhat semi-industrial character, there are opportunities for adaptive reuse of buildings,
      to accommodate emergency shelters that could serve homeless families and single individuals.
      The surrounding uses are Urban Residential and Industrial.
   7. That portion of Macarthur Boulevard between Fruitvale Avenue and High Street (Area 7):
      Parcels in this 68-acre area of the Dimond and Laurel neighborhoods are zoned mainly for mixed
      housing type residential, urban residential and commercial uses (RM-3, RM-4, RU-4, RU-5, CN-
      1, CN-2). The average parcel size is 0.2 acres. This area extends along the MacArthur Boulevard
      transit corridor with many choices for public transportation. Other corridors in the area served by
      AC Transit include High Street, 35th Avenue, Coolidge Avenue, Lincoln Avenue and Fruitvale
      Avenue. Other services in this area that would support the emergency shelters include schools
      (e.g. Bret Harte Middle School, Laurel Elementary School), care facilities especially for youth
      like the Fred Finch Youth Center, and a library. There are currently two identified opportunity
      sites in this segment; a vacant lot, and a one-story store with surface parking. Neighboring uses
      are mostly Residential Mixed Uses (RM-2, RM-3).
   8. That area of Coliseum Way bounded by San Leandro Street to the north, I-880 to the south, 66th
      Avenue to the east and High Street to the west (Area 8):
      This area in East Oakland totals 227 acres. There is an average parcel size of 1.05 acres. Parcels
      in this area are zoned for industrial uses (CIX-2, IG) with a wide variety of businesses (generally
      of a heavy commercial or industrial character) being currently permitted, creating greater off-site
      impacts than in the other areas. The site’s proximity to Coliseum and Fruitvale BART stations,
      San Leandro Street transit corridor and I-880, makes the entire site highly accessible by public
      transportation. Parcels on the western edge of the site are within a 0.5 mile distance or a 10-
      minute walk from Fruitvale BART station while parcels on the eastern edge of the site are within
      0.3-0.7 miles, or a 6-14 minute walk, from Coliseum BART station. Commercial uses are located
      in the High Street and Coliseum Way retail nodes, and neighboring community services include
      Acts Full Gospel Christian Academy, Lion Creek Crossings Head Start program, and St.
      Elizabeth preschool and food pantry. Although there are no identified opportunity sites for new
      construction in this segment, many parcels currently serve as parking lots or are underutilized. In
      addition, there is an abundance of industrial buildings with large footprints that could be
      repurposed as emergency shelters. The neighboring uses are primarily industrial.
Emergency Shelters Development Standards
APPENDIX F: EMERGENCY SHELTERS                                                                         563

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
Under SB2, emergency shelters may only be subject to those development and management standards
that apply to residential or commercial development within the same zone, allowing flexibility for the
City to apply standards regarding the maximum number of beds or persons to be served nightly, off-street
parking, size and location of onsite waiting and client intake areas, proximity to other emergency shelters,
if there is no requirement to be more than 300 feet apart, provision of onsite management, length of stay,
lighting and security.
According to the Oakland Planning Code emergency shelters, where permitted by-right, shall comply
with the development standards of the underlying zone and be in accordance with the following additional
criteria:
          1. Compliance with required licenses, permits, and approvals. An emergency shelter shall obtain
          and maintain in good standing required licenses, permits, and approvals from city, county and
          state agencies or departments and demonstrate compliance with applicable building and fire
          codes. An emergency shelter residential facility shall comply with all county and state health and
          safety requirements for food, medical and other supportive services provided on-site.
          2. Number of beds. A maximum of number of 100 beds or persons are permitted to be served
          nightly by the facility.
          3. Off Street Parking. See Sections 17.116.060(B) and 17.103.010(A) for parking-related
          requirements for emergency shelters.
          4. Size and location of exterior onsite waiting and client intake areas. Exterior waiting areas must
          comply with the Small Project Design Review Checklist Criteria for Facilities with 3 or More
          Dwelling Units.
          5. Restriction on overconcentration of Emergency Shelter Residential Activities. See Section
          17.103.010(B) for overconcentration standards for Emergency Shelter Residential Activities. In
          general, no Emergency Shelter may be located within 300 feet of another shelter or residential
          care or supportive housing facility.
          6. Length of stay. No individual or family shall reside in an emergency shelter for more than 180
          consecutive days.
          7. External Lighting and Security. Satisfactory completion of the City of Oakland's "Crime
          Prevention Through Environmental Design (OPTED) Checklist for Residential Projects" is
          required for all emergency shelters permitted by-right.
          8. Additional Requirements. For City of Oakland funded shelters refer to the current "Standard
          Contract - Service Agreement" that governs the disposition of funds from the City of Oakland,
          through the Department of Human Services, to a shelter operator.
          The Planning Code regulations adopted in July, 2014 seek to provide adequate shelter for the
          homeless population awaiting permanent housing, to alleviate problematic and expensive
          alternatives (i.e., hospital emergency room care and jail stays) and reduce the amount of outdoor
          homeless encampments. Elimination of the requirement for a Conditional Use Permit is intended
          to also reduce establishment costs for these types of facilities in specific limited locations.
564                                                                        APPENDIX F: EMERGENCY SHELTERS
                                                                                  CITY OF O AKL AND
                                                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
The City of Oakland adopted a Housing Element in the fourth cycle that was in compliance with State
law, submitted annual performance reports on time since adoption, and did not have any significant
changes to the City’s housing conditions, thus the City requested a Streamlined Update Review.
Following is the correspondence related to the adoption of the City of Oakland 2015-23 Housing Element.
    1) Summary conditions, requisite analysis and changes to the document from the 2007-2014
        Housing Element
            a. Attachment 1: Implementation Review
            b. Attachment 2: Completeness Checklist
            c. Attachment 3: Streamlined Update Template
    2) Letter from California Department of Housing and Community Development dated September
        12, 2014.
    3) Oakland response to California Department of Housing and Community Development dated
        October 22, 2014. This included, as Attachment 1, the revised list of Housing Opportunity Sites.
        Because that table has been included as Table C-6 of the 2015-2023 Housing Element, the
        duplicated table of Opportunity Sites been deleted from Appendix G.
    4) Letter from California Department of Housing and Community Development dated October 29,
        2014.
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                                                                 565

CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
566                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         567
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
568                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         569
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
570                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         571
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
572                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         573
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
574                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         575
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
576                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         577
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
578                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         579
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
580                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         581
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
582                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         583
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
584                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         585
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
586                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         587
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
588                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         589
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
590                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         591
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
592                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         593
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
594                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         595
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
596                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         597
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
598                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         599
CITY OF O AKL AND
HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
600                       APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION
                                              CITY OF O AKL AND
                                     HOUSING ELEMENT 2015-2023
APPENDIX G: HOUSING ELEMENT ADOPTION                         601
