           July 15, 2014
City of Alameda General Plan
       Housing Element
          2015–2023

Table of Contents
1. Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 3
   A. Purpose............................................................................................................................... 3
   B. Organization....................................................................................................................... 3
   C. Major Housing Initiatives for 2014–2022.......................................................................... 3
   D. Regional Housing Needs Allocation .................................................................................. 5
   E. General Plan Consistency .................................................................................................. 6
   F. Public Participation ............................................................................................................ 6
2. Housing Policy and Implementation Plan .......................................................................... 7
   A. Housing Goals and Policies ............................................................................................... 7
   B. Implementation Plan ........................................................................................................ 16
   C. Quantified Objectives ...................................................................................................... 17
List of Tables
Table-1:     Quantified Objectives, 2014–2022 ......................................................................... 17
   Cover Photograph by Keith Baker: In 2013, the Jack Capon Villa project opened 19 units
   for very low income individuals with disabilities on a former City of Alameda parking lot.
   The project exemplifies Alameda’s commitment to housing for special needs residents, and
   its long history of successfully creating housing through partnerships. This project is the
   result of a partnership between the City of Alameda, the Alameda Housing Authority
   Satellite Affordable Housing Associates and Housing Consortium of the East Bay.
City of Alameda                                                     ii                                    2015 – 2023 Housing Element

1.       Introduction
In order to ensure that the State is able to house its growing population, every jurisdiction in
California must have a General Plan, and every General Plan must contain a Housing Element.
This Housing Element is the City of Alameda’s blueprint for meeting its housing needs,
including housing affordable to very-low, low and moderate-income families, in a manner that
supports the City’s goals and policies, for the period of January 31, 2015, through January 31,
2023. This Element was prepared in conformance with State of California requirements.
A. Purpose
Alameda’s motto is “A City of Homes and Beaches,” which captures the importance of housing
in this unique city. The City's ability to preserve and expand its housing stock and housing
opportunities is central to its ability to achieve the goals of the General Plan and the General
Plan's environmental, climate action, transportation, historic preservation, and economic
development policy objectives.
The Housing Element provides policy direction for making decisions pertaining to housing
services and regulations, and sets forth policies, programs, and schedules promoting the
preservation, improvement, and development of diverse housing types for a diverse range of
household types and incomes in concert with the City’s housing and other policy objectives.
B. Organization
This Housing Element is organized into three main sections: the Introduction, the Housing
Element Policy and Implementation Plan, and the Housing Element Background Report.
The Introduction includes information on the purpose of the Housing Element, the organization
of the document, General Plan consistency, overview of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
(RHNA), and public participation efforts.
The Housing Element Policy and Implementation Plan sets forth the City’s goals, policies,
and implementation measures that address the housing needs in Alameda.
The Housing Element Background Report contains an evaluation of the prior Housing
Element and its accomplishments, an analysis of housing needs, identification of constraints to
the development of housing, and resources, such as an inventory of vacant and underutilized
sites, that are available for housing.
C. Major Housing Initiatives for 2015–2023
This Housing Element identifies several major initiatives for 2015–2023:
          Retooling and Improving Successful Affordable Housing Programs. The biggest
             challenge for the 2015–2023 period will be to find strategies and resources to retool
             and improve Alameda’s most successful housing programs in an era of limited public
             resources for affordable housing development. Finding financial resources to replace
City of Alameda                                   3                      2014 – 2022 Housing Element

            the Redevelopment Affordable Housing “set-aside” funds eliminated by the State of
            California during the last period will be critical to success.
  In 2012, the City of Alameda, the Alameda Housing Authority, and their non-profit partner
  Resources for Community Development completed work on the transformation of the former
  Islander Hotel into 62 units of housing for very-low and low-income Alameda households.
  Located within one block of the Park Street transit corridor and the Park Street business
  district, the project exemplifies Alameda’s commitment to transit oriented, multifamily
  housing.
          Transit-Oriented Housing and Sustainable Development. The focus of the next eight
            years will be to provide a variety of housing types for a diversity of household needs
            in transit- and pedestrian-oriented and mixed-used use locations, consistent with the
            City of Alameda General Plan, Local Action Plan for Climate Protection, and the
            regional Sustainable Communities Strategy, Plan Bay Area.
          Northern Waterfront Priority Development Area. These former industrial sites along
            the Oakland/Alameda Estuary provide important opportunities to reconnect Alameda
            neighborhoods to the waterfront and provide housing for a wide variety of household
            types.
City of Alameda                                    4                       2014 – 2022 Housing Element

          Naval Air Station (NAS) Alameda Priority Development Area. The NAS Alameda
            Priority Development Area (commonly known as “Alameda Point” and “Alameda
            Landing”) represents the next phase of the redevelopment and reuse of the former
            Naval Air Station.
  In 2010, the City of Alameda, the Alameda Housing Authority, and their non-profit partner
  Resources for Community Development completed work on Shensi Gardens, a 39-unit
  multifamily housing project for very-low and low-income Alameda families. The award-
  winning project exemplifies Alameda’s successful and ongoing efforts to transform the former
  Naval Air Station at Alameda into a mixed use, mixed income district.
D. Regional Housing Needs Allocation
In July 2013, the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) issued the Regional Housing
Needs Allocation (RHNA). The City of Alameda was assigned a RHNA of 1,723 units. To
address state, regional, and local need for affordable housing, 444 of the units are to be
affordable to very low-income households, 248 of the units are to be affordable for low-income
households, and 283 of the units are to be affordable for moderate-income households. The
balance of the units (748) may be market rate. The City of Alameda Land Inventory, located in
the Housing Resources section of the Housing Element Background Report on page 35,
identifies adequate sites for over 2,000 units that are appropriately zoned to address the
affordable housing demand. These identified sites provide support for state mandated
requirements, but do not represent the full extent of Alameda’s available housing sites.
City of Alameda                                 5                       2014 – 2022 Housing Element

E. General Plan Consistency
State law requires that “the general plan and elements and parts thereof comprise an integrated,
internally consistent, and compatible statement of policies.” Internal consistency avoids policy
conflicts and provides clear policy direction for the future improvement and development of
housing within the City. The City is evaluating the consistency of this element with other
chapters of the general plan as part of the update process. It will continue to maintain General
Plan consistency through ongoing review and revision conducted annually thereafter.
  Known for its excellent architecture and historic buildings, Alameda is also a community with
  a large number of well-designed multifamily buildings located in medium density residential
  districts.
F. Public Participation
During the preparation of the 2015–2023 Housing Element, public input was actively
encouraged. In early February 2014, the City released the draft Housing Element Update for
public review. The Element was posted to the City’s website and a hard copy was available for
review at City Hall. Quarter page advertisements were placed in local newspapers. The Draft
Housing Element was also provided to the California Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) for review and comment.
City of Alameda                                 6                       2014 – 2022 Housing Element

On February 27, 2014, the Planning Board held its first public hearing on the new draft Element.
At the meeting housing advocates and other interested parties submitted suggested changes and
revisions to improve the document. On March 14, 2014, the City of Alameda Board of Realtors
Local Government Relations Committee received a presentation and discussed the Element. On
March 19, 2014, the Housing Authority Board of Commissioners held a public hearing on the
draft Element and made a number of suggested changes. On April 2, 2014, the draft Housing
Element was discussed at a meeting of the Alameda Chamber of Commerce Economic
Development and Government Relations Committee. On April 24, 2014, the City of Alameda
Board of Realtors held a special meeting to hear a presentation on the draft Housing Element and
discuss its position on the Element. On April 28, 2014, the City of Alameda Planning Board
held a second public workshop on the Draft Element and reviewed a number of revisions to the
draft policies and programs. On June 9, 2014, the Planning Board held a final public hearing and
passed a resolution recommending that the City Council adopt this Housing Element.
Throughout the five month public planning process, City staff met with housing advocates,
housing providers, and housing professionals to discuss potential policy initiatives and programs.
These meetings and conversations were instrumental to the successful completion of the Housing
Element and included input and advise from:
    •    Renewed Hope, Housing Advocacy           •   HOMES, Housing Advocacy
    •    ECHO        Housing,      Housing        •   Alameda Development Corporation
         Advocates
                                                  •   Alameda HOME Team
    •    East Bay Housing Organizations
         (EBHO)                                   •   Alameda Board of Realtors
                                                  •   Alameda Chamber of Commerce
2.       Housing Policy and Implementation Plan
A. Housing Goals, Policies, and Programs
Alameda’s housing goals, policies, and implementation programs for the planning period 2015-
2023 wil guide the City’s future housing development decisions, housing programs, strategies, and
expenditures. The following constitutes the City of Alameda Housing Policy and Implementation
Plan.
 Goal #1: Provide housing services and opportunities to support, maintain, and enhance
 Alameda’s diverse community and excellent quality of life and provide for the housing
 needs of Alameda's future residents and regional housing needs.
 Policy HE-1: Support public and private efforts to increase the supply of housing in Alameda
 consistent with the City's environmental, climate action, transportation, historic preservation,
 and economic development policy objectives.
Program 1.1: Annual Review of Policies and Programs: Hold an annual public hearing in
February or March before the Planning Board to review and consider improvements to the
City of Alameda                                 7                       2014 – 2022 Housing Element

development review process and requirements to ensure that processes and requirements do not
create unnecessary costs or delays and increase the cost of housing in Alameda. The review
shall include an assessment of at least: inclusionary housing (AMC Section 30-16), density
bonus (30-17), multifamily overlay (30-18), Measure A (30-52), Design Review (30-36), and
off-street parking (30-7). The review will address impacts on housing costs, adequate incentives,
and flexibility of the ordinances. The review will also include a review of the Annual Progress
Report on the Housing Element implementation in the format required by the California
Department of Housing and Community Development as defined by Government Code Section
65400(a)(2)(B). Based upon the annual review and the Annual Progress Report, the Planning
Board will make a recommendation to the City Council recommending any changes to the City’s
development regulations necessary to support Housing Element implementation or immediately
institute any changes in the Planning Board or City staff procedures or processes that are within
the jurisdiction of the Planning Board or staff.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
         Funding Source: Community Planning Fee
         Time Frame: Annually monitor
         Quantified Objectives: Complete Annual Review and Hold Annual Public Hearing.
Program 1.2: Inventory of Housing Sites: Continue to maintain an inventory of available
housing sites with residential zoning designations for public information purposes on the City
website.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
         Funding Source: Community Planning Fee
         Timing: Ongoing
         Quantified Objectives: Update inventory regularly.
Program 1.3 Affordable Housing Development Review and Processing: Facilitate the
development of affordable housing, and provide for development projects of 50 to 150 units in
size, routinely coordinate with property owners, and give high priority to processing subdivision
maps that include affordable housing units. Give priority to permit processing for projects
providing affordable housing, and housing for seniors, persons with developmental disabilities,
and other special needs groups. Improve development review/processing procedures to
minimize, to the extent possible, the time required for review of development projects. This
reduction in time will reduce the cost to developers and may increase housing production in the
city. The City will utilize the Development Review Team to ensure projects are reviewed in a
timely manner.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
         Funding Source: Community Planning Fee
         Timing: As projects are processed through the Community Development Department
         Quantified Objectives: Complete Design Review process in three months if no other
         entitlements required, and subdivision approvals within six months if no other
         entitlements required.
City of Alameda                                  8                      2014 – 2022 Housing Element

Goal #2: Provide housing that meets the City’s diverse housing needs, specifically including
affordable housing, special needs housing, and senior housing.
Policy HE-2: Expand the City’s supply of affordable rental and ownership housing for
extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income households.
Program 2.1 Inclusionary Housing Ordinance: Continue to implement the citywide 15 percent
inclusionary requirement.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
         Funding Source: Permit Fees
         Time Frame: Ongoing
         Quantified Objective: Provide at least 15% affordable housing in all new housing
         projects with over 5 units.
Program 2.2 Funding for 5-year Pipeline Projects: Continue to maintain and update a 5-Year
Affordable Housing Pipeline Projects Report. Continue to seek available funding from state and
federal sources for which the projects identified in the 5-Year Affordable Housing Pipeline
Project Report are eligible, and for other eligible projects. Pipeline projects include rental
housing affordable to extremely low-, very low-, and low-income households.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Housing Authority
         Funding Source: CDBG, tax credits, HOME, AHUF
         Timing: Ongoing, as projects come forward and as funding is available
         Quantified Objective: Update the 2010–2015 Report for the period of 2016–2021, and
         provide financial assistance for one 100 percent affordable housing project biannually.
Program 2.3 Affordable Housing Unit/Fee (AHUF) Ordinance: Continue to administer the
AHUF to support the development of new and rehabilitated housing affordable to very low- and
low-income households, and periodically adjust the housing impact fee to keep pace with
inflation.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development and Housing Authority
         Funding Source: Non-residential development impact fees
         Timing: Ongoing
         Quantified Objective: $50,000 collected annually for affordable housing.
Program 2.4 Public Private Partnerships: Facilitate the development of affordable housing through
public-private partnerships, creative land use strategies, and expedited City permitting and
decision making.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development and Housing Authority
         Funding Source: Permit fees, Tax credits, HOME funds and AHUF fees.
         Timing: Ongoing
         Quantified Objective: Facilitate one new public private partnership project every other
         year.
City of Alameda                                   9                      2014 – 2022 Housing Element

Program 2.5 Preservation of At-Risk Housing Units: Continue to monitor the status of all
affordable housing projects and, as their funding sources near expiration, work with owners and
other agencies to consider options to preserve such units. The City will also provide technical
support to property owners and tenants regarding proper procedures relating to noticing and
options for preservation.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Housing Authority
         Funding Source: In-lieu fees, AHUF fees, Tax credits, HOME funds
         Timing: Ongoing
         Objectives: Monitor existing units annually.
Program 2.6 Housing Choice Voucher Program (Section 8): Continue issuing vouchers and
encouraging property owners to participate in this rental assistance program.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Housing Authority
         Funding Source: US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
         Timing: Ongoing
         Quantified Objective: 1,600 households assisted annually.
Program 2.7: Utility Assistance Programs: Continue to provide funding assistance to qualified
households in need of help with their electric bills. One program is a match-fund program for
households with a shut-off notice, and one program assists with up to 25 percent of a monthly
bill.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Alameda Municipal Power (AMP)
         Funding Source: Public Purpose Program and annual contribution from AMP
         Time Frame: Ongoing
         Quantified Objective: Provide up to $100,000 annually to households in need.
Program 2.8 Rent Review Advisory Committee: Continue to support the Rent Review Advisory
Committee (RRAC) efforts to provide voluntary mediation between tenants and landlords in
order to moderate rent increases for tenants of all income levels. The RRAC shall provide an
annual report to the City Council on the number of cases reviewed each year, the outcome of
those cases, and a recommendation for any additional City regulations or controls deemed
necessary by the RRAC. The Alameda City Council shall annually review the RRAC reports
and take any steps deemed necessary or appropriate at that time.
            Responsible Department/Agency: Housing Authority and RRAC
            Funding Source: AHUF
            Timing: Ongoing mediation and Annual Reports
            Quantified Objectives: Four households assisted annually.
Program 2.9 Employee Housing: Amend the Zoning Ordinance to specifically allow employee
housing for six or fewer residents as a permitted use in residential zoning districts, in compliance
with Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5.
City of Alameda                                 10                        2014 – 2022 Housing Element

         Responsibility Department/Agency: Community Development
         Funding Source:        Community Planning Fee
         Time Frame: June, 2015
Policy HE-3: Create rental, homeownership, and other housing opportunities for special needs
populations such as the elderly, homeless and people at risk of becoming homeless, people with
physical and/or developmental disabilities, single-parent households, and young adults.
Program 3.1 Special Needs Housing: Work with public or private sponsors to identify candidate
sites for new construction of rental housing for special needs populations, including persons with
physical and developmental disabilities, and take all actions necessary to expedite processing of
such projects.
            Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: Permit fees
            Time Frame: As projects are approved through the Community Development
            Department
            Quantified Objective: Identify and support two special needs projects between 2014
            and 2022.
Program 3.2 Homeless Shelter Funding: Continue to provide funding assistance to the Midway
Shelter, a 24-bed, service-enriched shelter for women and children, for a portion of the shelter’s
operating costs and for necessary capital improvements.
            Responsible Department/Agency: Housing Authority
            Funding Source: CDBG
            Time Frame: Ongoing
            Quantified Objective: Provide up to $40,000 annually to Midway Shelter.
Policy HE-4: Encourage and support new residential opportunities for senior citizens, including
senior housing projects, multifamily housing projects with accessible and small housing units,
assisted living projects, and in-law unit projects.
Program 4.1 In-Law Units and Senior Housing: Continue to support the addition of secondary
"In-Law" units for small households or seniors, and use Density Bonus Ordinance provisions to
encourage senior housing opportunities on sites in proximity to retail and transit services.
            Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: Permit fees
            Time Frame: As projects are approved through the Community Development
            Department
            Quantified Objective: One secondary unit per year, and two senior housing projects
            between 2014 and 2022.
Program 4.2 Universal Design Ordinance: Consider amendments to the Zoning Ordinance to
require universal design elements in all new housing projects of five or more units.
City of Alameda                                   11                     2014 – 2022 Housing Element

            Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: Community Planning Fee
            Time Frame: December 2014
            Quantified Objective: Complete ordinance within one year of Housing Element
            adoption.
Policy HE-5: Ensure that the entitlement process, zoning and parking requirements, and impact
fees do not unnecessarily burden the development of affordable housing units.
Program 5.1: Annual Review of Policies and Programs: Implement Program 1.1.
Policy HE-6: Assist people, especially extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income
households, in purchasing their first home with the goal of increasing homeownership rates in
Alameda to 60%.
Program 6.1 First-Time Homebuyer Program: Continue the First-Time Homebuyer Program
which provides down payment assistance to low- and moderate-income first-time homebuyers.
The program includes free homebuyer workshops. The workshops cover the complete home-
buying process including: Overview of the Home-Buying Process, Credit and Budgeting,
Qualifying for a Loan, the City's Down Payment Assistance Program, the Loan Application/Pre-
approval Process, Selecting a Home, Role of the Real Estate Agent, Home Maintenance, and
Foreclosure Prevention.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Housing Authority
         Funding: In-lieu fees, Affordable Housing / Unit fee (AHUF)
         Timing: Ongoing, as funding is available
         Quantified Objective: One household assisted biannually.
Program 6.2 Alameda County Mortgage Credit Certificate Program: Continue to participate in
the Countywide Mortgage Credit Certificate Program, which assists low- to moderate-income
first-time homebuyers to qualify for mortgage loans.
            Responsible Department/Agency: Housing Authority
            Funding: In-lieu fees, AHUF
            Timing: Ongoing
            Quantified Objective: One to two households assisted annually.
Policy HE-7: Promote the conservation and rehabilitation of the City’s existing housing stock.
Program 7.1 Housing Rehabilitation: Continue to administer owner-occupied and rental housing
rehabilitation programs:
•    Substantial Rehabilitation Program: Continue to implement the City’s Substantial
     Rehabilitation Program, which creates new rental units in existing vacant or underutilized
     residential structures.
City of Alameda                                 12                       2014 – 2022 Housing Element

•   Housing Rehabilitation Program: Continue the City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program,
    which provides grants and low-interest loans to help low- and very low-income homeowners
    repair and improve their homes.
•   Rental Rehabilitation Program: Continue the City’s Rental Rehabilitation Program, which
    provides low-interest loans to help property owners with low- and very low-income tenants
    repair and improve their units.
•   Minor Home Repair: Continue to implement the City’s Minor Home Repair program.
    Accessibility Modification Program: Continue providing grants and low-interest loans to
    assist eligible seniors and persons with disabilities in making modifications to their
    residences, allowing the individual to attain greater mobility and remain safely in their home.
                 Responsible Department/Agency: Housing Authority
                 Funding Source: Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds
                 Timing: Ongoing
                 Quantified Objective: Eight units rehabilitated annually for very low- and low-
                 income households.
Policy HE-8: Promote the elimination of overcrowded, unsafe, and unsanitary housing
conditions.
Program 8.1 Amnesty Program: Continue the City’s amnesty program, which provides a process
to legalize and improve occupied, existing undocumented dwelling units.
            Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: Application fees
            Timing: Ongoing
            Quantified Objective: Three units legalized annually.
Policy HE-9: Ensure equal housing opportunities by taking appropriate actions, when necessary,
to prevent housing discrimination in the local market.
Program 9.1 Fair Housing: Continue to support fair housing by contracting with a fair housing
contractor/provider to counsel tenants and landlords on their rights and responsibilities. Mediate
landlord/tenant disputes, and investigate complaints of housing discrimination. Information
about these services is provided by ECHO Housing, a non-profit organization, the Alameda
Housing Authority, and the City of Alameda through referral services, brochures, fair housing
and tenant rights programs, and the Section 8 program, at the City of Alameda and the Alameda
Housing Authority customer service counters and on the City of Alameda and Housing Authority
websites.
            Responsible Department/Agency: Housing Authority
            Funding Source: CDBG
            Time Frame: Ongoing
            Quantified Objective: Assist approximately 300 households annually with inquiries,
            complaints, audits, counseling, and conciliations.
City of Alameda                                   13                      2014 – 2022 Housing Element

Goal #3: Create transit oriented pedestrian friendly neighborhoods to reduce regional and
local greenhouse gas emissions and local traffic congestion.
Policy HE-10: To reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve regional transportation services
and facilities, facilitate and encourage mixed-use and residential development in the Northern
Waterfront area and at Alameda Point consistent with Plan Bay Area, the regional sustainable
communities’ strategy.
Program 10.1 New Housing TDM Programs: Require transportation demand management
(TDM) programs and facilities in all new housing developments of at least 10 units or more to
reduce local greenhouse gas emissions, vehicle miles traveled, and local traffic congestion.
Coordinate existing and future transportation demand management programs to create cost
effective and convenient transportation services between new residential development areas,
regional transportation services including ferry, BART, and AC Transit, and on-island
commercial districts, schools, and parks.
             Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
             Funding Source: Application fees
             Timing: Ongoing
             Quantified Objective: Require of all projects over 10 units in size.
Program 10.2 Existing Neighborhood Transportation Improvements: Work with existing transit
providers including AC Transit, the Water Emergency Transit Agency (WETA), and existing
Transportation Management Agencies to improve transportation services for existing Alameda
neighborhoods to reduce local greenhouse gas emissions, vehicle miles traveled, and local traffic
congestion.
             Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development and Public Works
             Departments
             Funding Source: Community Planning Fees and Grant funds
             Timing: Ongoing
             Quantified Objective: Improved transportation services for all Alameda residents.
Policy HE-11: Facilitate and encourage live/work developments and residential development
above ground floor commercial uses on Park Street, Webster Street, and in former “station”
neighborhood commercial areas on existing transit corridors to reduce greenhouse gases and
traffic congestion and support economic development policies.
Program 11.1 Transit Oriented Housing: Use density bonuses, maximum allowed parking
requirements, and unbundled on-site parking requirements in new housing projects of 10 units or
more, and require on-site secure bicycle parking for project residents to maximize densities on
transit corridors.
             Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
             Funding Source: Application fees
             Timing: Ongoing
             Quantified Objective: Require of all projects over 10 units in size.
City of Alameda                                   14                       2014 – 2022 Housing Element

Goal #4: Ensure High Quality Architectural and Sustainable Site Design.
Policy HE-12: Ensure that new residential development utilizes “green” building strategies,
environmentally sensitive building technologies, and site planning strategies to minimize
greenhouse gas emissions.
Program 12.1 Sustainable Development: Implement the Green Building Code and develop
incentives and requirements for energy efficient and sustainable new residential developments.
         Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
         Funding Source: Application fees
         Timing: Ongoing
         Quantified Objective: Review progress annually.
Program 12.2 Promote Energy Conservation: Continue to offer residential customer energy
services which include the following:
       • A weatherization cash grant program
       • A rebate program for compact fluorescent lights
       • A meter lending program
       • A rebate program for Energy Star refrigerators
       • A second refrigerator pickup program
       • Free energy audits
       • Energy Assistance Program to help low-income residents reduce their energy use
       • Implement the energy efficiency and conservation policies and programs in the Energy
           Element of the General Plan
             Responsible Department/Agency: AMP
             Funding Source: Utility fees
            Time Frame: Ongoing, as programs are available
            Quantified Objectives: Provide $40,000 in energy services annually.
Policy HE-13: Encourage public participation of all segments of the community, including low-
and moderate-income residents, the business sector, renters and homeowners, in the formulation
and review of City housing policy.
Program 13.1 Public Notice and Participation: Provide ample public notice and opportunities for
public involvement in the public decision making process.
             Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
             Funding Source: Application fees
             Timing: Ongoing
             Quantified Objective: Review procedures as part of annual report.
City of Alameda                                 15                      2014 – 2022 Housing Element

Policy HE-14: Maintain the integrity of existing residential neighborhoods by protecting and
enhancing the historic architecture and ensuring that new development complements the density,
and physical and aesthetic character of the neighborhood and surrounding areas.
Program 14.1 Design Concepts Develop preferred design concepts for important opportunity
sites to improve certainty in the entitlement process similar to the design concepts prepared for
the Webster Street Vision Plan, Civic Center Vision Plan, and North of Park Gateway Strategic
Plan.
             Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
             Funding Source: Application fees
             Timing: Ongoing
             Quantified Objective: Review progress annually.
Policy HE-15: Ensure that new neighborhoods seamlessly integrate with older residential
neighborhoods by designing new housing developments that complement, but not mimic, the
historic, architectural, aesthetic, and physical qualities of existing neighborhoods.
Program 15.1: Design Review: Continue to administer and improve the Design Review
Ordinance to ensure compatible new residential design in existing neighborhoods.
             Responsible Department/Agency: Community Development Department
             Funding Source: Application fees
             Timing: Ongoing
             Quantified Objective: Review ordinance annually as part of annual review.
City of Alameda                                    16                       2014 – 2022 Housing Element

B. Quantified Objectives
Table 1 provides the City’s quantified objectives for the 2015–2023 Housing Element period.
  Table-1:                Quantified Objectives For City of Alameda Programs, 2015–2023
                                                             Income Level
          Category                                                                                           Total
                                Extremely                                                     Above
                                               Very Low           Low           Mod.
                                    Low                                                        Mod.
ABAG RHNA, 2014–2022                222            222            248            283            748          1,723
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Units Provided Through Housing Programs
Substantial
                 1                    0              8              0              0             0              8
Rehabilitation
Amnesty Units                         0              0              0             24             0             24
Units Constructed by Private and Non-Profit Housing Providers (1)
New Construction                      0             85             68            119           1,428         1,700
Total New Construction                0             93             68            143           1,428         1,732
CONSERVATION
Existing Housing Choice Vouchers
Households                         1,200           320             80              0             0           1,600
Total Conservation                 1,200           320             80              0             0           1,600
REHABILITATION
Housing Rehabilitation
                                      6              8             10              0             0             24
Program (Units)
Rental Rehabilitation
                                      6              8             10              0             0             24
Program (Units)
Minor Home Repair
                                     0               8              8              0             0             16
(Units)
Accessibility Modification
                                     16             16             32              0             0             64
Program
Total Rehabilitation                 28             40             60              0             0            128
‘(1) Units constructed by the private and non-profit sectors are estimates of anticipated development activity based
upon current development proposals and anticipated economic and market conditions. Actual activity will be
determined by market conditions, property owner decisions, and other factors that are outside the control of the City
of Alameda.
Source: City of Alameda 2014
City of Alameda                                           17                           2014 – 2022 Housing Element

8                 SAFETY AND NOISE ELEMENT
State law (Government Code Sections 65300-65303.4) requires that the General Plan include
polices to protect the community from both natural and human-induced disasters and policies
that protect the community from harmful noise. The Alameda Safety and Noise Element
identifies the policies and strategies necessary to reduce the risk of death, injuries, property
damage, environmental degradation, economic and social dislocation, and excessive and harmful
noise from the natural and man-made hazards and noise sources in the City of Alameda. The
goals of the Safety and Noise Element are to:
       Protect the health, safety and general welfare of City of Alameda residents, workers and
        visitors.
       Reduce exposure to hazards.
   The City of Alameda will complete work on a new Emergency Operation Center for the
   Alameda community in 2017.
       Reduce damage to public and private property and the environment from natural disasters
        and hazards.
       Minimize disruption of essential public services, facilities, and infrastructure as the result
        of natural disaster.
       Facilitate timely and complete recovery from a natural disaster.
                                            115

       Increase public understanding and awareness of hazard and hazard mitigation.
       Facilitate participation in mitigation and resiliency preparation by Alameda residents,
        workers, and partner agencies.
The City of Alameda is located in a region that is susceptible to a variety of natural disasters.
Close proximity to major regional earthquake faults leads to significant risks from seismic and
geologic hazards. Earthquake ground shaking and soil settlement can lead to infrastructure
breaks that can lead to fire hazards. Relatively flat topography and proximity to the San
Francisco Bay, poses flooding hazards for Alameda. Severe storm events currently cause
flooding in low lying areas in Alameda. Climate change and sea level rise will increase the
severity of these hazards in the future. In addition, man-made risks from hazardous materials,
airport operations and noise will continue to pose risks for Alameda residents.
The Safety and Noise Element is informed by the City of Alameda Local Hazard Mitigation
Plan; City of Alameda Emergency Operations Plan; Association of Bay Area Government’s
Resiliency Program; Adapting to Rising Tides, Transportation Vulnerability and Risk
Assessment Pilot Project (prepared by Metropolitan Transportation Commission, California
Department of Transportation and Bay Conservation and Development Commission); Adapting
to Rising Tides: Alameda County Shoreline Vulnerability Assessment (prepared by the Alameda
County Flood Control and Water Conservation District and Bay Conservation and Development
Commission); California Governor’s Office of Emergency Services; United States Geological
Survey Earthquake Preparedness; and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration:
Weather-Ready Nation.
8.1                   EMERGENCY MANAGEMEN T
The City of Alameda aspires towards resiliency through the continual implementation of
mitigation actions that reduce the potential for loss of life, property damage, and environmental
degradation from natural disasters, while accelerating economic recovery from those disasters. A
resilient City is reliant on functional infrastructure systems, buildings, and programs to keep key
services operational, to help damaged areas rebuild, to keep undamaged homes habitable, and to
keep businesses open during recovery.
Disasters are rarely limited to jurisdictional boundaries and impacts from disasters often affect
multiple agencies within a region. The Federal Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000 encourages
State, regional and local agencies to work together to mitigate hazards. The Emergency
Operations Management program in Alameda is intended to coordinate response to potential
disasters such as hazardous materials releases, earthquakes, fire, or aircraft crash.
Objective: Minimize risks of loss of life, personal injury, property damage and
environmental degradation by developing, monitoring and updating comprehensive and
collaborative emergency preparedness and recovery programs.
                                              116

Policies:
SN-1. Maintain emergency management and disaster preparedness as a top City priority.
   a. Maintain and update the recommendations and standards established in the City of
       Alameda's Emergency Management and Operations Plan as the guide for disaster
       planning in Alameda.
   b. Maintain training programs to ensure that City personnel are sufficiently prepared to
       respond to an emergency and staff the Emergency Operations Center.
   c. Identify and publicize essential emergency facilities in the City, including shelters,
       evacuation routes, and emergency operation staging areas, and take the necessary actions
       to ensure that they will remain operational following a disaster.
   d. Conduct periodic emergency response exercises to test the effectiveness of local
       preparedness response, recovery, and mitigation procedures.
SN-2. Maintain a prepared Emergency Operations Center to support City responses to a major
   emergency event.
SN-3. Continue to develop and maintain General Mutual Aid Agreements. Coordinate local
   emergency preparedness efforts with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
   Coast Guard, United States Maritime Administration Ready Reserve Fleet (MARAD), the
   San Francisco Bay Area Water Emergency Transportation Authority (WETA), the Port of
   Oakland, adjacent jurisdictions, the Alameda Unified School District, the various private
   schools in Alameda, local hospitals, senior or disabled care housing facilities, and other local
   and regional police, fire and public health agencies in preparation for natural and man-made
   disasters, and ensure that the City’s disaster response communication technologies are
   compatible with other agency communication technologies.
SN-4. Maintain and promote community programs to train volunteers, senior and disabled
   support groups, food banks, and other local aid organizations to assist police, fire, and civil
   defense personnel during and after a major earthquake, fire, or flood.
       a. Maintain community-based emergency preparedness training programs targeted to
           neighborhoods and business groups including outreach and coordination with
           Voluntary Organizations Active in Disasters (VOAD) and other community based
           programs.
       b. Prepare and/or make available public education and awareness materials in multiple
           languages on all aspects of emergency preparedness, including the type and extent of
           hazards in the community, measures to reduce the likelihood of damage and injury,
           provisions for emergency supplies, steps to take immediately after a disaster, and the
           locations of shelters and medical facilities.
                                           117

SN-5. Ensure that the City prioritize public safety through the implementation of a Vision Zero
    policy to reduce annual pedestrian and bicyclist fatalities and serious injuries resulting from
    collisions with faster moving vehicles and unsafe street design.
8.2                  SEISMIC AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
Earthquakes are the single-most significant short-term geologic hazard facing the residents and
businesses in Alameda. Earthquakes are also the hazard that are most likely to cause extensive
damage. In addition to the initial shaking, secondary seismic hazards associated with earthquakes
include liquefaction, lateral spreading, and cracking of the ground surface, sand boils, slope
failure, and seiches. Figure 8-1 illustrates the proximity of Alameda to the Hayward and San
Andreas Faults. The likelihood of occurrence of these secondary effects due to ground shaking
in Alameda is high due to underlying soil conditions in Alameda, such as artificial fill, bay mud,
and expansive soils. Figure 8-2 illustrates Alameda’s susceptibility to severe liquefaction in the
                                                                event     of     ground      shaking.
                                                                Alameda’s relatively old housing
                                                                stock     and     unique       historic
                                                                commercial        buildings       were
                                                                generally constructed without the
                                                                benefit of modern Building Code
                                                                requirements       to      strengthen
                                                                buildings against         earthquake
                                                                shaking.
                                                                The 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake
                                                                caused damage to private and
                                                                public buildings, water mains,
                                                                sewer      lines,     streets,     and
                                                                bulkheads. Liquefaction (mud
                                                                boils) occurred at Alameda Point
                                                                and Harbor Bay Business Park.
                                                                South Shore experienced buckled
                                                                streets and sidewalks, and
                                                                subsidence that made the sanitary
                                                                sewer pipes no longer flow
                                                                downhill, requiring the City to
                                                                build a new sanitary sewer pump
                                                                station. According to the USGS,
                                                                the chance of an earthquake of
                                                                M6.7 or greater in the Bay Area in
                                                                the next 30 years is 72 percent.
                                                                The chance of an M6.7 or greater
                                                                 earthquake on our closest fault,
   Figure 8-1 Earthquake Probabilities Source: 2007              the Hayward Fault, in the next 30
   Working Group of California Earthquake Probabilities,         years is 28 percent. Combining
   2008.
                                             118

all likely scenarios, Alameda has a 10 percent chance of experiencing “Very Strong” to
“Violent” (MMI 8 to MMI 9) shaking in the next 50 years. This probability can also be
expressed as a 0.2 percent chance per year, or a 500-year event, which could happen any time.
Climate change is expected to worsen earthquake hazards. Rising sea levels will cause rising
groundwater levels. Soils that are more saturated with groundwater are more likely to liquefy and
subside. Some preliminary evidence suggests that changes in groundwater levels in the vicinity
of fault lines can promote more frequent small earthquakes.
Objective: Minimize risks of loss of life, personal injury, property damage and
environmental degradation posed by earthquakes and other geologic hazards.
Policies:
SN-6. Amend and update the Alameda local California Building Code, as necessary, to
    incorporate new standards for construction pertaining to development on areas of fill or
    underlain by Bay Mud or Merritt Sand and the design of new buildings to resist the lateral
    effects and other potential forces of a large earthquake on any of the nearby faults.
                                                                          Figure 8-2:
                                                                          Liquefaction
                                                                          Susceptibility
                                                                          Source: United
                                                                          States
                                                                          Geological
                                                                          Survey.
SN-7. Work with Caltrans, the Metropolitan Transportation Commission, the Alameda County
    Transportation Commission and other regional, state and federal partners to fund earthquake
    strengthening protection for critical public regional transportation facilities, such as the Posey
    and Webster Tubes, the Miller Sweeney Bridge and the High Street Bridge.
SN-8. Work with Caltrans, Alameda County, and other regional agencies to retrofit and improve
    at least one estuary crossing to meet a life-line standard to ensure access to the larger region
                                              119

    for emergency access, equipment supplies, and disaster response and recovery in the event of
    a major seismic event.
SN-9. Continue to strengthen and rehabilitate City Buildings and other city infrastructure,
    including but not limited to wastewater systems and pump stations, stormwater systems and
    pump stations and electric systems and facilities, to ensure that the City can respond
    effectively to a seismic event.
SN-10. Require owners of vulnerable structures, to the extent feasible, to retrofit existing
    structures to withstand earthquake ground shaking, and require retrofitting when such
    structures are substantially rehabilitated or remodeled.
        a. Continue to implement the City’s Soft Story Program including mandatory
            requirements for substantially improving the seismic performance of multi-family
            wood frame residential buildings with “soft stories.”
        b. Continue to implement the City’s Wood Framed Building Program including
            voluntary requirements for substantially improving the seismic performance of one-
            and two-story wood frame residential buildings with vulnerable “cripple walls.”
        c. Develop incentives and assistance to help property owners make their homes and
            businesses more earthquake-safe. Pursue a variety of funding sources, such as grants,
            low-interest loans, and tax credits, to assist residents and businesses with seismic
            upgrades.
        d. Require owners of shoreline properties, to the extent feasible, to inspect, maintain,
            and repair the perimeter slopes to withstand earthquake ground shaking, consolidation
            of underlying Bay Mud, and wave erosion.
        e. Establish incentives and exemptions from City zoning code requirements, such as off-
            street parking and/or on-site common open space, to facilitate private rehabilitation
            and strengthening of soft story multi-family buildings.
8.3                  FLOODING AND SEA LEVEL RISE
Due to its relatively flat topography and proximity to the San Francisco Bay, Alameda is
uniquely sensitive to flooding caused by high tides, storm events, and climate change induced
sea level rise. The City of Alameda normally experiences tides that range from -0.2’ Mean
Lower Low Water (MLLW) to +6.4’ Mean Higher High Water (MHHW), based on the
NAVD88 datum. (The NAVD88 datum or zero elevation is approximately the same as the
elevations used in local tide tables.) The highest tide of the year, or “king tide,” normally occurs
during the winter months of November thru February, and is usually about 7.4’. Every year,
there is a 1 percent chance the king tide will exceed 9.4’. The ten highest king tides recorded by
NOAA in Alameda for the last 75 years measured 8.6’ to 9.5’ elevation.
                                              120

Winter months are also when the City is likely to experience storms. During an extreme storm
event, the level of the sea can temporarily rise several feet above the level predicted by tide
tables. During the El Niño event of 1997-98, up to 2 feet of standing water occurred on Main
Street, due to higher sea levels during high tide and heavy rainwater runoff. In 1981, storms
eroded Crown Beach to the edge of Shoreline Drive. In 2006 storm waves damaged the Harbor
Bay Ferry Terminal, and washed away portions of the adjoining Bay Trail.
Storm related hazards will occur more frequently and more extensively in the future due to
climate change, which contributes to both sea level rise and more intense storms. A home located
in a currently predicted 100-year flood level would have a 1 percent annual likelihood of being
flooded in any one year. As the sea levels rise, the normal high tide will rise, so that smaller and
smaller high tides and storms will have the same flooding capabilities. By mid-century, Alameda
is likely to experience high tides of 9.4’ once every 5 years (20 percent chance per year). By the
end of the century, the new normal high tide will be a MHHW of 9.4’, with yearly king tides of
10.4’, and an annual 1 percent chance of seeing a 12.8’ tide.
  Figure 8-3: Flood Hazards. An illustration showing areas of Alameda that could be subject to temporary
  flooding with 24-inch sea level rise during a 100-year storm event.
  Source: Bay Conservation and Development Commission, May, 2015
                                                  121

Global warming and sea level rise will have severe long-term effects on Alameda. The Bay
Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC) and Alameda County Flood Control Water
Conservation District predict a likely 12-inch increase in sea level on the Alameda County
coastline by 2050, and a likely 24-inch increase in sea level in the same area by 2100 (Adapting
to Rising Tides: Alameda County Shoreline Vulnerability Assessment, May, 2015). The study
identified a 66-inch inundation level when combining the 24-inch sea level rise with a 100-year
storm event (see Figure 8-3). In addition to residential and commercial properties, the Webster
and Posey Tubes, Ron Cowan Parkway and the Alameda Gateway Terminal Ferry and other
major public improvements are vulnerable to inundation.
Objective: Minimize risks of loss of life, personal injury, property damage and environmental
degradation posed by sea level rise, flooding and storm water runoff.
Policies:
SN-11. Continue the City’s participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
SN-12. Continue to review and publish for public discussion the latest and most up-to-date flood
    hazard and sea level rise forecasts from regional, state and federal agencies.
SN-13. Advocate for a permanent seat for City of Alameda representation and active
    participation in regional discussions on sea level rise mitigation, infrastructure improvements
    and adaptation strategies.
SN-14. Identify public transportation, open space, and stormwater and wastewater facilities,
    shoreline assets, and other public assets vulnerable to sea level rise and flooding hazards, and
    begin planning for adaptation and protection.
        a. Implement a program for Resilient Shoreline Facilities, including performing
            appropriate seismic, storm, flooding and other safety analyses based on current and
            future use for all City-owned shoreline facilities, including dikes, shore protection
            (rip rap), lagoon sea walls, storm water outfalls, marinas and protective marshlands.
SN-15. Develop sea level rise adaptive strategies for different areas of the City for public
    discussion and evaluation, including but not limited to: avoidance/planned retreat, enhanced
    levees, setback levees to accommodate habitat transition zones, buffer zones, beaches,
    expanded tidal prisms for enhanced natural scouring of channel sediments, raising and flood-
    proofing structures, and/or provisions for additional floodwater pumping stations, and inland
    detention basins to reduce peak discharges.
        a. Develop for public discussion and evaluation potential financing strategies and
            partnership opportunities with regional and state agencies such as the Oakland
            International Airport, and other agencies to fund and build selected adaptive
            strategies.
SN-16. Protect and upgrade public infrastructure, including but not limited to streets, wastewater
    systems and pump stations, stormwater systems and pump stations, and electric systems and
                                             122

    facilities, to ensure capacity and resilience during storm events, high tides, and sea level rise,
    and to decrease the chance of flooding of nearby streets, utilities, and private property.
SN-17. Reduce the risk of tsunami inundation through public tsunami education, with special
    emphasis in low-lying shoreline properties, including the maritime communities and marinas.
SN-18. Design street rights-of-way, parks, other public spaces, street trees and landscaping to be
    resilient to temporary flooding.
SN-19. Require new development adjacent to the shoreline, lagoons and low elevations to plan
    for 50 years of sea level rise. Ensure that the design of future developments incorporate
    flood protection measures to protect improvements from a 100-year storm event and
    anticipated sea level rise.
        a. Require new development to provide adequate setbacks along waterfront areas for the
             future expansion of seawalls and levees to adapt to sea level rise.
SN-20. Require the creation and maintenance of easements along drainage ways necessary for
    adequate drainage of normal or increased surface runoff due to storms.
SN-21. Require and enforce stringent groundwater management programs to prevent subsidence.
SN-22. Require the use of “Green Infrastructure”, landscaping, pervious surfaces, green roofs,
    and on-site stormwater retention facilities to reduce surface runoff and storm drain flooding
    during storm events.
8.4                   FIRE HAZARDS AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Major fires resulting from the rupture of local gas or electric lines during an earthquake could be
severely compounded by water main failures and substandard fire protection systems in older
buildings.
Objective: Minimize risks of loss of life, personal injury, property damage and
environmental degradation posed by fire hazards.
Policies:
SN-23. Maintain the City's fire prevention, disaster preparedness, and fire-fighting and
    emergency medical service capabilities.
SN-24. Maintain a response time of 5 minutes, 20 seconds, 90 percent of the time, for the first
    fire unit to be on-scene of a fire.
SN-25. Work collaboratively with other jurisdictions and agencies to reduce fire hazards in
    Alameda, with an emphasis on effective vegetation management and mutual aid agreements.
                                              123

SN-26. Require new development to comply with the City's current Fire, Seismic, and Sprinkler
    Codes.
SN-27. Require new development to minimize the risks of fire and include adequate provisions
    for vegetation management, emergency access and appropriate firefighting equipment.
SN-28. Require new development to underground utilities to minimize disruption by fire or other
    natural disasters.
8.5     HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTE
The careful management of hazardous materials and the reduction in generation and safe
disposal of hazardous waste are critical to public health and safety. Hazardous materials are
stored and transported throughout Alameda. Hazardous materials used in industrial and
commercial areas and in households include: flammable and combustible liquids, solvents, paint,
plating or photographic solutions, acids, and pesticides. Waste oil, gases, and other hazardous
liquids associated with vehicle and heavy machinery maintenance are also present.
Objective: Minimize risks of loss of life, personal injury, serious illness, property damage
and environmental degradation posed by the use, transport, treatment, and disposal of
hazardous materials and hazardous waste.
Policies:
SN-29. Continue to identify and assess the risks associated with various hazardous materials
    transported in Alameda.
SN-30. Increase public awareness of hazardous material use and storage in the City, the relative
    degree of potential health hazards, and the appropriate channels for reporting odor problems
    and other nuisances.
        a. Promote public education about the safe disposal of household hazardous waste, such
            as motor oil and batteries, including the locations of designated household hazardous
            waste disposal sites.
SN-31. Work with county, regional, state and federal agencies to implement programs for
    hazardous waste reduction, hazardous material facility siting, hazardous waste handling and
    disposal, public education and regulatory compliance.
        a. Continue to remove and monitor methane gas produced as a waste product of
            materials decomposing in the former landfill on Doolittle Drive.
SN-32. Work with county, regional, state, and federal agencies and private property owners to
    ensure that the necessary steps are taken to clean up residual hazardous waste on any
    contaminated sites.
                                             124
        a. Require that all new construction, including construction on former industrial sites,
            has been cleared for residential, commercial or industrial uses from the appropriate
            federal, state and local agencies and acts, including the Comprehensive
            Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) Program, the
            Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), the California Department of
            Toxic Substances Control (DTSC), the Regional Water Quality Control Board
            (RWQCB) and the Alameda County Department of Environmental Health (ACDEH),
            which is the Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA) responsible for
            implementing state environmental regulations related to hazardous waste and
            hazardous materials.
SN-33. Continue to support the various resource recovery initiatives and other measures
    specified in the Alameda County Countywide Integrated Waste Management Plan.
SN-34. Ensure that the City’s Emergency Preparedness programs include provisions for
    hazardous materials incidents, as well as measures to quickly alert the community and ensure
    the safety of residents and employees following an incident.
        a. Improve the training and capability of the Fire Department to handle accidental
            releases of hazardous materials. Provide ongoing training for hazardous materials
            enforcement and response personnel. Apply the Emergency Operations Plan, if
            necessary, in response to a hazardous materials release disaster.
SN-35. Require adequate and safe separation between areas and uses with hazardous materials
    and sensitive uses such as schools, residences and public community facilities.
SN-36. Require that all facilities that handle and/or store hazardous materials are designed to
    minimize the possibility of environmental contamination and adverse off-site impacts and
    that they are in compliance with state and federal standards and requirements designed to
    protect public health and the environment.
SN-37. Encourage residential, commercial and industrial property owners to test their properties
    for elevated levels of radon gas (more than 4 pico curies per liter).
8.6                  NOISE AND AIRPORT ENVIRONS
Located within a major urban metropolitan area, the major noise sources in Alameda are: aircraft
noise, automobile and truck noise, and noise associated with certain commercial and industrial
land uses, such as the Port of Oakland seaport and Coast Guard Island. Research shows
excessive roadway, aircraft and/or wind turbine noise negatively impacts the memory, learning
acquisition, test scores and physical well-being of children. Every effort should be made to
minimize these risks in the placement of children with exposure to these noise sources. Aircraft
operations at the Oakland International and San Francisco International Airports are the most
significant sources of noise impacts in Alameda neighborhoods. Some Alameda residents
currently experience single event noise in excess of 80 dBA on a nightly basis.
                                            125

Objective: Protect Alameda residents from the harmful effects of exposure to excessive
noise from aircraft, buses, boats, trucks and automobiles, and adjacent land uses.
 Figure 8-4: Future Noise Contour Map. The major sources of noise projected to occur in Alameda by
 2035 will be from the Oakland International Airport and local streets with faster moving vehicles.
Policies:
SN-38. Support state and federal legislation to reduce transportation noise from cars, trucks, and
   aircraft.
SN-39. Through the City’s federal lobbying agenda, support and advocate for operational
   practices, changes to aircraft, new technologies, and physical improvements that would
   reduce the number of properties in Alameda that are impacted by aircraft noise.
SN-40. Oppose any expansion of operations at Oakland International Airport that would exceed
   the limits established by the existing Settlement Agreements.
                                               126

SN-41. Work with Oakland International Airport to reduce the incidence of single event noise
   exposure above those currently experienced.
SN-42. To reduce existing and future potential harmful aircraft noise impacts in Alameda
   neighborhoods:
   a. Actively participate in forums and discussions regarding operations and expansion plans
       for Oakland International Airport, including various working groups composed of
       individuals representing the City of Alameda, the City of San Leandro, the Port of
       Oakland, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and the air transport industry to
       monitor the airport's noise control program and to make recommendations for the benefit
       of City of Alameda residents. These groups include the South Field & North Field
       Research Groups, Oakland Airport-Community Noise Management Forum and Oakland
       International Airport Aviation Stakeholder Advisory Committee.
   b. Seek local representation on all task forces, commissions and advisory boards established
       to guide airport policies and programs.
   c. Seek adherence by airport operators to operational, development and management
       policies that will minimize noise nuisance and safety concerns for Alameda.
   d. Work with Oakland International Airport and the FAA to limit night use of North Field to
       Stage 3 and Stage 4 aircraft, and pursue mitigation of aircraft noise impacts to the fullest
       extent possible.
   e. Ensure that any changes to aircraft operations that would potentially result in increased
       noise levels in Alameda incorporate comprehensive noise mitigation measures, even
       when the impacts will be of limited duration. To the greatest extent feasible, any changes
       in airport activity should avoid impacts to noise sensitive uses such as residential areas
       and schools.
   f. To the extent permitted by the 1976 Settlement Agreement, the 2001 Settlement
       Agreement, the 2002 Settlement Agreement, the 2003 Addendum to the Settlement
       Agreement and the Written Compliance Plan, advocate for noise abatement and
       mitigation programs that are based not only on the airport’s noise contour maps, but that
       consider other factors such as the frequency of overflights, single-event noise levels, the
       altitude of aircraft, the hours of operation, low frequency noise, and sensitive receptors.
       Monitor implementation and compliance with the Settlement Agreements of 1976, 2001
       and 2002 and the Written Compliance Plan.
   g. Obtain assurance that the future noise exposure for Alameda is known and that aircraft
       operations will be controlled to ensure that projected noise levels are not exceeded.
       Validation of the 65 dB CNEL contour is to be carried out by means of a permanent full-
       time noise monitoring system to ensure compliance with the California Airport Noise
       standards and the Alameda County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) Plan.
                                            127

SN-43. Advocate for the following operational measures to be incorporated into any plans for the
   expansion of the Oakland International Airport:
   a. Use of Stage 3 and Stage 4 (least noisy) aircraft only, on all runways directly overflying
        Alameda residential areas.
   b. Enforced flight path alterations for noise abatement, for all runways, with remote
        monitoring sites maintained in locations mutually acceptable to the Port and the City.
   c. Prohibition of touch-and-go operations by jet aircraft.
   d. Prohibition of noisy engine ground run-ups at night outside of the Ground Run-Up
        Enclosure.
   e. Prohibition of intersection departures on Runway 28.
SN-44. Support the Port of Oakland in continuing to maintain a permanent full-time noise
   monitoring system that will (a) measure noise continuously, (b) separate OAK noise events
   from other noise source events, particularly overflights from other airports, (c) measure and
   augment CNEL values, (d) provide information on excessively noisy aircraft operations, (e)
   monitor effectiveness of noise abatement programs, and (f) meet the performance
   specifications of the California Noise Standards.
SN-45. Regulate land uses within designated airport safety zones, height referral areas, and noise
   compatibility zones to minimize the possibility of future noise conflicts and accident hazards.
SN-46. Maintain a high degree of readiness to respond to aircraft crashes through participation in
   preparedness drills and mutual aid activities with the City and Port of Oakland to ensure
   quick and effective response to emergencies.
SN-47. Enforce compliance with noise emissions standards for all types of automotive vehicles
   established by the California Vehicle Code and by federal regulations.
SN-48. With the cooperation of the U.S. Coast Guard, the City of Oakland, and the Port of
   Oakland, enforce California noise emission standards for engine-driven maritime vessels.
SN-49. Encourage BART and AC Transit to develop and apply noise-reduction technologies that
   reduce noise impacts associated with BART trains and buses.
SN-50. Where feasible and appropriate, develop and implement noise reduction measures when
   undertaking improvements, extensions or design changes to Alameda streets.
SN-51. Maintain day and nighttime truck routes that minimize the number of residents exposed
   to truck noise.
                                            128
SN-52. Require new or replacement residential development within 500 feet north of the 65 dB
   CNEL Settlement Agreement line on Bay Farm Island, to include noise insulation that meets
   the standards established in the ALUC Plan for assumed exterior 65 dB CNEL.
SN-53. Require compliance with the California Building Code requirements to ensure
   appropriate interior noise levels in new or replacement residential construction, hotels,
   motels, and schools. In new dwellings subject to an airport noise easement, the maximum
   interior noise level is not to exceed 45 dB CNEL. If this requirement is met by inoperable or
   closed windows, a mechanical ventilation system meeting California Building Code
   requirements must be provided. Require acoustical analyses as allowed by the California
   Building Code.
SN-54. Ensure that purchasers of property within or adjacent to the following areas are aware of
   existing and future potential noise conditions and the limitations of the City’s ability to abate
   existing or future noise conditions: the Oakland International Airport Influence Areas, as
   defined by the ALUC, commercial districts, truck routes, major arterials, Alameda United
   School District facilities, City recreation facilities, and business parks. Require the full
   disclosure of the existing and potential future noise levels within deeds and lease agreements
   as a condition of project approval, whenever possible.
SN-55. To the extent feasible, through the development entitlement process, require local
   businesses to reduce noise impacts on the community by avoiding or replacing excessively
   noisy equipment and machinery, applying noise-reduction technology, and following
   operating procedures that limit the potential for conflicts.
SN-56. Require noise reduction strategies in all construction projects. Require a vibration impact
   assessment for proposed projects in which heavy-duty construction equipment would be used
   (e.g. pile driving, bulldozing) within 200 feet of an existing structure or sensitive receptor. If
   applicable, the City shall require all feasible mitigation measures to be implemented to
   ensure that no damage to structures will occur and disturbance to sensitive receptors would
   be minimized.
SN-57. In making a determination of impact under the California Environmental Quality Act
   (CEQA), consider the following impacts to be “significant” if the proposed project causes: an
   increase in the Ldn noise exposure of 4 or more dBA if the resulting noise level would
   exceed that described as normally acceptable for the affected land use, as indicated in Table
   8-1, or any increase in Ldn of 6 dBA or more.
SN-58. Continue to enforce the Community Noise Ordinance by promptly responding to local
   noise complaints.
                                            129

Table 8-1: California Land Use Compatibility Guidelines.
Source: Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, General Plan Guidelines, November 2003.
                                            130

  CITY DESIGN ELEMENT
3 CITY DESIGN ELEMENT
  Alameda has a clear identity – certainly it is among the half dozen Bay Area
  cities with the strongest visual image. During an era when bland, look-alike
  communities are the norm, unique cities are an increasingly prized resource.
  But identity cannot be taken for granted; the richness of Alameda's historic
  urban fabric must continually be defended against pressures for development
  conforming to current standard practice. And not all that is unique or
  memorable is pleasant – there are bleak areas, clutter, and missed
  opportunities, as well as opportunities to be seized.
  The City Design Element addresses visual issues at a citywide scale. The
  quality of architectural and landscape design for individual sites and projects is
  also of great importance, as is constantly demonstrated by Alameda's wide
  variation in quality from block to block and lot to lot. Policy 3.3.e calls for
  detailed design guidelines. (See Figure 3-1, City Design Framework)
  3.1                  ENTRANCES
  Arrival in Alameda is a distinct event, whether by tube, bridge, or along San
  Leandro Bay. The City design objective is to establish immediately the desired
  character of Alameda for a person entering for the first or 10,000th time. A
  handsome building, a cluster of trees, or other prominent entry feature can give
  form to the journey.
  Guiding Policy: Entrances
  3.1.a   Alameda's entrances should create a sense of civic pride.
  Implementing Policies: Entrances
  3.1.b   Posey-Webster Tubes:
          Work with Caltrans to refurbish, paint and light the portal towers.
          Prepare an overall landscaping and design scheme as part of the
          Webster Street specific plan. Use large-growing trees to unify the
          entrance area and make a strong visual statement. (See Policy 2.5.g)
          Diminish the visual perception of an expanse of pavement along
          Constitution Way and Webster Street by creating a grove of trees on
          existing excess right-of-way, in Neptune Park, on the College of
          Alameda campus, and in parking lots for adjoining office buildings.
                                          3-1

Chapter 3 3-2 City Design Elemen
         Preserve the view of the Oakland skyline and hills for northbound
         travelers.
         Work with Caltrans to replace freeway-scale directional signs with
         smaller ones that convey the slower-speed character of Alameda.
         Bleak, wide open spaces have made the Tube Alameda's least friendly
         entrance, but a strong planting scheme combined with completion of
         Neptune Park, approved offices, and development on the drive-in site
         can transform it.
3.1.c    Park Street Bridge:
         Discuss with County staff the possibility of painting the bridge a strong
         color that will give it more visual weight. Add trees on Park Street.
         This busiest and most cluttered entrance can convey the quality of
         Alameda without severe limitation on signs along auto row.
3.1.d    Miller-Sweeney (Fruitvale) Bridge:
         Add trees on open land to the west and south to announce the transition
         from an industrial area to a residential neighborhood and to improve the
         environment for existing and planned homes.
3.1.e    High Street Bridge:
         Discuss with County staff the possibility of painting the bridge a color
         appropriate to a residential neighborhood. Improve the landscape
         quality of this entrance in conjunction with traffic improvements to the
         High Street/Fernside Boulevard intersection.
3.1.f    Bay Farm Island Bridge:
         Ensure that the design for Bridgeview Park enhances the Bay Farm
         Island Bridge entry onto the Main Island.
3.1.g    Cross Airport Roadway:
         Evaluate design treatment options for the entry of the Cross Airport
         Roadway into Alameda.
         The nearby Teleport Tower at Harbor Bay Business Park will be the
         landmark, but City identity will need to be established.
3.2                   EDGES, VISTAS, FOCAL POINTS
Guiding Policies: Edges, Vistas, Focal Points
3.2.a    Maximize views of water and access to shorelines.
Chapter 3                                 3-3                      City Design Element
         The sense of being on an island is easily lost where views of the water
         are blocked. On the northern and eastern shorelines of the Main
         Island, few opportunities now exist for views or access to these
         shorelines and marinas impede visual access to open water.
3.2.b Deleted: (GPA 99-05)
3.2.c    Maintain and extend Alameda's outstanding street tree system using the
         adopted Street Tree Management Plan as a guide in the decision-
         making process.
         The City's 12,000 street trees make the wide, heavily trafficked
         boulevards livable and place the Gold Coast among the finest existing
         Victorian neighborhoods.
         The few barren streets in Alameda demonstrate how bleak a densely
         built city can be without trees. The Street Tree Management Plan
         includes detailed proposals for care of existing trees and for the more
         than 3,500 identified vacant planting sites.
Implementing Policies: Edges, Vistas, Focal Points
3.2.d Maintain views and access to the water along streets and other public
         rights-of-way that extend to the bulkhead line. Construct benches,
         ramps, rails, and seating appropriate for viewing and access, and
         provide walls or other screening where needed to protect adjoining
         property.
         Westline Drive, Grand Street, Park Street, Central Avenue and Encinal
         Avenue are candidates for architectural or landscape features that
         would enhance the meeting of land and water.
3.2.e    Encourage landmark structures at prominent locations.
         The Housing Authority site at the southwest corner of Webster and
         Lincoln is an example of such a location.
3.2.f    Work to establish continuous greenways adjoining Main Street and
         Atlantic Avenue extending east through the railroad yard to Sherman
         Street, provided that the greenway design on each parcel allows for
         connection throughout the length of the greenway.      (GPA 96-4)
         In addition to providing bike and pedestrian ways, a 100-foot-wide
         greenway could have landmark trees in the sector of the City that is
         most in need of a greater presence of nature.
3.2.g Work with BCDC staff to prepare a schematic plan for development of
         the 100-foot-wide strip above mean high tide on properties likely to
         require BCDC development approval.
Chapter 3                                3-4                      City Design Element
            The schematic plan should provide for public access and provide
            shoreline streets wherever possible. Specific opportunities for shoreline
            streets should be identified. The plan should include design standards
            and guidelines for buildings, streets, pedestrian and bicycle routes,
            signage and landscaping.
            Bay Farm Island, Park Street Landing, and the San Leandro Bay
            shoreline east of the Aeolian Yacht Club demonstrate BCDC's ability to
            secure high-quality development of the shoreline for public use. Similar
            opportunities exist on portions of the Northern Waterfront.
  3.2.h     Work with the East Bay Regional Park District to plan and build a
            promenade along Shore Line Drive of a quality comparable to the
            promenade bordering Harbor Bay Parkway.
            The East Bay Regional Park District (EBRPD) stresses the importance
            of avoiding encroachment onto the dune system put in place to protect
            the beach and Shore Line Drive. EBRPD recommends that any
            promenade, if built, should occupy existing 60-foot street right-of-way.
  3.2.i     Ensure that sections of the Estuary waterfront remain visually
            unobstructed.
            Most of the Estuary waterfront not devoted to industrial use is
            developed as marinas which block vistas. The proposed Estuary Park
            will be on the most prominent viewpoint.
Alameda beach
and waterfront
   Chapter 3                                3-5                      City Design Element
3.3                   ARCHITECTURAL RESOUR CES
The Historic Preservation Element, adopted in 1980, was based on a survey of
about 80 percent of the Main Island; it identified 4,000 addresses as having
architectural and historical resources. The report noted that 1,400 structures,
most of them built before the turn of the century, had been demolished since
World War II. Recommendations for preservation include designation of
Heritage Areas (no added regulation), and Historic Districts (design
regulation). Historic preservation district boundaries were not proposed, but
three Heritage Areas subsequently have been studied under the Certified Local
Government Program, and designated by the City Council: Bay Station (1986),
Park Avenue (1988), and Burbank-Portola (1989). Since the adoption of the
Historic Preservation Element, the City completed detailed surveys of
unreinforced buildings, commercial buildings on Webster Street, and buildings
and sites in the northern waterfront These surveys fill in gaps in the original
survey, leaving few buildings and sites undocumented.
Historic
homes
Implementing Policies: Architectural Resources
3.3.a     Continue to identify quality architecture of all periods in Alameda's
          history and participate in programs to increase owners' and buyers'
          awareness of the importance of preservation.
 Chapter 3                                3-6                        City Design Element
3.3.b    Consider formation of Historic Districts within which alterations to
         existing structures would be regulated to maintain neighborhood scale
         and historic character.
3.3.c    Maintain strong demolition control for historic properties.
3.3.d    New construction, redevelopment and alterations should be compatible
         with historic resources in the immediate area.
3.3.e    Develop detailed design guidelines to ensure protection of Alameda's
         historic, neighborhood, and small-town character. Encourage
         preservation of all buildings, structures, areas and other physical
         environment elements having architectural, historic or aesthetic merit,
         including restoration of such elements where they have been
         insensitively altered. Include special guidelines for older buildings of
         existing or potential architectural, historical or aesthetic merit which
         encourage retention of original architectural elements and restoration of
         any missing elements. The design guidelines include detailed design
         standards for commercial districts.
3.3.f    Regulate development in neighborhood business districts to maintain a
         street-wall, with most structures built to the property lines, entrances
         directly facing the sidewalk, and parking at the rear.
3.3.g    Encourage off-site and multi-level parking in the Park Street and
         Webster Street business districts as essential to Main Street character.
         To maintain pedestrian character and visual interest, avoid locating
         parking structures at street level on corners and along retail streets.
         These areas should be occupied by retail activities and public uses.
3.3.h    Regulate development in the Park Street and Webster Street business
         districts to encourage two- and three-story buildings extending to the
         front and side property lines, with entrances directly facing the
         sidewalk, and parking at the rear.
3.3.i    Preserve all City-owned buildings and other facilities of architectural,
         historical or aesthetic merit. Prepare a list of these facilities and
         develop an Historic Facilities Management Plan that provides
         procedures for preserving their character-defining elements, including
         significant interior features and furnishings. Include in the Management
         Plan design guidelines or standards and a long-term program to restore
         significant character-defining elements which have been altered.
3.3.j    Encourage owners of poorly remodeled but potentially attractive older
         buildings to restore the exterior of these buildings to their original
         appearance. Provide lists of altered buildings which present special
         design opportunities and make the lists widely available. Develop
         financial and design assistance programs to promote such restoration.
Chapter 3                                 3-7                          City Design Element
3.3.k Require that any exterior changes to existing buildings receiving City
         rehabilitation assistance or related to Use Permits, Variances or Design
         Review, or other discretionary City approvals be consistent with the
         building’s existing or original architectural design unless the City
         determines either (a) that the building has insufficient existing or
         original design merit of historical interest to justify application of this
         policy or (b) that application of this policy would cause undue
         economic or operational hardship to the applicant, owner or tenant.
3.4                   CIVIC CENTER SPECIFI C PLAN
The imposing red-brick City Hall (1896), the Carnegie Library building
(1903), and the Elks Club (1909) form the nucleus of Alameda's civic center.
The Police Administration Building (1978) was designed to relate to the City
Hall, and the library proposed on the site of the LinOaks Motel east of Oak
Street provides an opportunity to create an identifiable civic center. New and
existing private buildings of compatible design and multi-level parking
structures replacing parking lots would serve both the civic center and the
adjoining Park Street business district. (See Section 6.4, Cultural Facilities, for
related policies.) (See Figure 3-2, Civic Center Specific Plan Area.)
Chapter 3                                 3-8                        City Design Element

Guiding Policies: Civic Center
3.4.a    Using City Hall as the centerpiece, develop the surrounding area as an
         identifiable civic center that will enhance civic pride in Alameda.
3.4.b    Rely on design character and provision of coordinated open spaces
         rather than narrow restrictions on use to create a sense of civic center.
         In addition to public and institutional facilities, permitted uses are to
         include pocket parks, offices, retail stores, residential units, and
         parking.
         Historic buildings in the area surrounding City Hall, including the
         main library constructed in neo-classical style and the Elks Club in the
         Colonial Revival style, could contribute to the design theme of the Civic
         Center.
Implementing Policies: Civic Center
3.4.c    Prepare a list of desired public and private civic center users and their
         space needs. In addition to a new library, the list might include City
         functions now located elsewhere, a museum, a new theater, or a
         refurbished Alameda Theater, a downtown minipark, offices, and
         restaurants.
3.4.d    Prepare and adopt a Civic Center Specific Plan for the 12-acre Specific
         Plan area delineated on the General Plan Diagram. The plan is to
         include uses, building footprints and envelopes (location and bulk),
         architectural and landscape design character, street and pedestrian way
         design, and schematic design of parking areas/structures.
         The level of regulation and means of implementation of the Specific
         Plan can vary over a broad range. Initial actions may include only
         library design and parking management or construction of the first
         parking structure, but these must occur in the context of a plan for the
         entire area. Property owners will need to know where parking will be
         located, how it will be financed, and what regulations, if any, in
         addition to current zoning will affect their holdings.
3.4.e    Encourage and consider City participation in an assessment district to
         build parking structures serving private and public uses.
Chapter 3                                 3-9                        City Design Element
  ALAMEDA POINT
4 TRANSPORTATION ELEMENT
  Virtually every street in Alameda is a residential street. Therefore,
  transportation decisions need to balance the goals of moving traffic smoothly
  and quickly with Alamedans much loved quality of life. As they have in
  previous Transportation Workshops, including the 1990 General Plan update
  meetings, Alamedans have made is clear that they are willing to forgo high
  speed streets in order to accommodate the community aspects that are fostered
  by slower speeds.
  As has been the goal in Alameda for decades, the Transportation Master Plan
  (TMP) envisions a city that is actively supportive of a multimodal
  transportation system (incorporating automobiles, transit, bicycles, walking,
  and the needs of people with disabilities). Traffic volume is one of the key
  concerns of Alamedans, and the TMP recognizes that our city cannot reduce
  traffic volumes while implementing projects and programs that rely heavily on
  automotive use only and negatively impact the use of other modes.
  The main island of Alameda’s historic street grid and the entire City’s overall
  flatness and temperate weather make Alameda a city that can effectively
  encourage bicycling and walking for a lot of intra-island trips. Traffic
  congestion concerns on our bridges and tubes call for increasing High
  Occupancy Vehicle trips (e.g. buses, carpools, and ferries) for off-island trips.
  It is important that with the upcoming build-out of Alameda Point and other
  large scale projects, the City work to reduce the impact of automobile trips on
  the quality of life for residents and on the easy, safe use of non-automotive
  transportation modes.
  4.1                   CIRCULATION GOAL
  Plan, develop and maintain a safe, barrier-free and efficient
  transportation system to provide the community with adequate present
  and future mobility.
  Objective 4.1.1: Provide for the safe and efficient movement of people,
  goods, and services.
  Policies
  4.1.1.a    Maintain a consistent multimodal classification system of streets
             throughout the City that will be the basis for identifying vehicle
   Chapter 4                         -1-                           Transportation Element

          commuter routes, transit routes, bike lanes, as well as corridors for
          other modes of transportation.
                1. Continue to identify and improve pedestrian crossings in
                    areas of high pedestrian use where safety is an issue.
4.1.1.b   Enhance pedestrian safety and mobility, particularly in high
          pedestrian use areas, applying methods consistent with the hierarchy
          classification of streets identified in 4.1.1.a.
                1. Identify and mitigate impediments and obstacles to walking
                    to locations that attract pedestrians, such as business
                    districts, schools, transit stops, recreational facilities, and
                    senior facilities.
                2. Develop needed connections that maximize direct access for
                    walking. Examples include legs of intersections where
                    crossing is currently prohibited.
                3. Modify signal timing as required to provide pedestrians with
                    sufficient crossing time and minimize pedestrian/vehicle
                    conflicts.
                4. Identify locations where lighting should be enhanced to
                    provide better visibility and a more comfortable nighttime
                    environment for pedestrians.
4.1.1.c   Implement and maintain a Truck Route map coordinated with the
          private sector and neighborhood representatives.
4.1.1.d   Provide a network of facilities to allow for the safe conveyance of
          bicycle traffic on all streets and in all sections of the city.
4.1.1.e   Support a convenient, cost-effective public transit system to serve the
          mobility needs of all segments of the population, including citizens
          with disabilities, to and from major destinations in Alameda and
          throughout the region.
4.1.1.f   Design transportation facilities to comply with accepted design and
          safety standards or guidelines including the use of design features and
          materials that do not adversely impact on people with disabilities.
                1. Upgrade existing pedestrian signals by adding countdown,
                    audible, and tactile/vibrational signals. New signals should
                    include these as standard features.
Chapter 4                           -2-                            Transportation Element
4.1.1.g   Work with appropriate regional agencies to identify the feasibility of
          developing presently unavailable alternative modes such as citywide
          and regional light rail, expanded ferry options and Bus Rapid Transit.
4.1.1.h   Encourage traffic within, to, and through Alameda to use the
          appropriate street system by providing clear and effective traffic
          control measures to promote smooth flow without unduly disrupting
          the quality of life for residents.
4.1.1.i   Design transportation facilities to accommodate current and
          anticipated transportation use.
4.1.1.j   Maintain the historic street grid and maximize connectivity of new
          developments to the grid, as well as within any new developments.
4.1.1.k   Minimize the creation of improvements that would physically
          interrupt existing grid systems, such as cul-de-sacs or diverters.
4.1.1.l   Develop and implement a list of priority projects that support level of
          service standards.
4.1.1.m Develop a set of design criteria for safe passage of transit users,
          bicyclists, pedestrians, and people with disabilities through or around
          construction sites.
4.1.1.n   Develop criteria for prioritizing specific transportation projects or
          types of projects to make the most effective use of resources.
4.1.1.o   Establish a transportation system management program that provides
          both mobility and accessibility for people, freight, and goods at all
          times.
                1. Employ transportation system management measures to
                    improve traffic and transit movements and safety for all
                    modes of travel. For example, coordinating and
                    synchronizing signals.
                2. Manage operations to maintain acceptable levels of LOS
                    a. Develop and implement a strategy to increase the use of
                        alternative modes of transportation by 10 percentage
                        points by the year 2015.
                    b. Reduce the percentage of Alameda traffic made up of
                        single occupant vehicle trips (e.g. based on Census data,
                        or do survey to establish baseline)
                    c. Shift 10 percent of peak hour trips to less congested
Chapter 4                           -3-                          Transportation Element
                        times of day
                    d. Collaborate with AUSD to explore opportunities to
                        reduce congestion during peak school times, for
                        example staggering class times, encouraging parents to
                        carpool, etc.
Objective 4.1.2: Protect and enhance the service level of the transportation
system.
Policies
4.1.2.a   Develop multimodal level of service (LOS) standards that
          development will be required         to maintain by encouraging the
          use of non-automotive modes.
4.1.2.b   Monitor the multimodal level of service at major intersections to
          identify priorities for improvement.
4.1.2.c   Promote methods to increase vehicle occupancy levels.
4.1.2.d   Support and monitor the City’s Traffic Capacity Management
          Procedure (TCMP), which was developed to meet the City’s
          development and transportation goals west of Grand Street.
4.1.2.e   Work with regional, state, and federal agencies to develop plans for
          design, phasing, funding, and construction of facilities to enhance
          multimodal cross-estuary travel, such as increased access to Interstate
          880 (bridge, tunnel or other vehicle connection) bike/pedestrian
          shuttles or high occupancy vehicle-only crossing (e.g. transit or
          carpool lane) to Oakland.
4.1.2.f   Create interagency working groups to discuss ways of mitigating
          impacts on circulation generated from outside the impacted agency’s
          jurisdiction.
Objective 4.1.3: Preserve mobility for emergency response vehicles and
maintain emergency access to people and property.
Policies
4.1.3.a   Consider emergency response goals in long-range transportation
          planning and while designing current projects.
4.1.3.b Work with public safety agencies to adequately consider emergency
          response needs.
Chapter 4                          -4-                          Transportation Element

4.1.3.c    Develop a network of emergency response routes, balancing
           emergency service needs with vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle
           safety consistent with the adopted street classification system.
Objective 4.1.4: Encourage, promote and facilitate proactive citizen
participation to determine the long-term mobility needs of our
community.
Policies
4.1.4.a    Maintain a public forum, such as the Transportation Commission, to
           facilitate citizen input on transportation policy.
4.1.4.b    Assist in efforts to facilitate dialogue between City departments,
           residents, and neighborhood organizations.
Objective 4.1.5: Consider the transportation needs of the community,
including those with limited mobility options.
Policies
4.1.5.a    Maximize compliance of transportation facilities with Americans
           with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
4.1.5.b    Continue to support the Paratransit program.
4.1.5.c    Continue to support the fixed-route AC Transit system to provide
           mobility for all, including those without access to personal
           transportation.
Objective 4.1.6: Increase the efficiency of the existing transportation
system by emphasizing Transportation System Management (TSM)
strategies and Transportation Demand Management (TDM) techniques.
Policies
4.1.6.a    Identify, develop, and implement travel demand management
           strategies to reduce demand on the existing transportation system.
                  1. Establish peak hour trip reduction goals for all new
                      developments as follows:
                          • 10 percent peak hour trip reduction for new residential
                            developments
                          • 30 percent peak hour trip reduction for new
                            commercial developments
 Chapter 4                           -5-                          Transportation Element

                2. Develop a TDM toolbox that identifies a menu of specific
                    TDM measures and their associated trip reduction percentages.
                3. Develop a citywide ITS infrastructure assessment using a
                    Systems Engineering approach to determine capital
                    investment needs.
                4. Require implementation of ITS infrastructure as part of all
                    new developments.
4.1.6.b   Identify locations where signal coordination could be employed to
          improve traffic flow and reduce vehicle emissions.
4.1.6.c   Coordinate with the appropriate agencies to utilize emerging
          technologies and Smart Corridor techniques (e.g. transit-priority
          systems for traffic signals and real-time information to enable
          travelers to choose the best routes) for the bridges and tubes.
                1. Integrate with existing regional ITS initiatives such as
                    SMARTCORRIDORS.org, 511.org, Integrated Congestion
                    management for the I-880 corridor, etc., to improve capacity at
                    the bridges, tubes and corridors.
                2. Collaborate with neighboring jurisdictions such as Oakland
                    and San Leandro to ensure a coordinated approach to ITS
                    implementation.
                3. Work with transit agencies in linking their ITS infrastructure to
                    enhance operational efficiency along the City’s egress and
                    ingress corridors.
4.1.6.d   Minimize the cross-island portion of regional vehicular trips by
          providing alternative connections to Oakland, such as Water Taxis,
          shuttles, and a Bicycle Pedestrian Bridge and by encouraging
          Transportation Systems Management (TSM) and Transportation
          Demand Management (TDM) techniques.
4.1.6.e   Support and maintain an up-to-date Transportation System
          Management (TSM) and Transportation Demand Management
          (TDM) plan consistent with state law to provide adequate traffic flow
          to maintain established LOS.
                1. Develop a TDM plan which would include specific
                    requirements for new developments to implement measures
                    to mitigate their traffic impacts based on an applicable
                    nexus.
                2. Develop one or more sub-area TDM plans to help address
                    the unique conditions of different areas within Alameda.
Chapter 4                          -6-                           Transportation Element

4.1.6.f    Require monitoring programs to ensure that TSM and TDM measures
           mitigate impacts.
                 1. Develop thresholds of significance for ongoing monitoring
                      and evaluation of TSM/TDM measures
4.1.6.g    Maximize the integration and coordination of various individual
           modes of transportation to enhance systemwide efficiency.
                 1. Work with various local and regional transit agencies in
                      integrating their schedules.
Objective 4.1.7: Identify facilities, corridors, mode transfer points, and
rights-of-way needed to enhance the viability of non-automobile
transportation. Meet long-term mobility needs in order to minimize the
need for increased cross-island roadway capacity.
Policies
4.1.7.a    Identify and address impediments to system-wide mobility.
4.1.7.b    Identify major activity centers that can function as mode transfer
           points.
4.1.7.c    Work with retail development to set aside existing parking areas as
           well as develop and promote mode transfer points, such as park-and-
           ride lots, to enhance the use of alternative modes of transportation
           and to assist the development of an intermodal transportation system.
4.1.7.d    Develop strategies to preserve and identify required rights-of-way.
                 1. Pursue opportunities to utilize the corridor of the former
                      Alameda Belt Line railroad for transit, bicycle, and
                      pedestrian transportation.
4.1.8.d    Study options for an estuary crossing in Alameda’s West End for
           bicyclists, pedestrians and transit.
4.2                    LIVABILITY GOAL
Balance the mobility needs of the community with the overall community
objective of creating a livable human and natural environment.
Coordinate the interaction of transportation systems development with
land use planning activities.
Objective 4.2.1: Design and maintain transportation facilities to be
compatible with adjacent land uses.
 Chapter 4                          -7-                          Transportation Element

Policies
4.2.1.a   Buffer land uses adjacent to high volume streets without the use of
          soundwalls.
                1. Where sound walls or buffers exist, breaks for pedestrian
                    access should be provided wherever pedestrian routes would
                    normally occur.
4.2.1.b   Include landscaping in transportation projects to enhance the overall
          visual appearance of the facility and improve and treat urban runoff.
Objective 4.2.2: Plan, develop and implement a transportation system that
enhances the livability of our residential neighborhoods.
Policies
4.2.2.a   Protect residential neighborhood integrity by minimizing the impacts
          of through traffic on low-volume residential streets.
4.2.2.b   Maintain a Traffic Calming Toolbox, as described on the City
          Website, and implementation program.
                1. Integrate traffic calming elements into new facility design
                    and as appropriate, modify existing facilities to enhance
                    traffic systems management.
4.2.2.c   Support programs that increase the number of people transported
          without increasing the number of vehicles.
4.2.2.d   Develop a program that monitors and reacts to traffic volumes on
          selected city streets to ensure an appropriate distribution of traffic.
4.2.2.e   Maintain a speed limit of 25 MPH on all streets in Alameda in order
          to avoid creating barriers between neighborhoods. Exempt current
          roadways with speed limits above 25 MPH: Ralph Appezzato
          Memorial Parkway, Main Street, Constitution Way, Tilden Way,
          Doolittle Drive, Island Drive, North Loop Road, South Loop Road,
          and Harbor Bay Parkway.
4.2.2.f   Encourage the inclusion of amenities, such as benches or art, in
          pedestrian improvement projects.
Chapter 4                           -8-                          Transportation Element
Objective 4.2.3: Plan, develop and implement a transportation system that
protects and enhances air and water quality, protects and enhances views
and access to the water, and minimizes noise impacts on residential areas.
Policies
4.2.3.a    Street projects should be designed to minimize the requirements for
           sound mitigation measures. Do not implement street projects that
           necessitate a soundwall.
4.2.3.b    Ensure that transportation system improvements comply with
           accepted noise standards in residential areas. Monitor the noise
           impacts of the existing transportation system. Identify strategies to
           mitigate excessive noise conditions.
4.2.3.c    Identify and pursue opportunities to enhance shoreline access for
           pedestrians.
4.2.3.d    Support and prioritize trip reduction strategies that maximize air
           quality benefits and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
                      1. Support the use of alternative fuel vehicles for all
                         transportation modes.
                      2. Encourage shift of trips to alternative transportation
                         modes. This includes short trips, as these will have a
                         disproportionate impact on air quality.
Objective 4.2.4: Develop a Transportation plan based on existing and
projected land uses and plans. Encourage land use decisions that facilitate
implementation of this transportation system.
Policies
4.2.4.a    Encourage development patterns and land uses that promote the use
           of alternate modes and reduce the rate of growth in region-wide
           vehicle miles traveled.
4.2.4.b    Integrate planning for Environmentally Friendly Modes, including
           transit, bicycling and walking, into the City's development review
           process.
4.2.4.c    Encourage mixed use development that utilizes non-single occupancy
           vehicle transportation modes.
 Chapter 4                         -9-                            Transportation Element
Objective 4.2.5: Manage both on-street and off-street parking to support
access and transportation objectives.
Policies
4.2.5.a   Consider a fully-funded on-street parking permit program in
          neighborhoods with chronic parking problems and new
          developments.
4.2.5.b   Support use of parking in-lieu fees where feasible to increase and
          encourage public transit options and evaluate the use of shared
          parking strategies in mixed use areas.
Encourage the use of transportation modes, especially at peak-period,
other than the single-occupant automobile in such a way as to allow all
modes to be mutually supportive and to function together as one
transportation system.
Objective 4.3.1: Develop programs and infrastructure to encourage the
use of high occupancy vehicles (HOVs), such as buses, ferries, vans and
carpools.
Policies
4.3.1.a   Update and implement the recommendations of the Alameda Long
          Range Transit Plan.
4.3.1.b   Consider the use of strategies to give priority to high occupancy
          vehicles at the bridges and tubes.
4.3.1.c   Actively encourage increases in public transit, including frequency
          and geographic coverage.
4.3.1.d   Encourage and support efforts to provide information to use
          environmentally-friendly transportation modes.
4.3.1.e   Provide amenities or support programs to make using alternative modes
          a more attractive option.
4.3.1.f   Reduce vehicle trips through telecommuting or other options.
4.3.1.g   Establish targets for increasing mode share of non-SOV
          transportation modes.
Chapter 4                         - 10 -                        Transportation Element
                1. Increase daily non-SOV mode share (transit, walking,
                    bicycling) by 10 percentage points by 2015 as compared to
                    2000.
                2. Increase the share of children who walk or bicycle to school
                    by 10 percentage points by 2015 as compared to 2000.
4.3.1.h   Encourage the creation of transit-oriented development and mixed-
          use development.
4.3.1.i   Develop parking management strategies for both new development
          projects and, as appropriate, for existing development.
                1. Establish maximum parking requirements for both new
                    development and, as appropriate, for existing development.
4.3.1.j   Implement queue jump lanes and other strategies for improving
          transit operations.
Objective 4.3.2: Enhance opportunities for pedestrian access and
movement by developing, promoting, and maintaining pedestrian
networks and environments.
Policies
4.3.2.a   Include improvements to pedestrian facilities as part of City
          transportation improvement projects (streets, bridges, etc.).
                1. Wherever possible provide wide sidewalks that facilitate
                    and accommodate activities such as sidewalk cafes and
                    other pedestrian friendly activities.
4.3.2.b   Review City sidewalk design standards to ensure continued
          compliance with requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act
          and to better serve pedestrian needs.
                1. Evaluate existing sidewalks for compliance with ADA
                    requirements, and to identify possible improvements such as
                    relocating utility installations and poles which block or
                    hinder pedestrian access.
4.3.2.c   Identify gaps and deficiencies in the City’s existing pedestrian
          network and develop strategies to rectify them.
Chapter 4                         - 11 -                         Transportation Element

                1. Wherever possible, establish facilities on all natural
                    pedestrian routes (both sides of streets and drives, along
                    visually direct lines to major destinations, etc.).
                2. Establish a program to plan for future pedestrian paths to
                    connect streets, alleys, paths, etc., that are cut off from
                    others (e.g., at the end of a cul-de-sac).
                3. Use observations of common pedestrian behavior, from
                    general studies or direct evidence such as informal paths in
                    Alameda, to improve connections where feasible.
4.3.2.d   Develop and implement a Pedestrian Master Plan with regard to
          physical system improvements, as well as programs and policies
          relating to encouragement, education and enforcement
                1. Develop criteria to identify intersections where signal
                    priority could be given to pedestrians to improve and
                    encourage pedestrian trips.
                2. Produce and distribute brochures and other materials to
                    educate residents, especially children and seniors, on
                    walking safely, and encourage walking as an alternative to
                    car trips, including walking to school.
                3. City should work with public and private schools to identify
                    needs and roles in addressing infrastructure, education and
                    encouragement.
Objective 4.3.3: Promote and encourage bicycling as a mode of
transportation.
Policies
4.3.3.a   Maintain and implement the Bicycle Master Plan with regard to
          physical system improvements (especially the identified priority
          projects), as well as programs and policies relating to encouragement,
          education and enforcement.
4.3.3.b   Include improvements to bike facilities as part of City transportation
          improvement projects (streets, bridges, etc.).
4.3.3.c   Identify gaps and deficiencies in the City’s existing bike network and
          develop strategies to rectify them.
Chapter 4                          - 12 -                          Transportation Element

Objective 4.3.4: Manage demand placed on the street system through a
TDM program to be developed with available funding in accordance with
state law.
Policies
4.3.4.a   Work with major employers to accommodate and promote alternative
          transportation modes, flexible work hours, and other travel demand
          management techniques and require that appropriate mitigation be
          funded through new development if a nexus exists.
Objective 4.3.5: Assess the impacts on all transportation modes (including
auto, transit, bike and pedestrian) when considering mobility and
transportation improvements.
Objective 4.3.6: Coordinate and integrate the planning and development
of transportation system facilities to meet the needs of users of all
transportation modes.
Policies
4.3.6.a   Review and update multimodal design standards for lane widths,
          parking, planting area, sidewalks, and bicycle lanes to guide
          construction, maintenance, and redevelopment of transportation
          facilities consistent with the street classification system.
4.3.6.b   Identify areas of conflict and of compatibility between modes (e.g.
          walking, bicycling, transit, automobiles, and people with disabilities).
          Pursue strategies to reduce or eliminate conflicts, increase
          accessibility, and foster multimodal compatibility.
4.3.6.c   Maintain a committee (such as the Interagency Liaison Committee)
          that works with transit service providers to resolve transit-related
          problems.
4.3.6.d Coordinate efforts with regional funding agencies in order to address
          Alameda’s regional transportation issues.
4.4                   IMPLEMENTATION GOAL
Implement and maintain the planned transportation system in a
coordinated and cost-effective manner.
Objective 4.4.1: Require developers to reserve and construct (if nexus
exists) rights of way, transportation corridors and dedicated
Chapter 4                          - 13 -                         Transportation Element

transportation facilities through the development process and other
means.
                 1. Develop design guidelines for pedestrian access in new
                     development and redevelopment areas, including shopping
                     centers, residential developments, and business parks.
                 2. In any new development or re-development, safe and
                     convenient pedestrian connections between major origins
                     and destinations, including connections within the
                     development and between the development and adjacent
                     areas, should be a high priority in evaluating the site plan.
                 3. Develop shoreline access design guidelines.
Objective 4.4.2: Ensure that new development implement approved
transportation plans, including the goals, objectives, and policies of the
Transportation Element of the General Plan and provides the
transportation improvements needed to accommodate that development
and cumulative development.
Policies
4.4.2.a   Roadways will not be widened to create additional automobile travel
          lanes to accommodate additional automobile traffic volume with the
          exception of increasing transit exclusive lanes or non-motorized
          vehicle lanes.
4.4.2.b   Intersections will not be widened beyond the width of the
          approaching roadway with the exception of a single exclusive left
          turn lane when necessary with the exception of increasing transit
          exclusive lanes or non-motorized vehicle lanes.
4.4.2.c   Speed limits on Alameda’s new roads should be consistent with
          existing roadways and be designed and implemented as 25mph
          roadways.
4.4.2.d   All EIRs must include analysis of the effects of the project on the
          city’s transit, pedestrian and bicycling environment, including
          adjacent neighborhoods and the overall City network.
4.4.2.e   EIRs will not propose mitigations that significantly degrade the
          bicycle and pedestrian environment which are bellwethers for quality
          of life issues and staff should identify “Levels of Service” or other
          such measurements to ensure that the pedestrian and bicycling
Chapter 4                          - 14 -                        Transportation Element

           environment will not be significantly degraded as development takes
           place.
4.4.2.f    Transportation related mitigations for future development should first
           implement TDM measures with appropriate regular monitoring;
           transit, bicycle and pedestrian capital projects; and more efficient use
           of existing infrastructure such as traffic signal re-timing in order to
           reduce the negative environmental effects of development, rather than
           attempting to accommodate them. Should appropriate regular
           monitoring indicate that these mitigations are unable to provide the
           predicted peak-hour vehicle trip reductions, additional TDM
           measures, development specific traffic caps, or mitigations through
           physical improvements of streets and intersections, consistent with
           policy 4.4.2.a and policy 4.4.2.b, may be implemented.
4.4.2.g    After the implementation of quantifiable/verifiable TDM measures
           (verified through appropriate regular monitoring), and mitigation
           measures consistent with 4.4.2.f and identification of how multimodal
           infrastructure relates to congestion concerns, some congestion may be
           identified in an EIR process as not possible to mitigate. This
           unmitigated congestion should be evaluated and disclosed (including
           intersection delay length of time) during the EIR process, and
           acknowledged as a by-product of the development and accepted with
           the on-going funding of TDM measures.
Objective 4.4.3: When considering improvements to transportation
facilities, the following issues should be addressed: traffic demand,
preservation of neighborhood character, impacts to traffic operations
including all modes of transportation, protection of historic and natural
resources, utility and stormwater needs, the conservation of energy, and
maintenance costs.
Policies
4.4.3.a    Utilize alternative paving materials and/or root barriers to help
           prevent sidewalk deterioration.
Objective 4.4.4: Prioritize the maintenance of capital investment and
maximize the efficient use of the existing street system through
operational improvements over new construction.
Policies
 Chapter 4                          - 15 -                         Transportation Element
4.4.4.a    Implement programs to fund maintenance of the existing and future
           transportation systems to the extent feasible to meet desired service
           levels.
                 1. Include Pedestrian Master Plan projects in the Capital
                     Improvement Program.
                 2. Apply for available grant funding for pedestrian
                     improvement projects.
                 3. Establish an annual program to install curb ramps at
                     crosswalks throughout the City to comply with the
                     Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
4.4.4.b    Coordinate with utility construction, maintenance schedule and public
           agencies.
4.4.4.c    Continue to regularly update the City’s pavement management
           system (PMS) program.
                 1. Develop guidelines for choosing appropriate street trees and
                     avoiding species with aggressive roots that can cause
                     sidewalk damage.
4.4.4.d Pursue funding opportunities to implement Citywide ITS
infrastructure.
Objective 4.4.5: Develop service level standards for the operation and
maintenance of public works infrastructure, including streets, bridges,
pedestrian ways, bicycle facilities and intersections.
Objective 4.4.6: Work with area employers and other stakeholders to
develop one or more TMAs to implement TDM programs
Policies
4.4.6.1    For new development projects, require residential, business
           associations, property owners, and lessees to be dues-paying
           members in the TMA, as allowed by law.
4.4.6.2 Encourage existing and previously approved developments to join a
           TMA, through which they would contribute toward, and benefit from,
           TDM programs.
Objective 4.4.7: Require developers to contribute toward the
 Chapter 4                        - 16 -                        Transportation Element

implementation of appropriate TSM/TDM measures to mitigate the
impacts of their projects on the bridges, tubes, specific intersections, and
corridors.
Policies
4.4.7.a    Develop standardized method for calculating the appropriate financial
           contribution for TSM/TDM fees.
4.4.7.b    Develop TSM/TDM fee collection mechanism.
Objective 4.4.8: Work with AUSD to include transportation choice
awareness in education in the schools.
 Chapter 4                      - 17 -                       Transportation Element
STREET CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
In Alameda, Street classification system is divided into three categories:
Street Types
Land-use Classifications
Transportation Mode Classification
Street Types:
Street types range from regional arterials to local streets. Each street type
reflects the function of the street relative to the rest of the network. Streets in
Alameda are classified as follows:
    •     Regional Arterial
    •     Island Arterial
    •     Transitional Arterial
    •     Island Collector
    •     Transitional Collector
    •     Local Street
Generally, Regional Arterials serve the major activity centers of a city and
provide for the longest trip lengths, highest traffic volumes, and most through
traffic. Regional Arterials connect to smaller Island Arterials, which due to the
City of Alameda’s extensive grid network and residential character, allow
cross-island traffic to be channelized from the neighborhoods. Collectors,
which serve as a funnel for local streets from specific neighborhoods, feed into
the Island Arterials. Collectors are scaled down appropriately and are more
common than arterials while local streets carry the least amount of traffic but
are the most prevalent. These classifications are discussed in further detail
below and a street classification map is presented in the figure below.
The land use and transportation mode classifications were developed to
provide additional information about the context of each street. To apply this
information to the City’s street network, these classifications would be overlaid
on the street type layer. The land use and modal overlays are then used to
identify appropriate design treatments and modal preferences for each street.
For example, a street that is classified as an island arterial, a primary transit
street, but not a bicycle priority street could potentially include bus bulbs to
facilitate transit access, even though this would preclude the installation of a
bicycle lane.
 Chapter 4                         - 18 -                          Transportation Element

Chapter 4 - 19 - Transportation Elemen
Regional Arterials
Regional Arterials carry the heaviest volumes of traffic on the longest trip
lengths including intercity trips and regional through traffic. Connections to
regional attractions such as state highways, shopping districts, colleges, and
major recreational areas are a key attribute. Auto mobility is an important, but
not the only feature of regional arterials as traffic is generally regional in
nature and traveling a greater distance. Specific design features that foster
livable streets and multi-modal access can be applied through the land use and
modal overlay classifications.
Design and Operational Features:
Primary Functions
    •     Serve long distance, regional automobile and transit trips.
    •     Provide access to regional freeway network.
    •     Provide access to regional attractions such as shopping districts,
          colleges, employment centers, and major recreational areas
Number of Lanes
    •     3 to 4 automobile lanes. This should be determined through the
          operational evaluation and should be tied to the thresholds (LOS),
          which are to be developed as part of the TMP, and weighed against
          neighborhood livability issues.
    •     May include exclusive transit lane in the future.
    •     May include bike lanes if along a bicycle priority street.
Congestion Tolerance
    •     Lowest degree of congestion tolerance among street types.
    •     Mitigation measures must be balanced against the needs of other modes
          and the surrounding land uses.
    •     Congestion should be reduced where possible in order to promote
          efficient person and good circulation as well as improve transit
          operations. The level of congestion that is acceptable should be
          determined through the thresholds (LOS) for different modes of
          transportation and balanced against neighborhood livability issues.
          These thresholds are to be developed as part of the TMP.
 Chapter 4                         - 20 -                         Transportation Element

Traffic Calming Measures
     •    Non-intrusive measures may be applied to maintain the posted speed
          limit.
Island Arterials
Island Arterials serve to complement regional arterials by providing cross
island access for local intra-island trips through generally residential
neighborhoods. The street classification constraints of a residential, island
community with a limited number of portals are addressed in the designation
of Island Arterials. These streets generally carry shorter trip lengths, do not
have regional destinations, and carry less traffic volume than regional arterials.
Auto mobility is a feature emphasized on Island Arterials due to their cross-
island connectivity but to a lesser extent than regional arterials because of the
residential nature of the Island Arterials. The grid network in Alameda allows
for the distribution of traffic along several Island Arterials rather than channel
all the traffic to large Regional Arterials that would separate the
neighborhoods. In general, Island Arterials will be narrower than their
regional counterparts and more integrated into the surrounding neighborhoods.
Design and Operational Features:
Primary Functions
     •    Serve shorter distance, local trips that begin and end within the City.
     •    Connect traffic between local and collector street network, and regional
          arterial system.
Number of Lanes
     •    2 to 3 automobile lanes. Although some Island Arterials currently have
          capacity for four lanes, the residential nature of these streets should be
          preserved while providing for the intra-island connection to Regional
          Arterials. An operational analysis should be used to determine the
          number of lanes and needed. The number of lanes should be based on
          the thresholds (LOS) for different modes of transportation and weighed
          against neighborhood livability issues.
     •    May include bike lanes if along a bicycle priority street.
Congestion Tolerance
     •    Higher levels of congestion acceptable to improve multi-modal access
          and accommodate the needs of surrounding land uses. The level of
          congestion should be based upon the thresholds (LOS) for different
 Chapter 4                          - 21 -                         Transportation Element

          modes of transportation and balanced against neighborhood livability
          issues.
Traffic Calming Measures
    •     More frequent use of non-intrusive traffic measures may be applied to
          maintain posted speed limit and address neighborhood livability issues.
Transitional Arterials
The classification of Transitional Arterial indicates a street that is currently
classified as, and operates as an arterial but is desired to operate as an Island
Collector. This is in contrast to the Island Collector classification, which
already operates as such. Through a series of measures, either implemented
today or in the future, the street’s traffic volumes and/or trip characteristics
will be altered to the point that a lower classification is warranted. Measures
that can be taken along a transitional arterial include traffic calming, opening a
new street, and other methods to move traffic away from the Transitional
Arterial and onto a nearby street, preferably an arterial. Transitional Arterials
should only be classified as such when alternate routes are in close proximity.
Design and Operational Features:
Primary Functions
    •     Currently serves as a Regional or Island Arterial
    •     Desire is for the street to function as an Island Collector in the future.
Number of Lanes
    •     2 to 3 automobile lanes.
    •     May include bike lanes if along a bicycle priority street.
Congestion Tolerance
    •     Higher levels of congestion acceptable to improve multi-modal access
          and accommodate the needs of surrounding land uses.
Traffic Calming Measures
    •     More advanced traffic calming measures such as street narrowing can
          be applied to divert through traffic to other streets (preferably other
          arterials), maintain posted speed limit, and improve general livability.
 Chapter 4                           - 22 -                        Transportation Element

Island Collectors
Island Collectors serve to balance mobility and land access. Usually spaced
more frequently than the arterials, Island Collectors carry less traffic volume
but provide for more direct land access for vehicles. Island Collectors
typically funnel all local traffic onto arterials for longer trips and disperse
arterial traffic onto local streets for local traffic.
Collector streets are called Island Collectors in the City of Alameda. Island
Collectors differ from traditional collector streets in that they form part of the
City of Alameda’s historical grid system. As part of this system, Island
Collectors are expected to carry more traffic than what would be expected
from a typical collector.
Design and Operational Features:
Primary Functions
    •     Funnel traffic between local streets and the arterial network
    •     Provide access to local attractions, where applicable, such as schools
          and parks
Number of Lanes
    •     2 to 3 automobile lanes
    •     May include bike lanes if along a bicycle priority street
Congestion Tolerance
    •     Land access, neighborhood livability, and multi-modal access balanced
          equally with congestion reduction measures
Traffic Calming Measures
    •     More advanced traffic calming measures such as street narrowing
          (bulb-outs) can be applied to divert through traffic to other streets
          (preferably other arterials), maintain posted speed limit, and improve
          general livability
Transitional Collectors
Similar to Transitional Arterials, Transitional Collectors currently function as
Island Collector streets but are desired to operate as Local Streets. This is in
contrast to the Local Street classification, which already operates as such.
Through a series of measures, either implemented today or in the future, the
 Chapter 4                          - 23 -                         Transportation Element

street’s traffic volumes and/or trip characteristics will be altered to the point
that a lower classification is warranted.
Measures that can be taken along a Transitional Collector include advanced
traffic calming, opening a new street, and other methods to move traffic away
from the Transitional Collector and onto a nearby street, preferably an arterial
or collector. Transitional Collectors should only be classified as such when
alternate routes are in close proximity.
Design and Operational Features:
Primary Functions
    •     Currently serves as an Island Collector.
    •     Desire is for the street to function as a Local Street in the future.
Number of Lanes
    •     2 automobile lanes.
Congestion Tolerance
    •     Land access, neighborhood livability, and multi-modal access takes
          precedence over congestion reduction measures.
Traffic Calming Measures
    •     All available traffic calming measures may be applied to divert through
          traffic to other streets (preferably other arterials or collectors), maintain
          posted speed limit, and improve general livability.
Local Streets
Local streets make up the rest of the City’s street network and provide for
direct land access with auto mobility as a secondary feature. Local streets are
the most common streets by mileage but carry the least amount of traffic over
the smallest trip distances.
Design and Operational Features:
Primary Functions
    •     Serve abutting land uses
    •     Serve as an extension of neighborhood life
 Chapter 4                            - 24 -                         Transportation Element

Number of Lanes
    •    2 automobile lanes, usually unmarked
Congestion Tolerance
    •    Land access, neighborhood livability, and multi-modal access takes
         precedence over congestion reduction measures
Traffic Calming Measures
    •    All available traffic calming measures may be applied to divert through
         traffic to other streets (preferably other arterials or collectors), maintain
         posted speed limit, and improve general livability
Land Use Classification:
The land use overlay describes the interaction between the roadway and the
surrounding area, as well as the design treatment examples.
Land use Classifications include:
    1.   Residential Corridor Street
    2.   Commercial Main Street
    3.   General Commercial and Industrial Street
    4.   School and Recreational Zone
    5.   Gateway Street
Chapter 4                            - 25 -                         Transportation Element

p
Chapter 4 - 26 - Transportation Element
1. Residential Corridor Street
Most of the streets in the City of Alameda are fronted by residential land uses
which contribute to the City’s unique character and small town feel. Some of
these streets, however, because of their location and cross-section function,
serve as arterials or collectors and carry high volumes of motor vehicle traffic
on the island. The result is that the residences along these streets experience
noise and congestion. Residential Corridors are designated to enhance street
livability (landscaping to reduce noise, providing a tree canopy, on-street
parking, etc.) and provide access to the communities they serve while
preserving mobility for all modes of travel.
Design and operational Features:
    -     Landscaped or painted medians at key locations if space allows
             o Encourage 25mph driving by reducing perceived street width
             o Improve aesthetics
             o Act as a pedestrian refuge island at crosswalks
             o Recommended only for arterials and other 3 to 4-lane streets
    -     Wider sidewalks
             o Improve pedestrian comfort
             o Create street as a place
    -     Landscaped sidewalk buffer
             o Reduce street noise
             o Improve pedestrian comfort
             o Encourage 25mph driving by reducing perceived street width
    -     Curb extensions
             o Improve pedestrian comfort and crosswalk safety
             o Encourage 25mph driving by reducing perceived street width
    -     Bicycle markings on designated routes
             o Bike lanes
                     Single white line for flexibility
                     Avoid parked car door area
                     Proper intersection treatments including continuing lane
                        through intersection
             o Sharrow markings to indicate shared lanes
             o Providing bicycle loop detectors
    -     On-street parking
             o Provide for residential access
             o Improve pedestrian comfort
 Chapter 4                         - 27 -                       Transportation Element

    -     Adequate travel lanes
             o Design and operations should allow for access to residential
                 properties and minimize impacts to residential driveways
             o Encourage 25mph driving
    -     Travel lane width
             o Narrower travel lane width (or perceived width) through
                 striping
             o Encourage 25mph driving
    -     Block Length
             o New developments should have block lengths of 400’-500’
             o Maintain neighborhood connectivity
             o Encourage walking and bicycling by providing multiple paths
2. Commercial Main Street
Commercial Main Streets are designed to serve adjacent, street facing,
commercial land uses. Multi-modal access is emphasized through the
placement of pedestrian amenities, bicycle facilities, transit access, and on-
street parking. The street itself is promoted as a place and destination through
the use of wider sidewalks, landscaping, and special paving. Building
frontages should maintain a common setback and entrances should be oriented
facing the street.
Curb cuts and driveways are minimized to help promote a continuous street
frontage and to enhance pedestrian safety and environment. On-street parking
preservation is to be encouraged over other pedestrian or bicycle
improvements if there is insufficient right-of-way. Marked pedestrian
crosswalks are to be frequent but should be based upon pedestrian activity and
activity generators.
Design and operational Features:
    -     Parking
             o Provide adequate on-street and off street parking for
                 commercial access
             o Improve pedestrian comfort by having on-street parking
             o Parallel parking or angle parking if sufficient right-of-way
                      Bicycle safety should be considered when implementing
                         angle parking – back-in parking offers higher degree of
                         safety
             o Minimize driveway/intersections to increase parking, reduce
                 vehicular conflicts, and improve pedestrian walkway
 Chapter 4                         - 28 -                       Transportation Element

   -     Parking safe-zone
            o Act as a buffer between parallel parking area and travel lanes
            o Make use of special paving to mark safe-zone
   -     Bicycle facilities
            o Encourage bicycle access
                     Bike racks on each block if space is available
                     Bike lanes or Bike Route (Class III) if sufficient width is
                         available
                     Continue lanes through intersections, bicycle loop
                         detectors
                     Bicycle facility and destination signage
            o Maintain proper riding distance from parallel or angle parking
   -     Wide sidewalks
            o Improve pedestrian comfort
            o Promote street as a place and a destination
   -     Landscaped sidewalk buffer
            o Reduce street noise
            o Improve pedestrian comfort
            o Encourage 25mph driving by reducing perceived street width.
                However, the width of the travel lane should be adequate to
                accommodate commercial vehicle traffic
   -     Special paving for crosswalks
            o Improve pedestrian comfort and safety
            o Alert motorists to pedestrian presence
            o Highlight street as a retail district
   -     Curb extensions
            o Improve pedestrian comfort and safety
            o Encourage 25mph driving by reducing perceived street width
   -     Adequate travel lanes
            o Provide sufficient lanes for adequate capacity to minimize
                queuing and impacts to residential and commercial driveways
                and to maintain arterial functionality
            o Encourage 25mph driving
   -     Travel lane width
            o Narrow travel lane width (or perceived width) through striping
            o Encourage 25mph driving
Chapter 4                          - 29 -                     Transportation Element

    -    Block Length
            o New developments should have block lengths of 400’
            o Maintain commercial main street connectivity
            o Encourage walking and bicycling by providing multiple paths
3. General Commercial and Industrial Street
Serving the industrial, shopping, and office areas of Alameda, General
Commercial and Industrial Streets are designed to handle a significant amount
of truck and heavy vehicle traffic. Truck access to the adjacent industrial land
uses is provided through wider travel lanes and turning radii at intersections.
On-street parking is restricted where necessary. Pedestrian and bicycle access
should still be maintained but with fewer amenities than the Residential
Corridor or Commercial Main Streets.
Design and operational Features
    -    Wider travel lanes
            o Safely accommodate truck traffic
    -    Larger turning radii
            o Safely accommodate truck traffic
    -    Parking
            o Provide for loading and unloading areas – off street loading and
                unloading areas should be encouraged
            o Sufficient off-street parking is provided in accordance with the
                General Plan parking requirements
            o Accommodate wider travel lanes
            o Minimize driveways and intersections to provide on-street
                parking where needed and to reduce vehicular conflicts
    -    Sidewalks
            o Provide for safe pedestrian access
            o Can be narrower than Residential Corridor or Commercial Main
                Streets, except on designated trail corridors, and should be in
                accordance with ADA guidelines
    -    Bicycle Facilities
            o Bike Lanes (Class II) or Bike Routes (Class III) on designated
                bicycle routes
Chapter 4                         - 30 -                         Transportation Element

4. School and Recreational Zone
Along streets in a designated School and Recreational Zone, pedestrian and
bicycle accommodations are to be evaluated in conjunction with other street
functions. Many of the schools in the City are found along Regional and
Island Arterials and Island Collectors and therefore the features in this overlay
need to be balanced against other features such as the number of travel lanes
and lane width. School and Recreational Zones are identified within the 2
block radius around each school, public and private.
Streets that serve parks, libraries, beaches, and other high pedestrian traffic
generators are also be included in the School and Recreational Zone
classification. Along these streets, pedestrian comfort and safety will receive
the highest priority in street design while maintaining the multimodal
characteristics of the street. Curb extensions, wider sidewalks, and landscaped
medians along with other treatments will be used to enhance the pedestrian
environment.
Design and Operational Features
    -     Crosswalks
             o Special paving, marking, and lighting for designated crosswalks
                to alert motorists of school zone
             o Marked at each intersection along Safe Route to School
             o Mid-block for longer blocks or where significant crossings
                occur
             o Provision of in-street pedestrian signs or in-pavement lights
                where appropriate
    -     Curb extensions
             o Improve pedestrian comfort and safety
             o Encourage School Zone speed limit by reducing perceived
                street width
    -     Landscaped medians
             o Encourage School Zone speed limit by reducing perceived
                street width
             o Improve aesthetics
             o Act as a pedestrian refuge island at crosswalks
    -     Narrower travel lanes
             o Encourage School Zone speed limit by reducing perceived
                street width
             o Reduce crosswalk traffic exposure
 Chapter 4                         - 31 -                       Transportation Element
    -     Wide Sidewalks
             o Improve safety and comfort of pedestrians
    -     Bicycle Facilities
             o Wider bicycle lanes for children on designated routes
             o Proper intersection treatment such as signage and lane markings
                 through intersection to improve safety
             o Bike Lanes (Class II) or Bike Routes (Class III) on designated
                 bicycle routes
    -     On-street parking
             o Provide for adjacent land use access
             o Improve pedestrian comfort
    -     Landscaped sidewalk buffer
             o Reduce street noise
             o Improve pedestrian comfort
             o Encourage School Zone speed limit by reducing perceived
                 street width
5. Gateway Street
As an island city, Alameda has a limited number of entryways and points of
egress, or “gateways” into the city. The gateways are designed to provide a
sense of arrival to residents and visitors coming into the city and to eventually
distribute them onto the arterials and other city streets. Proper signage and
street design elements should be present to welcome arrivals as well as to set
the tone for lower driving speeds in the city. Motorists and other traffic
moving between the Main Island and Harbor Bay Isle should keep a sense of
continuity between the two parts of the city.
Gateways also serve those who wish to leave the city by channeling traffic
from city arterials to the rest of the regional network. Egress traffic should be
multi-modal and seamless with the connecting networks.
Design and Operational Features:
    -     Landscaped medians towards end of gateway
             o Reduce visual broadness of roadway to encourage slower
                 speeds
             o Enhance aesthetic appeal of gateway
    -     Narrowed travel lanes and/or right of way towards end of gateway
             o Reduce visual broadness of roadway to encourage slower
                 speeds
 Chapter 4                          - 32 -                      Transportation Element

    -    Welcome signage
            o Provide a sense of arrival
            o Encourage motorists to “Drive 25” in Alameda
            o Encourage multi-modal travel in Alameda
    -    Bicycle and Pedestrian facilities where applicable
            o Connect all modes to the rest of the region
            o Enhance pedestrian and bicycle comfort and safety
    -    Seamless connection with outside network
            o Collaborate with Oakland, Caltrans, AC Transit, and Alameda
                County to provide multi-modal connectivity
            o Further collaboration to address tube and bridge connectivity to
                Oakland and regional network
Modal Classifications:
Modal classifications are used to denote the preferred mode of travel on a
particular street segment, as well as appropriate design treatments. All streets
have a limited amount of right of way available and the modal network
connectivity should be preserved within these constraints.
Modal overlays include:
    1. Transit Priority
    2. Bicycle Priority
    3. Truck Route
Chapter 4                        - 33 -                        Transportation Element

Chapter 4 - 34 - Transportation Elemen
Chapter 4 - 35 - Transportation Elemen
Chapter 4 - 36 - Transportation Elemen
1. Transit Priority
The Transit Priority street classification is broken down into three groups, each
with its own set of design and operational features. The Transit Priority street
classification does not imply that a specific type of transit or level of service
will run on the street; it refers to the preference of transit on the street and the
type of design features that would be prioritized. For all Transit Priority street
classifications, the pedestrian environment needs to be incorporated into plans,
as this is the primary mode of transit access.
Streets not classified as Transit Priority streets could nevertheless be used by
such non-traditional transit services as neighborhood shuttles, paratransit,
electric buses, etc. Non-classification does not preclude the use of full size
school buses on specialized “School Routes” as necessary.
Design and Operational Features
Primary Transit Street:
Provide for high volume and frequent, regional, and city wide transit service.
Provide frequent, moderate speed, high capacity service between major
regional and city ridership generators. Primary transit streets are candidates
for transit priority treatments such as queue jump lanes, limited/local stop
service and traffic signal priority/pre-emption. Primary Transit Streets are
candidates for Bus Rapid Transit, Streetcars, and other fixed guideway
projects.
    -     Bus bulb-outs
             o Improve transit operations
             o Clearly designate bus stop location
    -     Lane widths and curb returns
             o Wider lane widths or wider curb lanes to minimize conflicts
                 with bicyclists
             o Wider radii, and lane widths or wider curb lanes to
                 accommodate transit vehicles
    -     Enhanced bus stops
             o Shelters, benches, and other amenities to improve transit service
                 experience and encourage transit use
             o Clearly designate bus stop location
             o Far side bus stops at intersections to improve bus operations and
                 safety
 Chapter 4                          - 37 -                         Transportation Element

    -     Passenger information
             o Provide up-to-date schedule and routing information
             o Provide surrounding neighborhood map
             o Provide real-time bus arrival information as available
             o Enhance transit service experience
             o Encourage transit use
    -     Signal priority, right-of-way priority
             o Examples include, queue jump lanes, and signal pre-emption
             o Improve transit operations
             o Useful for longer, congested corridors and frequent service
                 areas
    -     Pedestrian amenities
             o Wide sidewalks
             o Curb extensions
             o Crosswalk paving, markings
             o Landscaped sidewalk buffer
Secondary Transit Street:
Provide for local and neighborhood transit service without physical priority
treatments.
    -     Bus bulb-outs
             o Improve transit operations
             o Clearly designate bus stop location
             o Lower priority than Primary Transit Streets
    -     Bus stops
             o Shelters, benches, and other amenities to improve transit service
                 experience and encourage transit use
             o Clearly designate bus stop location
             o Lower priority than Primary Transit Streets
    -     Pedestrian amenities
             o Wide sidewalks
             o Curb extensions
             o Crosswalk paving, markings
             o Landscaped sidewalk buffer
             o Lower priority than Primary Transit Streets
 Chapter 4                        - 38 -                      Transportation Element
Exclusive Transit Right of Way:
Identify future dedicated right of way routes for bus rapid transit or light rail
service. Possible candidates include Lincoln Avenue which is a centrally
located Island Arterial with numerous residential areas surrounding. Connects
to main commercial areas on Webster Street and Park Street.
    -     Bus Rapid Transit or Light Rail
             o High capacity, frequent transit service for intra-city and regional
                 transportation
    -     Lane widths and curb returns
             o Wider lane widths or wider curb lanes to minimize conflicts
                 with bicyclists
             o Wider radii, and lane widths or wider curb lanes to
                 accommodate transit vehicles
    -     Bus bulb-outs
             o Improve transit operations
             o Clearly designate bus stop location
    -     Enhanced bus stops/stations
             o Raised platform for level boarding
             o Platform length shelters and seating areas
             o Off-vehicle fare payment
             o Clearly designate transit corridor / transit way
             o Improve transit service experience and encourage transit use
    -     Passenger information
             o Provide up-to-date schedule and routing information
             o Provide surrounding neighborhood map
             o Provide real-time bus arrival information as available
             o Enhance transit service experience
             o Encourage transit use
    -     Signal priority/pre-emption, right-of-way priority
             o Improve transit operations
             o Useful for longer, congested corridors and frequent service
                 areas
    -     Pedestrian amenities
             o Wide sidewalks
             o Curb extensions
             o Crosswalk paving, markings
             o Landscaped sidewalk buffer
 Chapter 4                       - 39 -                         Transportation Element
             o Equal priority as Primary Transit Streets
             o Connectivity to other modes, adjacent neighborhoods and
                 destinations
2. Bicycle Priority
Streets identified on the bicycle network map are candidates for class I (off
road path), class II (bike lanes), and class III (shared lanes) bike routes. These
streets are identified in order to provide a network of streets that give cross-
island access to bikers of all abilities. These streets should be prioritized for the
implementation of bicycle loop detectors at all traffic lights and directional
signage for cyclists, as well as safety improvements such as bike lanes and
sharrows to increase the use of these facilities. The identified bicycle network
does not preclude the use of bicycles on any streets. Additionally, bicycle loop
detectors should be provided at all new signalized intersections regardless of
street class.
Design and Operational Features
    -     Bike lanes (Class II)
             o Single white line for flexibility or dual white line to mark
                 designated lane
             o Keep bicyclists away from car doors, transit stops, and other
                 hazards
    -     On-street Bike Routes (Class III)
             o Sharrows or white edge line to remind motorists and bicyclists
                 that a right of way is always shared
             o Keep bicyclists away from car doors, transit stops, and other
                 hazards
             o Only use if there is enough room for vehicles to safely pass
    -     Network signage
             o Direct bicyclists to safest routes across city
             o Remind motorists of bicycle presence
    -     Intersection treatments
             o Higher priority for bike-actuated loop detector upgrades at
                 existing auto-actuated traffic signals
                      All new auto-actuated traffic signals shall receive bike
                          actuators regardless of classification
             o Markings to discourage right turn conflicts
    -     Bicycle facilities
 Chapter 4                          - 40 -                        Transportation Element

             o Require new developments to provide Bike racks and parking
                 areas to access adjacent land uses
3. Truck Route
The Truck Route Network is designed to maintain a limited number of streets
on which through truck traffic is allowed. Truck traffic is allowed to use non-
truck route streets when it is necessary in order to reach their destination.
Truck drivers must use the truck route for as much of their trip as possible.
This network was created in order to give a useful network of streets that will
not require excessive off-route driving.
Design and Operational Features
    -     Route signage
             o Alert trucks of truck route locations
    -     Intersection design
             o Sufficient turning radii at intersections frequented by heavy
                 trucks
             o May conflict with transit, pedestrian, and bicycle design goals
    -     Roadway design
             o Sufficient travel lane width (up to 14 feet) to accommodate
                 trucks
In general, trucks have vastly different design needs than those of pedestrians,
bicyclists, transit users, or even motorists. Accommodating trucks with
bicyclists could be challenging if travel lanes are not wide enough. The street
design process will have to balance all of these needs depending on the
frequency of truck use and the overall goals of the specific street segment.
 Chapter 4                         - 41 -                        Transportation Element
 List of Future new Streets and Transit Corridors in the City of Alameda
  Improvement            From                 To            Description
Clement (West)     Grand Street       Hibbard Street
Clement (West)     Ohlone St.         Sherman Street
Clement (East)     Broadway           Tilden Way
Wilver “Willie”    Main Street        Fifth Street
Stargell Avenue
Wilver “Willie”    Fifth Street       Webster Street
Stargell Avenue
Mitchell-Moseley   Mariner Square     A new
Extension          Loop               intersection on
                                      Main Street north
                                      of Singleton
                                      Avenue
Fifth Street       Wilver “Willie”    Mitchell-Moseley
                   Stargell Avenue
Mariner Square     Mariner Square     Marina Village     Proposal includes
Drive extension    Loop (east side)   Parkway            a Park and Ride
                                      intersection with  facility and a
                                      Constitution       direct transit
                                                         access on to
                                                         Constitution
                                                         using the current
                                                         Mariner Square
                                                         Drive access.
Alameda Point      New Streets                           Various locations
Dev
West Alameda       Sea Plane                             Relocate Main
Point Ferry        Lagoon                                Street Terminal
Terminal                                                 to Alameda Point
Light Rail         Fruitvale          Alameda Point      This route uses
Corridor           Avenue Railroad                       the Alameda Belt
                   Bridge                                Line Property
                                                         along Clement to
                                                         Marina Village to
                                                         Constitution to
                                                         old railway
                                                         property along
                                                         Atlantic to
                                                         Alameda Point
Chapter 4                      - 42 -                    Transportation Element

  OPEN SPACE AND
5 CONSERVATION ELEMENT
  Alameda enjoys a variety of open space resources unique to its island location.
  The various elements of the City's natural environment—the land, marshes,
  tideflats, and Bay waters—constitute the foundation of the open space system
  and fulfill multiple open space functions supporting community health, safety,
  recreation, and preservation of natural resources. Within the built environment,
  parks and other public facilities provide open space for recreation and sports.
  INTEGRATION OF THE OPEN SPACE ELEMENT AND
  CONSERVATION ELEMENT
  In function and content, the Open Space Element and Conservation Element
  often overlap. The Conservation Element is oriented toward the management
  of natural resources to prevent waste, destruction or neglect. The Open Space
  Element, in comparison, emphasizes open space as a land use and requires that
  preservation and management of natural resources be considered in land use
  planning and decision-making. This combined Open Space and Conservation
  Element describes conservation practices within four state-designated types of
  open space described below, meeting the requirements of both elements. In
  addition, Alameda's climate and air quality are considered, as is the
  preservation of the City's historic and archaeologic resources.
  STATE CLASSIFICATION OF OPEN SPACE
  State law requires that four types of open space be analyzed in the Open Space
  Element: open space for the preservation of natural resources; open space for
  the managed production of natural resources; open space for outdoor
  recreation; and open space for public health and safety. It is the intent of State
  law that cities preparing general plans recognize open space as a limited and
  valuable resource to be conserved whenever possible. Any action by the City
  to acquire, dispose of, or regulate the use of open space lands in any of these
  categories must be consistent with the Open Space Element.
  5.1     OPEN SPACE FOR THE P RESERVATION OF
          NATURAL RESOURCES
  The Bay waters and tidal areas that surround Alameda sustain vital
  communities of animal and plant life, some listed by Federal agencies as
  endangered or threatened. Protection of water resources and fragile habitat
  recognizes the interdependent relationship between human and other living
  communities. This section considers water resources in three parts: water-
  related habitat, water quality, and water conservation.
                                           5-1

The urban environment also comprises and provides habitat and is considered
briefly in a section on urban habitat. Following this discussion is a review of
the wildlife and vegetation of both water-related and urban habitat.
WATER-RELATED HABITAT
The San Francisco Bay is the largest estuary along California's coastline, and
the estuarine environment of marshlands, mudflats, salt production lands, and
open water supports close to 100 species of fish. As an essential portion of the
Pacific Flyway, a bird migration route which spans from Canada to Mexico,
the Bay supports countless migratory as well as year-round bird species. (See
subsequent section on wildlife and vegetation.)
The aquatic and water-related habitat has intrinsic value not only for the
individuals of a variety of plant and animal species, but also for humans. Bay
Area residents derive many benefits from the Bay, including food, economic
gain, recreation, scientific research, education, and aesthetics. In addition, the
tidal wetlands serve a vital function in filtering out many of the pollutants in
the Bay waters, and aid in buffering land from flooding.
Since the influx of population to California associated with the Gold Rush,
filling and construction along the San Francisco Bay have destroyed most of
the original bordering marshlands, and remaining wetlands are increasingly
valued. The regional loss reflects and contributes to a statewide and national
trend toward wetlands loss. The Department of Fish and Game (DFG)
estimates that California has lost more than 90 percent of its wetlands; the
 Chapter 5                      5-2                 Open Space and Conservation Element
National Wildlife Federation reports that more than half of the wetlands
nationally have been destroyed.
Alameda is fortunate to have some wetlands within and surrounding the City,
although repeated filling has moved the tidal wetlands progressively bayward,
and the existing wetlands are not in their original, pre-European-settlement
location. (See Figure 1-1.) Nonetheless, the Alameda shoreline is part of the
once-extensive system of wetlands which ringed the Bay. The wetlands which
border a segment of the South Shore of the Main Island at the Elsie D. Roemer
Bird Sanctuary and proposed Bayview Shoreline Preserve are representative of
historic tidal wetlands habitat.
Across San Leandro Bay from the Main Island, the Arrowhead Marsh,
although not a part of Alameda, is another tidal wetlands, is likely ecologically
linked with the wetlands of the Bird Sanctuary and Bayview Shoreline
Preserve, the tidal and seasonal wetlands at the Oakland Airport, and the
lagoons and sloughs throughout Bay Farm Island and the Island of Alameda.
The varied wetlands habitats, as well as associated upland and open water
areas, interact to form a larger ecological unit. Bird species, for example, may
nest in one type of vegetation, forage or court in another, and rest elsewhere.
The reduction, loss, or alteration of one habitat can decrease the abundance and
diversity of wildlife in others.
Water-related habitat is shown on Figure 5-1, Environmental Resources, and is
reviewed briefly in the following paragraphs; habitat includes uplands, sandy
areas, open water, mudflats, and eelgrass beds.
Due to the extensive filling which occurred around the perimeter of the
original Alameda and Bay Farm islands, no "original" uplands remain of the
historic habitat. However, some of the shoreline area functions as uplands
habitat associated with wetlands, places where waterfowl and shorebirds can
rest and take refuge. The Bayview Shoreline Enhancement Plan, now in draft
form, envisions the enhancement of native upland vegetation bordering the
wetlands behind homes between Broadway and Ravens Cove. This project
would include the development of specific plans to relocate an existing trail, a
landscape restoration/enhancement project using native species, and
interpretive signs, all in order to improve public access and enjoyment of the
shoreline and the quality of the wildlife habitat.
 Chapter 5                      5-3                Open Space and Conservation Element
Like uplands, sandy areas such as Crown Memorial State Beach, Alameda
Beach, and portions of the Naval Air Station, Oakland Airport, and the
Municipal Golf Courses, are used as resting places by birds, and Least Terns
are known to court on the beach. In addition, those sandy areas which are
tidally inundated may contain seawater puddles in which birds may forage.
The open water surrounding Alameda as well as the mudflats around the South
Shore of the Main Island and west of Bay Farm Island also function as
significant habitat. The open waters of the Bay provide foraging areas for fish-
eating birds, as well as the substrate for the many life forms which live in the
water column and on the Bay floor. The organisms which live in the mudflats
provide a rich pantry of invertebrate fauna and algal growth.
Two separate beds of eelgrass provide distinctive habitat for marine organisms
living in the waters off of Alameda. The bed which is southwest of Bay Farm
Island is believed to be the richest grass bed left in San Francisco Bay, with
respect to the presence of small animals. The grass is long and wide, grows
quickly, and dozens of common species are known to be associated with this
bed of eelgrass. The endangered Least Terns are known to forage on herring
living in and around this eelgrass. The second bed of eelgrass off of Alameda,
although shorter and growing in shallower water, probably also provides a
nursery for fish species which the Least Terns nesting at Alameda Point (GPA
01-01) forage. This bed is located off of Crab Cove, the cove which stretches
between the arm of Ballena Isle and Crown State Beach. (See Figure 5-1,
Environmental Resources.)
 Chapter 5                     5-4                   Open Space and Conservation Element
WATER QUALITY
San Francisco Bay water quality varies with a measurement site's proximity
and exposure to point and non-point sources of pollution. Despite the lack of a
coordinated system of measurement, it is known that since the 1950s water
quality in the Bay has improved markedly, due in large part to the upgrading of
municipal sewage treatment facilities.
Municipal sewage discharges and industrial wastewaters are regulated as point
sources by the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB), while non-
point sources include polluted urban runoff from streets and parking lots,
erosion from construction sites, pollutants in fresh water inflow, pollutants
from toxic waste sites and dumps of all kinds, direct spills of pollutants to the
Bay, dredging, and vessel waste discharges.
Monitoring done by the RWQCB has focused primarily on the impacts of
point-source pollutants, although a regional monitoring network for water and
sediment quality—to be developed by 1993—will also analyze non-point
source pollution. Once the network is in place, more water quality information
will be available for analysis.
WATER CONSERVATION
As of 1990, the fourth year of lower-than-normal rainfall, the East Bay has
reduced its water use to 84 percent of its 1986 levels, the levels which
represent the last year of normal rainfall. Since water storage is still 25 percent
below normal levels, EBMUD urges customers to continue to conserve.
In addition to conservation measures appropriate for individual households,
such as the use of low-flow showerheads, aerating faucets, and smaller-
capacity toilets and urinals, the East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD)
recommends that existing and new landscaping design incorporate EBMUD's
water-conserving Landscape Requirements. In 1988, the City of Alameda
Ordinance 2389 added a chapter on Water Conservation to the Municipal
Code, specifying landscape design and practices.
A user agreement has just been signed (June 1990) between EBMUD and the
Alameda Municipal Golf Courses for the former to supply reclaimed
wastewater from the San Leandro Treatment Plant for irrigation use on parts of
the golf courses, as a step towards implementing EBMUD's Alameda
Reclamation Project. This measure is intended to conserve drinking water
which would otherwise be used in landscape irrigation. Construction of
additional treatment facilities to improve the quality of reclaimed wastewater,
and to supply the treated water for Alameda median strips (Harbor Bay
Parkway and Airport Drive) and other landscaped portions of the City is
anticipated over the next several years.
 Chapter 5                     5-5                 Open Space and Conservation Element

A Reclamation Master Plan, to be published in mid-1990, will govern
EBMUD's wastewater reclamation program until the year 2000. The
Reclamation Master Plan may call for new development within the service
area—including Alameda—to design irrigation systems to use reclaimed
wastewater, where available in an acceptable quality.
URBAN HABITAT
"Urban habitat" refers to those areas of the City which provide a land-based
living and feeding environment for birds and mammals. This might include
Alameda's parks, street trees, parkway and median-strip landscaping, yard
trees, the golf courses, and vacant lots. With nearly 14,000 street and park
trees (1990) and an uncounted number of yard trees, the City is set within and
framed by an urban forest. The leafy green canopy provides food and shelter
for many creatures, and contributes toward a verdant community. Lower-
growing shrubs and grasses—both those planted intentionally, and accidental
introductions—also provide habitat.
The Street Tree Inventory identifies 3,634 vacant street planting sites, and the
General Plan identifies the Inventory as a guiding reference document for the
development of the urban forest. A statewide California Urban Forest Survey
done in 1989 calculated an existing street tree per urban resident ratio of 1:4.
The 1990 Alameda ratio is approximately 1:6, although at build-out the ratio is
expected to be 1:5, about one street tree for five residents. The number of
appropriate street trees for Alameda is based on more than a statewide ratio, of
course, and Section 3, the City Design Element, guides the visual development
of the City.
 Chapter 5                     5-6                  Open Space and Conservation Element

WILDLIFE AND VEGETATION
The above discussion of habitats sets the stage for a mention of their
inhabitants. Habitats function interdependently with their inhabitants. Trees
and other vegetation may be viewed as both providing habitat and as dwelling
within a larger habitat. This section briefly describes individual species which
make up the wetlands and water-related habitat areas, and those species which
inhabit the urban portion of Alameda.
Natural terrestrial and shoreline habitats have been drastically modified
throughout the City as a result of development. Open water habitats, while less
obviously modified, have still been affected. As a result of this habitat
modification, the vegetation, insects, fish, birds, and mammals which are
present today represent both remnants of a past landscape and more recent
introductions, intentional and accidental. Several of the plants or animals
described herein are recognized as species of special status, and Alameda is
fortunate to contain unique habitat that supports members of species which are
known to be diminishing throughout all or part of their natural ranges.
According to the State Department of Fish and Game, a variety of fish, shrimp,
and crab inhabit the waters surrounding Alameda, some of the more common
including:
       Yellowfin Goby                           White Sturgeon
       (Acanthogobius flavimauus)               (Acipenser transmontanus)
       American Shad                            Jacksmelt
       (Alosa sapidissima)                      (Atherinopsis californiensis)
       Speckled Sanddab                         Pacific Herring
       (Citharicthys stigmaeus)                 (Clupea harengus)
       Shiner Surfperch                         Northern Anchovy
       (Cymatogaster aggregata)                 (Engraulis mordax)
       White Croaker                            Bay Goby
       (Genyonemus lineatus)                    (Lepidogobius lepidus)
       Staghorn Sculpin                         Brown Smoothhound
       (Leptocottus armatus)                    (Mustelus henlei)
       Bat Ray                                  English Sole
       (Myliobatus californicus)                (Parophrys vetulus)
       Starry Flounder                          Northern Midshipman
 Chapter 5                       5-7                Open Space and Conservation Element
       (Platichthys stellatus)                (Porichthys notatus)
       Striped Bass                           Longfin Smelt
       (Roccus saxitilis)                     (Spirinchus thaleichthys)
       Leopard Shark                          Bay Shrimp
       (Triakis semifasciata)                 (Crangon sp.)
       Dungeness Crab                         Mud Crab
       (Cancer magister)                      (Hemigrapsus oregonensis)
       Oriental Shrimp                        Spider Crab
       (Palaemon macrodactylus)               (Pyromaia tuberculata)
California cordgrass (Spartina foliosa) is present in the Bayview Shoreline
Preserve. This species and the Eelgrass (Zostera marina) which grows in
several locations off of Alameda and Bay Farm islands are of prime
importance to the aquatic and wetlands ecosystems. The endangered
California Clapper Rail (Rallus longirostris obsoletus) is known to frequent
cordgrass areas, including those comprising the Bayview Shoreline Preserve
and in the nearby Arrowhead Marsh. The endangered Least Tern nests at
Alameda Point (GPA 01-01) and Oakland Airport, and forages for Pacific
Herring which are found in the eelgrass beds.
The Alameda song sparrow(Melospiza melodia pusillula), one of several
unique sub-species of song sparrow unique to the San Francisco Bay, is listed
by the State Department of Fish and Game as a species of special status and
was categorized by the Federal Government in 1989 as a Candidate 2, a
species being considered for listing by the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
The Department of Fish and Game and the local Audubon Society monitor the
presence and condition of both water-orientated and land orientated bird
species. According to them, shore-inhabiting birds which have been observed
around Alameda, include:
       Snowy Plover                           Common Loon
       (Charadrius alexandrinus nivosus)      (Gavia immer)
       California Brown Pelican               Double-breasted Cormoran
       (Pelicanus occidentalis)               (Phalacrocorax auritus)
       Harlequin Duck                         Barrow's Goldeneye
       (Histrionicus histrionicus)            (Bucephela islandica)
       Northern Harrier                       California Black Rail
       (Circus cyaneus                        (Laterallus jamaicensis)
 Chapter 5                       5-8              Open Space and Conservation Element
       California Gull                          Salt Marsh Yellowthroat
       (Larus californicus)                     (Geothlypis trichas sinuosa)
       Elegant Tern
       (Sterna elegans)
Land birds thought to be present at least occasionally within the City of
Alameda and vicinity include the Merlin (Falco columbarius), Peregrine
Falcon (Falco peregrinus), Short-eared Owl (Asio flammeus), and Burrowing
Owl (Athene cunicularia). All of these species are considered to be of special
status: rare, threatened, endangered, or a candidate for such listing. Dozens of
more common species are also present.
The Burrowing Owl is of considerable interest locally. This small diurnal owl,
which tends to inhabit open country, finds its niche in urban areas where open
spaces, such as at airports and vacant lots, resemble that of its natural habitat.
Known historically to inhabit ground squirrel burrows on Bay Farm Island, a
colony was moved from its natural habitat in the Harbor Bay Isle area to a
burrows constructed at the Municipal Golf Courses.
The Salt Marsh Wandering Shrew (Sorex vagrans halicoetes), another species
of special status, was known to inhabit the Oakland Airport in 1950, and it is
assumed that it still may be present. A mole which is known only to the Island
of Alameda and called, appropriately, the Alameda Island Mole (Scapanus
latimanus parvus) is to be listed in 1991 by the Department of Fish and Game
as a species of special concern. It is unknown where the mole is living at this
time. Other animals which might be expected to be present within the
landward urban portion of Alameda include field mice, ground squirrels, jack
rabbits, opossums, raccoons, and domestic animals, such as dogs and cats.
Common plants found on the golf courses, vacant lots, and parks include such
grasses as barley and wild oats, several species of thistle, many species of the
mustard family, and a wide variety of shrubs. Unusual plants which may be
present include the salt marsh-dwelling Pt. Reyes Bird's Beak (Cordylanthus
maritimus spp. palustris), the flowering aromatic herb Adobe Sanicle
(Sanicula maritima), and the Monterey Spineflower (Chorizanthe pungens var
pungens).
On residential sites and along the streets, in parks, and on the golf courses,
most plants are non-native ornamental shrubs and trees. The Alameda Tree
Inventory identifies approximately 12,000 trees, with the London Plane Tree
(Platanus acerifolia) constituting 16 percent of the total Alameda urban forest.
The Gingko (Gingko biloba) is the next most common, making up 9.4 percent.
The oldest trees, identifiable by their greater-than-24" diameter, account for
about 5 percent of the population, and are dominated by London Plane,
 Chapter 5                     5-9                   Open Space and Conservation Element
Liquidambar (Liquidambar styraciflua), and American Elm (Ulmus
americana).
Guiding Policies: Open Space for the Preservation of Natural Resources
5.1.a    Preserve and enhance all wetlands and water-related habitat.
         Water-related habitat includes open water, Bay bottom, mudflats,
         uplands, sandy areas, lagoons, and sloughs. Since the various Bay
         wetlands are linked ecologically, preservation of nearby Arrowhead,
         Fan, and Damon marshes would aid in the preservation and
         enhancement of Alameda's wetlands, including those at the Elsie D.
         Roemer Bird Sanctuary and Bayview Shoreline Preserve.
5.1.b Protect Open Space-Habitat areas, including sensitive submerged
         tidelands areas (mudflats) and eelgrass beds, from intrusions by
         motorized recreational craft, including jet skis and hovercraft.
5.1.c    Continue to prohibit filling of water-related habitat except in those
         limited cases in which a strong public need clearly outweighs the
         habitat preservation need, and where approval is granted by the
         appropriate agencies.
5.1.d Preserve buffers between wetlands and urban uses.
         The California Department of Fish and Game recommends buffers of
         between 50 and 100 feet, to separate and protect the two land uses.
         Since Alameda is nearly built out, buffer size may need to be adjusted
Chapter 5                      5-10                 Open Space and Conservation Element
         so that parcels rendered unbuildable by the application of this
         standard.
5.1.e    Continue to preserve and maintain all lagoons as habitat as well as
         visual and compatible-use recreational resources.
         Forster's Terns and diving ducks, among other species, use the lagoons
         for foraging.
5.1.f    Deleted: (GPA 01-01)
5.1.g    Conduct all dredging in compliance with the Long Term Management
         Strategy, Management Plan, prepared by the USACE, USEPA, BCDC,
         and SFRWQCB. (GPA 01-01)
5.1.h    Continue to support EBMUD in its efforts to promote and implement
         water conservation measures.
         Alameda City government's largest water consumer is the Recreation
         and Park Department (ARPD), and the ARPD has cut its water use by
         about 20 percent by eliminating wasteful watering habits and by
         planting drought-resistant ground cover. (GPA 01-01)
5.1.i    Encourage the use of drought-resistant landscaping.
5.1.j    Use the City of Alameda Street Tree Management Plan as the guiding
         reference when considering action which would affect the trees
         contained in the urban forest.
         After presenting a thorough inventory of the location, composition,
         condition, and maintenance needs of City-maintained trees, the Street
         Tree Management Plan presents recommendations for planting and
         tree maintenance.
Implementing Policies: Open Space for the Preservation of Natural
Resources
5.1.k    Ban the use of jet skis and hovercraft within the Elsie D. Roemer Bird
         Sanctuary and San Leandro Channel at all times, and San Leandro Bay
         only during critical bird nesting periods.
         The East Bay Regional Park District has contemplated such a move,
         planning to enforce its ban through the use of police boats or planes.
5.1.l    Work with local recreation groups to disseminate information regarding
         the sensitivity of Open Space-Habitat areas to intrusions by motorized
         craft.
Chapter 5                      5-11                 Open Space and Conservation Element
         Crab Cove Visitor Center and other local educational resource centers
         could participate in an information dissemination campaign.
5.1.m Post and maintain signs warning boaters and users of motorized craft
         that they are approaching a wildlife area.
5.1.n Inventory existing wetlands and water-related and other habitats to
         create a comprehensive map of sensitive biological and botanical
         resources, to better protect these resources.
         Figure 5-1, Environmental Resources, is based on a compilation of
         available sources on wetland and water-related habitat. Public and
         private organizations are encouraged to conduct field surveys to
         contribute detail on the extent and importance of these and other
         potentially unidentified habitat areas.
5.1.o Complete the Bayview Shoreline Preserve Improvement Plan.
5.1.p Require that proposed projects adjacent to, surrounding, or containing
         wetlands be subject to a site-specific analysis which will determine the
         appropriate size and configuration of the buffer zone.
         The size and configuration of the buffer zone should be based on the
         characteristics and importance of the wetlands and the proposed
         project. The purpose of the buffer zone will be to ensure the long-term
         viability of the wetlands area, which may include provisions for off-site
         needs such as upland nesting habitat.
5.1.q Work with the East Bay Regional Park District and other appropriate
         agencies to improve, protect, and preserve Crown Memorial State
         Beach and the Alameda Beach as habitat as well as recreational
         resources.
         The boundary between Crown Memorial State Beach and Alameda
         Beach lies at Westline Drive. The presence of people and dogs along
         the beaches limits beach habitat value for nesting birds, although
         biologists have observed Least Terns courting on the sand and on
         offshore buoys at Crown Beach. The ban on allowing dogs to run
         without leashes should be strictly enforced, for the protection of all,
         including the dogs.
5.1.r    Continue to participate in the Alameda County Non-Point Source Task
         Force.
         The Task Force is made up of public works directors or representatives
         from each city within Alameda County, and is engaged in organizing
         the implementation of the Non-Point Source Control Program, to
         ensure continued improvement of Bay water quality. Non-point sources
         of pollution include polluted urban runoff, construction site erosion,
Chapter 5                      5-12                 Open Space and Conservation Element
         pollutants in fresh water inflow, pollutants from toxic waste sites and
         dumps, direct spills of pollutants to the Bay, dredging, and vessel waste
         discharges.
5.1.s    Participate in the Non-Point Source Control Program (NPSC).
         Although not fully designed, the NPSC Program is anticipated to
         include measures for prevention of contamination and source control
         of pollutants. Treatment of urban runoff, while potentially effective, is
         costly, and prevention and source control are the preferred methods of
         abatement. The main objective of the NPSC Program is to ensure that
         only storm water enters the storm drains, which will involve
         eliminating illegal connections and strict surveillance and enforcement
         of "no dumping" mandates. Educational as well as regulatory
         strategies are under consideration.
         As a part of the NPSC Program, by mid-1991 the City will prepare a
         report for submittal to the RWQCB, characterizing local pollutant
         types and amounts, and a plan for implementing a control program.
5.1.t    Consider adopting City standards in addition to those adopted by the
         County, to deal with non-point source water pollution problems such as
         sheet flow storm runoff and sedimentation affecting sensitive water
         habitats.
5.1.u    Participate in the County Hazardous Waste program and/or consider
         establishment of hazardous waste and/or oil disposal or transfer sites.
         The dearth of available hazardous waste and motor oil disposal sites
         may lead citizens to pour dangerous materials into storm drains.
         Establishment of such sites allows the City more control over
         substances which could contaminate the Bay. See also policies
         contained in the Health and Safety Element.
5.1.v    Participate in the identification of agencies responsible for the cleanup
         of toxic materials within the Oakland Estuary, and support them in their
         efforts.
5.1.w Require new marinas and encourage existing marinas to provide easily
         accessible waste disposal facilities for sewage and bilge and engine oil
         residues.
5.1.x    Prevent migration of runoff off-site or into wetlands areas and water-
         related habitat by requiring that proposed projects include design
         features ensuring detention of sediment and contaminants.
Chapter 5                      5-13                  Open Space and Conservation Element
         Project design should specify techniques to be used to detain runoff.
         On-site inspection during construction may be necessary to ensure that
         designs are realized.
5.1.y Work with EBMUD to implement the Alameda Reclamation Project.
         The Alameda Reclamation Project anticipates the increased use of
         reclaimed wastewater for landscape irrigation throughout the City.
5.1.z    Develop a comprehensive City Water Conservation Ordinance that
         recognizes Alameda's unique climate, soil conditions, and development
         patterns.
5.1.aa Review proposed development projects for both water and energy
         efficiency, and integrate plans for the use of reclaimed wastewater for
         landscaping as a condition of approval.
5.1.bb Require a biological assessment of any proposed project site where
         species or the habitat of species defined as sensitive or special status by
         the California Department of Fish and Game or the U.S. Fish and
         Wildlife Service might be present.
         Listings of sensitive and special status species change from year to
         year, but might include birds, animals, and plants such as the
         California Least Tern, California Clapper Rail, Burrowing Owl,
         Alameda Island Mole, Salt Marsh Wandering Shrew, Adobe Sanicle,
         Pt. Reyes Bird's Beak, and Monterey Spineflower.
Chapter 5                      5-14                 Open Space and Conservation Element
5.1.cc Implement the City's Street Tree Management goal of planting trees in
          all vacant street tree sites within 10 years.
5.1.dd Develop and implement planting and herbicide, pesticide, and fertilizer
          application plans, including a pesticide drift control plan, for the golf
          course and public open space areas. (GPA 01-01)
5.2       OPEN SPACE FOR THE M ANAGED
          PRODUCTION OF RESOUR CES
This section of the Open Space Element is required to address the commercial
value and use of open space lands. The General Plan does not designate any
land as Open Space for the Managed Production of Resources, but does
recognize the function of Bay waters and vegetation as fish nurseries, some of
which may be of value to commercial fishing production. A discussion of the
more common fish, shrimp, and crab species is found in Section 5.1.
Guiding Policies: Open Space for the Managed Production of Resources
5.2.a     Protect and preserve Bay waters and vegetation as nurseries and
          spawning grounds for fish and other aquatic species, both as a part of
          habitat preservation and to encourage continued use of the Bay for
          commercial fishing production.
          Implementing policies ensuring protection and preservation of Bay
          waters and vegetation may be found in Section 5.1.
5.2.b     Explore interest in public and privately owned sites available for
          community gardens.
5.3       OPEN SPACE FOR OUTDO OR RECREATION
The General Plan discusses the need to maintain and expand the City's
inventory of parks and recreation facilities. Text and policies reviewing the
value of open space for outdoor recreation are found in Section 6, the Parks
and Recreation, Shoreline Access & Development, Schools and Cultural
Facilities Element.
5.4       OPEN SPACE FOR PUBLI C HEALTH & SAFETY
The proximity of the (Text deleted pursuant to GPA 01-01) Metropolitan
Oakland International Airport requires the establishment of safety zones for
landing aircraft. Text and policies pertaining to safety zones are found in
Section 7, the Airports Element. Policies specifying the preservation of unbuilt
 Chapter 5                        5-15                 Open Space and Conservation Element
areas within flood plains subject to the 100-year flood are listed in the Health
& Safety Element, within Section 8.3.
5.5       CLIMATE AND AIR QUAL ITY
Alameda is normally exposed to an influx of marine air from the west, having
a climate which is cool and wet in the winter and relatively cool in the
summer, with fog or wind. The high-pressure cell which lies over the Pacific
Ocean contributes to the dryer air in summer, and its movement to the south
during the winter exposes the Bay Area to wet weather.
Like all Bay Area cities, Alameda experiences both the general Bay Area
climate and air quality, and the local variations on these patterns caused by
specific location and topography. Some interior sections of Alameda are
warmer than the maritime norm, and are more sheltered from the winds.
Similarly, locations toward the outer edges of Alameda and Bay Farm islands
experience the force of the winds more directly. Early travelers' historical
accounts of the City often commented on Alameda's relatively fog-free
climate, particularly in contrast to San Francisco. The constant flow of
relatively clean air through the Golden Gate results in good air quality
compared with other parts of the Bay Area.
There is no air quality measurement instrumentation in Alameda, however, and
the closest sampling stations are in Oakland and San Leandro. These stations,
both of which measure ozone and one of which (Oakland) measures carbon
monoxide levels, indicate few days exceeding State or Federal air quality
standards in recent years. (See Table 5-1.)
                                         TABLE 5-1:
  AIR POLLUTION AT THE BAAQMD's OAKLAND & SAN LEANDRO
   STATIONS 1987 - 1988; AND AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS
                                    O                                 CO
                                      3
                                            Days                              Days
                                   MA       NTL      CA               MA NTL
_______________________________________________________________________________
1987 (Oakland)                      9       0        0                 4.9       0
1987 (San Leandro)                  9       0        0
1988 (Oakland)                     10       0        1                 6.0       0
1988 (San Leandro)                  8       0        0
________________________________________________________________________________
Averaging Time                                1 hour         8 hours
California Ambient Air Quality Standards      9              9
Federal Ambient Air Quality Standards         12             9
 Chapter 5                         5-16              Open Space and Conservation Element
Table 5-1 Notes:    MA = Maximum Average Value
                    "Days" columns give the number of days per year on which an air quality
                    standard was exceeded, either nationally (NTL) or within California (CA).
                    O (ozone) is measured in pphm (parts per hundred million).
                      3
                    CO (carbon monoxide) is measured in ppm (parts per million).
                    These monitoring stations do not measure Nitrogen Dioxide, Sulfur Dioxide, or
                    Total Suspended Particulates.
Source:             Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) Meteorology and Data
                    Analysis Section.
Although the data from these two stations usually are generalized to include
Alameda, the City's position between the former (GPA 01-01)Naval Air
Station airport and the Metropolitan Oakland International Airport raises a
question as to whether proximity to airports increases air pollution. In a 1971
study by the Bay Area Air Pollution Control District, the Oakland Airport was
judged to possess marginal pollution potential for the vicinity, and former
(GPA 01-01)Naval Air Station activity was anticipated to lead to occasional
episodes of increased pollutant levels. No current study of this issue is
underway.
The computer model URBEMIS #2, developed by the California Air
Resources Board, projects the following changes in the amounts of the three
most important contaminant gases, when buildout is reached within Alameda:
          Carbon Monoxide (CO):                   23% decrease
          Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2):                 9.4% decrease
          Reactive Organic Gases:                 5% decrease
The decreases are due to projected increases in automobile engine efficiency
built into the model. It should be noted that this model is based on numerous
assumptions regarding trip patterns, which are in turn based on population and
land use projections. If any of these patterns change between the base year
(1990) and the buildout year (assumed to be 2010), then actual production of
contaminants may differ significantly from the projections.
The URBEMIS #2 model does not include emissions projections for the
Oakland Airport, nor for the former (GPA 01-01)NAS Alameda. The former
(GPA 01-01) NAS was identified in 1987 by BAAQMD as a major point
source of air pollution in the Bay Area; it produces measurable amounts of
carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, total organic gases, and
particulate matter.
The URBEMIS #2 model also does not take into account the potential air
quality problems associated with the methane gas produced at the former
 Chapter 5                        5-17                       Open Space and Conservation Element
sanitary landfill on Bay Farm Island. The City has engaged a private
contractor to siphon or "bleed off" methane gas, which is produced as a by-
product of decomposing materials at Mt. Trashmore. The process is expected
to last at least six to 10 years (until perhaps the year 2000), by which time the
amount of gas produced is expected to have diminished.
Regionally, the most severe and complex air quality problem is the relatively
high level of ambient ozone experienced during inversions in summer and fall.
Ozone is not emitted directly into the atmosphere, but is produced in the
atmosphere through a complex series of photochemical reactions involving
hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxides, and sunlight. No single source accounts for
most of the hydrocarbon and nitrogen oxide emissions, and many sources are
spread throughout the region.
Because so much of the Bay Area's air pollution problem is attributable to
motor vehicles, improving transportation facilities to reduce vehicle hours of
travel will improve air quality. (See Section 4.2, Transportation Element, on
Transportation Systems Management.)
Guiding Policies: Climate and Air Quality
5.5.a     Strive to meet all Federal and State standards for ambient air quality.
          Table 5-1 lists the air quality standards for all significant contaminant
          gases. These standards are subject to change, and in fact have
          changed since 1975.
5.5.b Support continued monitoring efforts by the Bay Area Air Quality
          Management District.
Implementing Policies: Climate and Air Quality
5.5.c     Encourage use of public transit for all types of trips.
          See policies in Section 4.3 in the Transportation Element.
5.5.d Encourage development and implementation of Transportation System
          Management (TSM) programs.
          See Transportation Element policies (4.2.a and 4.2.b).
5.5.e     Minimize commuting by balancing jobs and nearby housing
          opportunities.
          Buildout of Alameda will create four jobs for every three employed
          residents, minimizing out-commuting. A surplus of jobs in Alameda is
 Chapter 5                      5-18                 Open Space and Conservation Element
          likely to result in less travel than if these office/business park jobs were
          at alternative outlying locations.
5.6       HISTORIC AND ARCHAEO LOGIC RESOURCES
Alameda's history and prehistory are reflected throughout the City in the
pattern and names of streets, the placement and style of homes and businesses,
and in commemorative markers posted in public places. Alamedans are well
aware of the recent history of their community, as is evidenced in the existence
of such groups as the Alameda Victorian Preservation Society, formed in 1972.
The group is dedicated to preserving the historic character of the City,
increasing awareness and appreciation of Alameda's historic roots, and
providing historic building restoration and rehabilitation information to
citizens.
The creation of a Historical Advisory Board, the City's identification of
historic districts and Heritage Areas, and efforts to revitalize older, historic
business districts through participation in the Main Street Project all indicate
Alameda's continuing commitment to celebrating the Island's past. In addition,
the City adopted an optional Historic Preservation Element in 1980 with two
major goals: nurturing an understanding and appreciation of the City's history
and architecture, and the preservation of Alameda's historical and architectural
resources. The policies in this section are intended to supplement the
Element's recommendations for an education and preservation program.
Prehistoric Period. The Coastal Miwoks lived within the protection of the
oak forest that blanketed the Encinal peninsula, a peninsula fringed on its
northern and eastern shores with cordgrass and pickleweed marsh. It later
became the Island of Alameda. Until the early 1900s, at least a half-dozen
huge shellfish mounds punctuated the landscape, refuse heaps whose contents
attested to the hunting, fishing, and gathering way of life of the earliest
inhabitants. When excavated, the largest mound, 400 feet long by 150 feet
wide by 14 feet high and encompassing an area bounded by Central Avenue,
Court Street, Johnson Avenue, and Gibbons Drive, was found to cover burial
grounds. In 1908 the contents of this mound were hauled to Bay Farm Island
and used for paving and filling material. Mound Street passes through the
original shellmound location, and additional artifacts lie buried beneath the
urban hardscape.
The California Archaeological Inventory reports that with only 5 percent of the
General Plan Project Area surveyed, seven prehistoric archaeological sites
have been identified, and there is a high probability of additional resources in
unsurveyed areas. Policies within this section anticipate future finds. The
types of artifacts which might be expected to be found are those typical of Bay
Area settlements near existing or former marshland, including mortars and
 Chapter 5                        5-19                  Open Space and Conservation Element
pestles, obsidian knives, weapons, or projectile points, and bone needles or
other small tools. Obsidian, chert and other stone with which the tools and the
weapons were composed is not native to Alameda, suggesting Coastal Miwoks
had trade connections with mainland or inland tribes. Other prehistoric
resources that could be discovered within Alameda might include dark,
crumbly soil containing shell and bone dietary debris, heat-affected rock, or
human burials.
Historic Period. European settlement began in the late 1700s with the arrival
of the Spanish, initiating a period of land appropriation and subdivision which
ultimately displaced Alameda's earliest inhabitants. By the late 1800s,
settlement existed at three disparate locations on the peninsula, with a main
road (now Central Avenue) and a railroad line linking the settlers. The large-
scale transformation of the landscape was already taking place, with some
wetlands being diked and filled, and the initiation of a Federal government
project which would take nearly 30 years to complete: the dredging of a Tidal
Canal between the peninsula and the mainland, severing Alameda from the
shore.
The California Gold Rush brought a huge influx of population to the Bay Area
in the mid-1800s. Among these settlers were several entrepreneurs who would
subdivide the peninsula and sell tracts for residences and orchards. The pace
of settlement within Alameda remained steady during the last three decades of
the century as rail and ferry projects connected Alamedans to one another, to
the rest of the Bay Area, and, indeed, to the rest of the country. The corner of
Lincoln and Webster streets is noted for being the location of the terminus of
the first transcontinental railroad; a Central Pacific train completed a cross-
continental journey for the first time in 1869. The late 1800s also left their
mark within the City in the form of the Victorian homes which may be seen
throughout Alameda.
The California Archaeological Inventory notes that the City contains many
properties of recognized historic value. The National Register of Historic
Places lists 10 properties, the California Inventory of Historic Places lists five
properties, and California Historical Landmarks lists one property. A historic
resources inventory conducted in 1979-1980 resulted in the identification of
663 historic properties within the General Plan Project Area. A more recent
survey suggests as many as 4,000 properties with historic value.
The early settlement date of this area and the prevalence of properties of
historic value strongly suggest the existence of additional unidentified historic
resources, both archaeologic and architectural. Historic archaeologic resources
which might be expected include stone or adobe foundations or walls,
structures and remains with square nails, and refuse deposits, often found in
old wells or privies.
 Chapter 5                      5-20                Open Space and Conservation Element
Guiding Policy: Historic and Archaeologic Resources
5.6.a    Protect historic sites and archaeologic resources for their aesthetic,
         scientific, educational, and cultural values.
         Historic preservation programs, such as the measures proposed within
         the 1980 Historic Preservation Element, have been successful in
         preserving the small-town character of many California communities.
         See Section 3.3, Architectural Resources, for additional policies.
Implementing Policies: Historic and Archaeologic Resources
5.6.b    Working in conjunction with the California Archaeological Inventory,
         review proposed development projects to determine whether the site
         contains known prehistoric or historic cultural resources and/or to
         determine the potential for discovery of additional cultural resources.
5.6.c    Require that areas found to contain significant historic or prehistoric
         archaeological artifacts be examined by a qualified consulting
         archaeologist or historian for appropriate protection and preservation.
         The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires evaluation
         of any archaeological resource on the site of a development project.
         Unique resources, as defined by State law, should be protected, either
         by physical measures or by locating development away from the site. A
         preferred preservation method involves covering a site with earth fill
         for potential future, leisurely excavation; immediate excavation by
         qualified archaeologists should be undertaken only if such protection is
         infeasible.
5.6.d    Update the Historic Preservation Element when funds allow.
Chapter 5                       5-21                Open Space and Conservation Element
2 LAND USE ELEMENT
  2.1                   LAND USE ISSUES
  Much of Alameda's character is a result of a development pattern set during a
  transit-dominant period. Narrow residential lots and compact shopping
  districts create a city rather than a suburban feel. Concern about further
  intensive development that would increase traffic and destroy the small-city
  feel led to passage of Measure A in 1973, halting apartment construction; it
  also led to the height and density/intensity standards in this General Plan.
  As in all cities, the demand for land that may be used for various purposes is
  continually changing, and is difficult to influence through planning policies.
  For example, the General Plan cannot preserve obsolete industry, but it can
  either express the City's desire to be a home to industry by retaining industrial
  land or encourage alternative uses by redesignating the land for other activities.
  Alameda's present zoning pattern was established in 1958, when commercial
  or industrial uses could outbid residential uses at most locations and portions
  of older residential neighborhoods were designated for conversion. In 1990
  the prospect of significant assembly of residential properties for conversion to
  industry or retail use is remote, and dramatic changes are not anticipated.
  The General Plan is designed to ease potential conflicts between different land
  uses such as manufacturing, industry and housing, having evaluated
  opportunities for preservation and development of those uses at specific
  locations. The Plan Diagram (located in the pocket at the back of this volume)
  designates some locations for preservation of industry and housing, and others
  for redevelopment of underused industrial land to increase the City's housing
  supply and limit potential traffic increases. Mixed-use areas are designated to
  encourage creative development and to retain and enhance the diversity that
  distinguishes Alameda from suburban cities.
  2.2                   LAND USE CLASSIFICAT IONS
  The following descriptions apply to uses indicated on the General Plan
  Diagram. The legend on the Plan Diagram includes an abbreviated version of
  the descriptions.
  The classifications are adopted as General Plan policy and are intentionally
  broad enough to avoid duplication of the City's zoning regulations. More than
  one zoning district may be consistent with a single General Plan use category.
                                           -1-
For most uses, a maximum permitted rate of gross floor area to site area is
specified. The floor area ratio (FAR) is a broad control of building bulk that
limits both visual prominence and traffic generated.
RESIDENTIAL
Residential densities are expressed in housing units per net acre, exclusive of
land used or to be used for public or private streets. Where new streets will be
needed, the land area to be occupied by streets is to be subtracted before
calculating density or ratio of floor area to site area. Easements for the purpose
of public access, pedestrian paths, alleys, or utility lines shall not be excluded
from the net density. Densities within the ranges listed below are used to
calculate probable housing unit increases in Tables 2-1, 2-3 and 2-6. Densities
used to estimate future additions do not establish entitlement to a specific
number of housing units or amount of floor area.
Low-Density Residential: Single-family detached units. New units typically
will be on 5,000-square-foot, or larger, lots, or in planned unit developments
not to exceed 8.7 units per net acre. Density range: 4.5 to 8.7 units per net
acre. Secondary dwelling units discussed in Section 65852.2 of the
Government Code of the State of California are also permitted, and are not
limited by this density range.
Medium-Density Residential: Two family or one family units. Medium-
density residential development will provide at least 2,000 square feet of site
area per unit. Existing densities range up to 70 units per net acre on blocks
with mixed single- and units. Density range for additional units: 8.8 to 21.8
units per net acre. Projects of five or more units with 20 percent of the units
Chapter 2                             -2-                              Land Use Element
affordable to lower-income households earn a state-mandated density bonus
permitting up to 26.1 units per net acre. Congregate housing and single room
occupancy facilities would be permitted and their density would be regulated
by the bulk standards (setbacks, height, lot coverage) in each zoning
classification.
Measure A Exception: The City Council agreed in the Settlement Agreement
on the Guyton vs. City of Alameda case that Section 26-2 of the City Charter
allows the Alameda Housing Authority to replace, with multi family housing,
325 low cost housing units. Three hundred and twenty five represents the
number of low cost units lost when the former Buena Vista Apartments were
converted to Bridgeport Apartments. The City agreed that the 325 units of
multi family housing can be built at densities allowed as of January 1, 1990,
even if Zoning and General Plan changes are subsequently adopted which
reduce allowable densities.
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS
Compact neighborhood business districts, a majority of them at former
streetcar stops, meet the convenience shopping needs of nearby residents. The
area of new stores and offices is limited, and activities and business hours are
controlled to maintain compatibility with residential neighborhoods.
Residential use is encouraged on the second floor and is permitted elsewhere.
Maximum FAR .6. The maximum FAR can increase to 2.0 if in-lieu parking
fees are substituted for on-site parking.
COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL
This category includes the City's two major business districts, Park Street and
Webster Street, and the four shopping centers: South Shore, Marina Village,
Fernside, and Harbor Bay Landing. Uses include small retail stores,
department stores, motels, automobile sales and service, and offices, depending
on location. Attainable FAR depends on parking requirements and varies
widely among shopping centers and traditional business districts. Residential
and office uses are encouraged on the second floor and are permitted
elsewhere. Maximum FAR with off-site parking is 3.0.
OFFICE
Professional and administrative offices not located in business districts or
business parks: FAR .40 for one story; .45 for two stories. Medium-density
residential is a permitted use.
Chapter 2                             -3-                           Land Use Element
BUSINESS PARK
Harbor Bay Business Park and portions of Marina Village consist primarily of
offices, but also may include research and development space, manufacturing,
and distribution. Harbor Bay plans include a small amount of retail space and
a conference-oriented hotel. Maximum FAR is .5, with increases up to a
maximum of 2 permitted, proportional to the amount of required parking
enclosed in a structure.
SPECIFIED MIXED USE
Nine areas designated on the General Plan Diagram are to have combinations
of uses specified to implement General Plan policies. Development programs
that include limitations on development intensity are described in Sections 2.6.
(See Table 2-1.)
The Specified Mixed Use Areas labeled on the General Plan Diagram are:
MU1 Island Auto Movie
MU2 Mariner Square
MU3 Ballena Isle
MU4 Northern Waterfront (Grand Street to Willow Street)
MU5 Northern Waterfront (Willow Street to Oak Street)
MU6 Northern Waterfront (Sherman to Grand)
MU7 Catellus Mixed Use Commercial
AP1 Alameda Point Civic Core
AP2 Alameda Point Inner Harbor
AP3 Alameda Point Marina
GENERAL INDUSTRY
Alameda's heavy industries are related to bulk maritime and rail shipping or
water transportation. Some may create noise, visual, or air-quality problems.
Zoning regulations determine the types of activities to be permitted and the
standards they must meet. Maximum FAR is .5.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION
Marinas on the Estuary, San Leandro Channel, and San Francisco Bay berth
the largest concentration of small boats in the Bay Area. Harbor Bay Isle Club
provides 10 acres of indoor and outdoor recreational facilities for members,
and a new R-V storage facility is proposed at the old gun club site on Maitland
Drive. This category also includes open space uses which are not intended for
permanent open space for public access or habitat preservation. (GPA-96-2)
Chapter 2                            -4-                            Land Use Element
PARKS AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE/OPEN SPACE/HABITAT
In addition to City parks, these categories include the Alameda Municipal Golf
Courses, Robert Crown Memorial State Beach, and public and private land
committed or proposed as permanent open space for public access or habitat
preservation.
PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL
Schools and City facilities that have unique public character are in this
category. Places of religious assembly are not shown.
FEDERAL FACILITIES
Sites occupied by Federal facilities including (Text deleted pursuant to GPA
01-01) Naval Reserve Center, the Federal Center on McKay Avenue, and
Coast Guard Island are in this category.
2.3                  GENERAL PLAN HOLDING CAPACITY
The tables in this section show how Alameda will change if all potential
development envisioned by the General Plan were to occur between 1990 and
2010. Tables 2-1 through 2-4 list assumptions for additional development by
major land use categories. Table 2-5 summarizes these assumptions. Existing
Chapter 2                             -5-                          Land Use Element
and projected development in the nine Planning Sectors illustrated in Figure 2-
1 is shown in Table 2-6.
Population at buildout is estimated at 81,400, (vs. 74,139, January 1990 DOF);
assuming household population averages 2.26 persons per housing unit and
group-quarters population totals 5,000. The household size and vacancy rates
used are those estimated by the California Department of Finance (DOF) for
January 1990. The DOF 1990 estimate of group-quarters population, of which
the largest component is Alameda Naval Air Station personnel, is assumed as
constant. Housing unit totals in the tables do not include group quarters.
             TABLE 2-1 ASSUMED DEVELOPMENT INCREMENT:
                       SPECIFIED MIXED USE SITES, 1990-2010
            Site                      Land Use                          Units or Square Feet
MU1 Island Auto Movie          Residential               200 Single Family Residences and/or Duplexes
                               Office                    30,000 sq. ft.
MU2 Mariner Square             Residential, including    As identified in the Housing Element
                               assisted living
                               Office                    10,000 sq. ft.
                               Institutional             100,000 sq. ft. west of Mariner Square Drive
                               Maritime Uses             40,000 sq. ft. boat storage, marina
MU3 Ballena Isle               Hotel                     220 rooms (234,000 sq. ft.)
                               Office                    70,000 sq.ft.
                               Commercial                10,000 sq. ft.
                               Recreation
MU4 Northern Waterfront        Residential               40 Live/Work
(Grand to Willow)              Office                    50,000 sq. ft.
                               Industry                  100,000 sq. ft.
MU 5 Northern Waterfront       Residential               300 Two-Family
(Willow to Oak)                Office                    40,000 sq. ft.
                               Park                      10 acres
MU 6 Northern Waterfront       Residential               345 housing Units
                               Commercial                50,000 sq. ft. Maritime Commercial
                               Office and Retail         400,000 Office and Retail
MU 7 Catellus                  Residential               300 residential units
Mixed Use Site                 Office                    300,000 sq. ft. commercial retail
                               Commercial                400,000 sq. ft. office, and
                                                         20,000 sq. ft. of health club facilities.
                                                         Up to 250,000 sq. ft. of commercial retail may be
                                                         exchanged for up to 370,000 square feet of
                                                         research and development uses. Other uses may
                                                         be exchanged or substituted as permitted by the
                                                         Master Plan.
Notes: Section 2.6, Specified Mixed Use Areas, establishes minimum and maximum development
shares for each use in each SMU area. This table assumes probable quantities for each permitted use
within these ranges.
a
 Up to 325 units of publicly assisted housing may be built in Alameda as multifamily housing as
replacement housing for publicly assisted housing at Bridgeport Apartments which converted to private,
market-rate housing in 1988. Some or all of these replacement units may be located at one or more of the
mixed-use sites.
Chapter 2                                        -6-                                     Land Use Element
             TABLE 2-2 ASSUMED DEVELOPMENT INCREMENT:
                       NONRESIDENTIAL PROJECTS, 1990-2010
Site                                   Land Use                             Square Footage
Alameda Gateway                        Business Park                        132,000
                                       Warehouse                            127,000
                                       Retail                               4,000
Marina Village                         Office                               389,000
                                       Retail                               12,000
Paragon                                Business Park                        183,000
Harbor Bay BP                          Business Park                        3,545,000
                                       Retail/Hotel                         540,000
Grand Marina                           Office/Retail                        42,000
Total                                                                       4,974,000
Note: Approved, entitled or submitted as of June 1990.
    TABLE 2-3 SUMMARY OF ASSUMED DEVELOPMENT INCREMENT
                    TABLE: RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 1990-2010
Site                          Acres            Density              Type                Units
Alameda Annex (#1)            59               MDR                  Two-Family              a
(U. S. Navy)                                                                            785
Independence Plaza (#2)       5                MDR                  Multi Family        186
Atlantic/Buena Vista          9                MDR                  Two Family          205
 (#3-#6)
Marina Village (#9)           7                MDR                  Two Family          156
Beltline Yard                 4                MDR                  Two Family          84
(Near Webster Street)
Main Island Infill            -                MDR                  One Family          520
                                                                    Two Family
Village 5/HBI (#7)            104              LDR                  One Family          630
(Bay Farm Island)                                                   Two Family
Clarke Lane (#8)              3                MDR                  One Family          25
(Bay Farm Island)
Grand Harbor                  -                                     Two Family          38
(Live aboard)
Specified Mixed Use           -                MDR                  Two Family          1,195
Sites (See Table 2-1.)                                              Live/Work
Total                                                                                   3,824
          a
Notes:     520 dwelling units are expected through 1995.
Site numbers (#) from Housing Element, adopted December 1990.
Up to 325 units of publicly assisted housing may be built in Alameda as multifamily housing as
replacement housing for publicly assisted housing at Bridgeport Apartments which converted to private,
market-rate housing in 1988. Some or all of these replacement units may be located at one or more of the
mixed-use sites, or in any area of the City where residential units are permitted
Source: Housing Element, adopted 1990; Blayney-Dyett, June 1990.
Chapter 2                                        -7-                                   Land Use Element
  TABLE 2-4, ASSUMED DEVELOPMENT INCREMENT COMMERCIAL,
                     OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS, 1990-2010
                                                                            Square Footage
Site                                  Land Use
                                                                            (Gross Leasable)
Park Street                           Commercial                            100,000
Webster Street                        Commercial                            100,000
Neighborhood Business Districts       Commercial                            25,000
Subtotal                              Commercial/Retail                     225,000
Offices near Civic Center             Office                                25,000
Total                                                                       250,000
Notes: Does not include projects from Table 2-2.
Gross leasable areas are estimates and are not based on availability of specific sites or construction at
specific floor area ratios.
Supportable incremental retail space data and assumptions are:
      All calculations are in 1988-1989 constant dollars.
      1988-1989 taxable sales: $228,735,000 (excludes building materials, automotive, service
        stations).
      1990 jobs: 38,720 at $800 per year sales in Alameda.
      1988-1989 sales to household residents: Total sales less sales to jobholders, plus $1,000
        nontaxable sales per capita=$3,860 per household resident.
Buildout increment:
3,129 additional households x 2.26 persons x $3,860         = $27,296,000
18,600 additional jobs x $800                               = $14,880,000
Total:                                                        $42,176,000
Supports 211,000 square feet at $200 annual sales per square foot.
              TABLE 2-5, SUMMARY OF ASSUMED DEVELOPMENT
                                      INCREMENT TABLE
Site/District                               Housing Units             Non-Residential Square Footage
Specified Mixed Use Sites (Table 2-1)       1,195                     1,590,000
Non-Residential Projects (Table 2-2)        0                         4,974,000
Residential Projects (Table 2-3)            2,629a                    0
Commercial, Office, Industrial Districts    0                         250,000
(Table 2-4)
Total                                       3,824                     6,814,000
a 2,929 represents assumed development increment from residential projects exclusive of the Specified
Mixed Use Sites identified above.
Chapter 2                                       -8-                                        Land Use Element

                   TABLE 2-6: LAND USE BY PLANNING SECTOR
                             1989-1990 AND BUILDOUT (2010)
                                                           Housing Units/             Gross Square Feet
  Planning Sector                Land Use
                                                              1989-1990                     Buildout
West End                 One Family Housing           1,405 units                  2,455 units
                         Two Family Housing           4,180 units                  4,180 units
                         Total Housing                5,585 units                  6,635 units
                         Commercial                   10,000 sq. ft.               328,000 sq. ft.
                         Business Park                0                            132,000 sq.ft.
Webster Street           One Family Housing           5 units                      10 units
                         Two Family Housing           0                            0
                         Total Housing                5 units                      10 units
                         Commercial                   349,000 sq. ft.              449,000 sq.ft.
West Central             One Family Housing           1,833 units                  2,023 units
                         Two Family Housing           2,809 units                  2,809 units
                         Total Housing                4,642 units                  4,832 units
                         Commercial                   102,000 sq.ft.               140,000 sq. ft.
East Central             One Family Housing           1,533 units                  1,748 units
                         Two Family Housing           3,555 units                  3,555 units
                         Total Housing                5,088 units                  5,303 units
                         Commercial                   38,000 sq. ft.               50,000 sq. ft.
Park Street              One Family Housing           6 units                      11 units
                         Two Family Housing           229 units                    229 units
                         Total Housing                235 units                    240 units
                         Commercial                   945,000 sq. ft.              1,045,000 sq. ft.
East End                 One Family Housing           3,805 units                  3,845 units
                         Two Family Housing           1,852 units                  1,852 units
                         Total Housing                5,657 units                  5,697 units
                         Commercial                   54,000 sq. ft.               54,000 sq. ft
South Shore              One Family Housing           1,395 units                  1,400 units
                         Two Family Housing           2,658 units                  2,658 units
                         Total Housing                4,053 units                  4,058 units
                         Commercial                   550,000 sq. ft.              550,000 sq. ft.
Estuary                  One Family Housing           342 units                    1,120 units
                         Two Family Housing           369 units                    555 units
                         Total Housing                711 units                    1,675 units
                         Commercial                   125,000 sq. ft.              137,000 sq. ft.
                         Business Park                876,000 sq. ft.              1,558,000 sq. ft.
Bay Farm Island          One Family Housing           4,539 units                  5,194 units
                         Two Family Housing           52 units                     52 units
                         Total Housing                4,591 units                  5,246 units
                         Commercial                   64,000 sq. ft.               64,000 sq. ft.
                         Business Park                1,135,000 sq. ft.            5,220,000 sq. ft.
Total                    One Family Housing          14,863 units                  17,481 unitsa
                         Two Family Housing          15,704 units                  16,215 unitsa
                         Total Housing               30,567 units                  33,696 units
                         Commercial                  2,237,000 sq. ft.             2,817,000 sq. ft.
                         Business Park               2,011,000 sq. ft.             6,910,000 sq. ft.
Commercial includes retailing, services and business and professional offices with the exception of
Harbor Bay Business Park where the support retail is included under Business Park. This table does not
include manufacturing, distribution, and office space in general and light industrial areas.
a Up to 325 low cost housing units may be built in Alameda as housing as replacement housing for the
low cost units lost when Buena Vista Apartments were converted to market- rate housing in 1998. Some
or all of these replacement units may be located at one or more the mixed-use sites, or in any area of the
City where residential units are permitted.
Chapter 2                                        -9-                                      Land Use Element
                TABLE 2-7: ALAMEDA POINT BUILDOUT, 2000-2020
                                     Civic      Inner                  West                       Alameda
                                                           Marina                  NW
Land Use Categories        Units     Core       Harbor                 Neighbor-                  Point
                                                           (AP3)                   Territories
                                     (AP1)      (AP2)                  hoods                      Total
Lt.Industry/Business       sq.ft.    740,000    400,000    0           0           0              1,140,000
Park/Office
Industrial/Warehousing     sq.ft.    277,500    76,500     76,500      0           0              430,500
Marina-Related             sq.ft.    0          0          44,250      0           0              44,250
Industry
Civic/Institutional        sq.ft.    100,000    01         0           30,0001     0              130,0001
Buildings
Commercial                 sq.ft.    52,000     0          0           52,000      0              104,000
Visitor-Serving            sq.ft.    0          0          130,000     0           0              130,000
Recreation/Commercial
Golf                       sq.ft.    0          0          0           0           26,000         26,000
Clubhouse/Conference
Facilities
Sports Complex             acres     40         0          0           0           17             57
Golf Course                acres     0          0          0           0           214            214
Marina slips               slips     0          0          530         0           0              530
Live Aboards               slips     0          0          53          0           0              53
Low Density                units     0          0          0           50          0              50
Residential
Medium Density             units     8632       0          525         490         0              1,878
Residential
Hotel/Conference           rooms     0          0          300         0           300            600
Center
  1. Does not include square footage for Alameda Unified School District.
  2. Does not include 210 units of senior housing to be provided in the former Bachelor Officers Quarters.
  NOTE: This table represents the maximum build-out for Alameda Point. While development intensities
  have been assigned to each Planning Area, the development increments can be moved from one Planning
  Area to another to optimize development opportunities.
  ABAG (Projections '90) expects the number of jobs in Alameda to increase
  from 38,700 estimated in 1990 to 47,700 in 2005, a gain of 9,000 jobs in 15
  years. If buildout and full occupancy of the nonresidential space summarized
  in Table 2-2 and Table 2-4 were to be reached by 2010, Alameda would add
  18,600 jobs. The ABAG projection includes an unstated assumption about
  employment at Alameda NAS. The estimate of total future employment
  included in the General Plan is based on an assumption that the number of jobs
  in space available in 1990 will remain constant, and that job growth will result
  from increases in nonresidential space. Because most of the space will be
  business park/office, the average density will be one employee per 300 square
  feet of gross floor area.
  Chapter 2                                      - 10 -                                 Land Use Element
Recognizing the transportation impacts that can result from a land use pattern
that prevents many workers from living near their work, state law requires
cities and counties to zone sufficient land for residential use in relation to
nonresidential use. Jobs/housing balance is often quantified by comparing the
number of employed residents in a community with the number of jobs
available in the same community. Balance tends to minimize travel, although
if local employees cannot afford or do not desire local housing, there may be
long commutes for many residents and employees.
ABAG estimates that in 1990 the ratio of Alameda jobs to employed residents
of Alameda is .95. (38,720 jobs; 40.800 employed residents). Assuming the
52.6 percent of residents will hold jobs at build-out, the ratio will jump to 1.34
(57,300; 42,850 employed residents. The bulk of the employment gain (74
percent) will result from buildout of Harbor Bay Business Park under
entitlements that pre-date revision of the General Plan. Without Harbor Bay
Business Park, buildout would result in a jobs-to-employed-residents ratio of
1:1.
2.4                  RESIDENTIAL AREAS
Alameda is primarily a residential community; 71 percent of employed
residents commute to jobs outside the city. All streets on the Main Island
except Webster Street are at least partly residential streets. Central location in
the region, a good climate, and the sense of identity provided by surrounding
water have kept residential demand strong.
This section should be read in conjunction with the Housing Element, adopted
in 1989 and published separately, which addresses housing need and includes a
five-year program to preserve and increase the supply of housing.
Guiding Policies: Residential Areas
2.4.a     Maintain and enhance the residential environment of Alameda's
          neighborhoods.
Chapter 2                            - 11 -                           Land Use Element
 Single family
 Residential
 Homes
2.4.b To the extent feasible, conserve housing located in areas that have been
          zoned for commercial or industrial use.
2.4.c     Where a suitable residential environment can be created, give priority
          to housing on land to be developed or redeveloped in order to meet the
          quantified objectives of the Housing Element.
2.4.d Limit residential development to one family detached and two family
          dwellings, in accord with the provisions of Measure A. Up to 325 low
          cost units may be built in Alameda as multifamily housing as
          replacement housing for the low cost units lost when Buena Vista
          Apartments were converted market-rate housing in 1988. Some or all of
          these replacement units may be located at one or more of the mixed-use
          sites, or in any area of the City where residential units are permitted.
          Although no apartments other than replacement units have been
          approved in Alameda since passage of initiative Measure A in 1973, in
          1990 less than half of all existing units are single-family dwellings.
2.4.e     Expand housing opportunities for households in all income groups.
          See Housing Element Policies B.1 (Section 8 Rental Assistance) and
          C.1 (Affordable Housing Program Ordinance).
2.4.f     Protect and restore Alameda's outstanding residential architecture of all
          periods and styles.
          See also City Design Element, Section 3.3, Architectural Resources.
Chapter 2                               - 12 -                          Land Use Element
2.4.g     Minimize through-traffic on minor residential streets.
          See policies 4.1.a and 4.1.i.
2.4.h     Control nonresidential development on sites adjoining residential
          neighborhoods to minimize nuisances.
2.4.i     Encourage the inclusion of family child care homes in residential areas
          and child care centers in major residential and commercial
          developments with special consideration to areas or developments
          convenient to transit, community centers, and schools.
Implementing Policies: Residential Areas
2.4.j     Schedule hearings to consider amendments to the Zoning Map that
          would reclassify predominantly residential areas zoned for
          nonresidential use to bring the Zoning Map into consistency with the
          General Plan Diagram.
2.4.k     Include a specified minimum number of residential units in appropriate
          Specified Mixed Use areas.
          This policy ensures that housing will be included in mixed-use
          development proposals. Other uses also could be required or some
          Specified Mixed Use areas could be developed exclusively for housing
          at the discretion of the developer. See Section 2.6.
2.4.l     Explore the possibility of developing a small portion of the Alameda
          Beltline railyard near Webster Street into a residential neighborhood.
          Development here could only occur after negotiations with the owner.
          Housing would relate to proposed greenway and Island Auto Movie
          site. See policies 2.6.a and 6.1.g
2.4.m Preserve historic districts and buildings of architectural significance.
          See policies 3.3.a and 3.3.b in City Design Element and policy 5.6.a in
          Open Space and Conservation Element and the 1980 Historic
          Preservation Element.
2.4.n     Give priority for public open space and other public improvements to
          neighborhoods determined to have a shortage relative to the rest of the
          city.
2.4.o     Explore the feasibility of providing definitions and identifying
          appropriate locations for congregate housing and single room
          occupancy (SRO) hotels as part of the comprehensive revision of the
          Zoning Ordinance.
2.4.p     Amend the Zoning Ordinance and zoning map to be consistent with
          Measure A, as necessary.
Chapter 2                               - 13 -                        Land Use Element
2.4.q Require that all new development pay appropriate development impact
          fees.
2.5                  RETAIL BUSINESS AND SERVICES
Convenient and pleasant shopping is important to residents. Because shopping
districts are prominent visual features and major destinations, their appearance
and quality influence how people feel about their community. Retail
businesses are essential to the City's fiscal health.
 Webster Street,
 Croll’s Tavern
A Strategic Plan Committee appointed by the City Council in 1988 gave
Alameda a "C" for retail shopping, and conducted a survey of issues that
identified "improved shopping/more convenient shopping" as a major need and
opportunity. A question is how much more business can be attracted to
Alameda, which is out of the way for nonresidents and does not have a large
enough population to support large department stores or high-volume
discounters. Three sources of increased sales will be: new residents,
nonresidents attracted to restaurants and boating-related businesses, and the
rising per capita disposable income of existing residents. Improved
merchandising can capture sales made to Alamedans at off-Island locations.
In an on-going effort to ensure the General Plan remains current, the City
undertook a review of retail policies and strategies that included several
community forums in 2003. The 2004 Citywide Retail Policy Report
recommended additions and modifications to the General Plan to refine and
expand existing policy. The Report evaluated existing policy and suggested
Chapter 2                            - 14 -                         Land Use Element

the consideration of additional policies and implementing policies around retail
design and development. In 2008, the General Plan was amended to
incorporate the major policy recommendations from the 2004 Citywide Retail
Policy Report and amend the policies as necessary to reflect current Alameda
goals and priorities for Alameda’s retail business areas.
Guiding Policies: Retail Business and Services
2.5.a     Provide enough retail business and services space to enable Alameda to
          realize its full retail sales potential and provide Alameda residents with
          the full range of retail business and services.
          Many Alameda residents travel to neighboring jurisdictions to find the
          retail and businesses services they need. This results in a loss of retail
          sales tax to other cities that is needed to fund City of Alameda services
          and facilities, such as police, fire, and recreational services, and it
          results in additional traffic at the City’s limited number of Estuary
          crossings.
2.5.b     Revitalize Alameda's historic Main Street business districts on Park
          Street and Webster Street while maintaining their small-city scale and
          character.
          The Main Street Business Districts on Park Street and Webster Street
          provide the primary concentration of specialty shops and a wide range
          of retail sales, services and entertainment uses to meet community-wide
          market demands. These districts are pedestrian-oriented districts with
          historical patterns of development that limit building form and limit the
          ability of individual businesses to provide off-street parking. The work
          of the Alameda Main Street Project is evident in both districts. The
          Park Street Historic District is on the National Register of Historic
          Places.
2.5.c     Continue to support and promote Park Street as Alameda’s downtown,
          the entertainment, cultural, social and civic center of the City, by
          providing a wide variety of commercial, retail, cultural, professional
          and governmental services.
2.5.d     Continue to support and promote Webster Street as the shopping,
          dining, entertainment, and community service center for present and
          future residents west of the West End.
2.5.e     Discourage offices from occupying ground floor space suitable for
          retail within the Main Street business districts and the Neighborhood
          business districts.
          Interruptions to the continuity of retail frontage decrease pedestrian
          traffic and diminish the synergy essential to a successful retail district.
          However in some cases, office uses may be appropriate on side streets
Chapter 2                                 - 15 -                       Land Use Element

          or in particular buildings that are not able to successfully attract retail
          tenants. Currently, a conditional use permit is required for any office
          use proposed on the ground floor in the Main Street or Neighborhood
          business districts.
2.5.f     Encourage continuing improvements to the Alameda Towne Center,
          formerly known as South Shore Center, and other shopping centers.
          Alameda Towne Center attracts both Alamedans and customers from a
          larger trade area. The original design turned its back on the Bay and
          devoted little attention to landscaping. New development should take
          advantage of Bay view, and landscaping should be appropriate to the
          scale of the buildings.
2.5.g Maintain neighborhood business districts for small stores that attract
          mainly pedestrian traffic and can be acceptable neighbors for nearby
          residents.
          The 17 compact corner neighborhood business districts, 10 of them at
          former Red Train stations, are important components of the City's
          traditional, historic, pedestrian-scaled ambience. They provide retail
          sales and personal services primarily for the surrounding residential
          areas. The neighborhood districts usually have little or no off-street
          parking, so neighborhood business district businesses must rely mainly
          on customers who walk from their homes.
2.5.h Consider amendments to the Municipal Code to encourage mixed use
          development including retention and addition of housing, childcare
          centers, and community meeting rooms and services in retail areas.
          Housing provided above retail space or on the rear half of parcels can
          add patrons and expand housing opportunities, provided tenants accept
          an environment in which commerce has priority. The Business and
          Waterfront Improvement Project can provide actions and financing to
          facilitate affordable housing where appropriate in commercial
          districts.
2.5.i     Support, encourage and foster new retail development to serve the West
          End of Alameda.
2.5.j     Maximize opportunities for retail development at Alameda Point to
          support creation of a mixed use, transit oriented community at Alameda
          Point as envisioned in the Alameda Point General Plan policies.
2.5.k Pursue and encourage new retail development that is consistent with
          the retail policies of the General Plan and Economic Development
          Strategic Plan; primarily serves the community or addresses a high
          priority local retail or service need; and will not have a significant long
Chapter 2                                - 16 -                         Land Use Element
          term deleterious effects on existing retail areas and/or the local
          economy.
2.5.l     New commercial/retail development along the waterfront should be
          consistent with best practices for waterfront-oriented development
          including providing waterfront public access, attractive architectural
          elevations facing the street and the water, and where possible, uses that
          will activate the waterfront and support public access to the waterfront.
Implementing Policies: Retail Business and Services
2.5.m Implement the 2005 Webster Street Strategic Plan.
          The 2005 Webster Street Business District Strategic Plan includes a
          series of retail development, marketing, parking, and public
          improvement recommendations which serve as a guide for the
          revitalization of Webster Street.
2.5.n     To maintain the historic urban form and character of Park Street and
          Webster Street business districts, limit building heights on Park Street
          and Webster Street to three stories above grade, measuring 35 to 40
          feet, depending on roof configuration. Parking structures are to be
          limited by height only, regardless of the number of parking levels.
          See Policy 3.4.d and 3.3.h in the City Design Element. Current zoning
          (1990) permits 100-foot buildings inconsistent with small-city
          character in some areas. Zoning text revisions should be written to
          avoid nonconforming status for the small number of existing buildings
          that would not conform to the new height limit.
2.5.o     Protect residential areas adjacent Retail Business Districts by
          discouraging conversion of residential structures in adjacent residential
          zones for retail, commercial, or business service use.
2.5.p     Limit the size of stores in Neighborhood Business Districts in order to
          avoid traffic and parking demand inconsistent with residential
          character.
          To avoid transforming pedestrian-scale business districts into auto-
          oriented shopping centers, businesses that outgrow the existing small
          retail spaces should be encouraged to find sites elsewhere in Alameda
          where adequate off-street parking can be provided. Where only small
          stores are permitted, a lower ratio of parking spaces to floor area than
          is required in larger commercial areas may be reasonable.
2.5.q     To maintain the historic character of a retail district and support
          General Plan policies encouraging trip reduction, transit-first, support
          for alternative modes of transportation, and minimize overflow parking
          in the neighborhoods consider reduced off-street parking requirements
Chapter 2                               - 17 -                          Land Use Element
          for proposed projects or alternative methods of providing parking on-
          and off-site, including payment of in lieu fees for transit or the
          provision of off-site public parking.
          The Alameda Municipal Code currently requires a minimum of five off-
          street parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of new retail space,
          which exceeds the recommendations of the Metropolitan
          Transportation Commission for urban shopping districts and the
          findings of the Institute of Transportation Studies.
2.5.r     Plan for multilevel and shared parking to serve the intensively
          developed retail segments of Park and Webster streets. Encourage
          construction of multilevel parking and shared parking in shopping
          centers where necessary to enable them to reach full potential. Provide
          retail uses in the front portion of the parking structures’ ground floors
          where necessary to provide continuity of ground floor retail uses or to
          connect such uses where they are now separated.
2.5.s     Improve public transit service and transit facilities in retail areas.
          Transit use can be encouraged by providing bus shelters, by locating
          store entrances on the street with parking at the side and rear, and by
          charging for parking. Fees paid in lieu of providing on-site parking,
          project related transportation demand management mitigations, and/
          or parking meter revenue should be used for transit improvements,
          shopper shuttles, dial-a-ride, and/or intra-island shuttles.
2.5.t     Require that large parking areas serving shopping centers or other
          commercial uses be adequately landscaped with large-growing trees
          and that the trees be maintained in a manner that preserves and
          promotes natural growth form. To facilitate pedestrian, bicycle, and
          transit modes of transportation to and within new retail developments,
          discourage construction of new, large surface parking fields. If large
          quantities of off street parking are required to serve the development,
          parking should be woven throughout the project in smaller parking
          pods. Parking pods should not be located between the buildings and
          the public street. Parking pods should locate behind the buildings.
          Locating parking pods adjacent to the building and adjacent to the
          street should be avoided, unless not other option is available.
2.5.u Require that new retail projects be pedestrian-oriented and designed in
          a manner that is architecturally, aesthetically, and operationally
          harmonious with the community and surrounding development. Retail
          developments should include:
          1. Wide sidewalks on both sides of the street and other improvements
              to accommodate pedestrian traffic and promote strolling, window-
              shopping and sidewalk dining.
Chapter 2                                - 18 -                         Land Use Element

          2. Clearly marked and well-designed pedestrian paths and sidewalks
              with enhanced crosswalk paving and a minimum number of curb
              cuts.
          3. Well designed parking pods that allow for internal automobile
              circulation with a minimum of pedestrian automobile interface.
          4. Major new internal roads which serve as major public spaces and
              organizing features of the development should be dedicated public
              roads maintained by the project with sidewalks on both sides and a
              minimum number of curb cuts.
          5. Large-growing trees maintained in a manner that preserves and
              promotes natural form to shade parking and pedestrian areas.
          6. Street trees, Bay Friendly landscaping, pedestrian scaled street
              lighting, and street furniture, such as benches, trash receptacles,
              planters, newspaper vending machines, kiosks, and bus shelters.
          7. Facilities for bicyclists and transit users, such as bike lockers and
              racks, bus transit centers and turnouts.
          8. Well-designed public signage including street signs, directional
              signs, gateway markers, street banners, and pedestrian-oriented
              directories.
          9. Varied building facades that are well articulated, visually appealing
              at the pedestrian scale, and architecture that is site-specific and
              incorporates design themes and features that reflect Alameda’s
              unique character and history.
          10. New streets should generally provide on-street parking and provide
              for a 150 to 400 foot long block similar to the typical block lengths
              on Park Street and Webster Street. In some locations with minimum
              thru traffic, on-street parking may be removed if desired to improve
              or increase the pedestrian realm.
          11. Utility boxes and trash enclosures should be screened from public
              view and should not be located adjacent to the public right of way
              unless no other location is feasible or possible.
2.5.v     Projects within the Main Street Business Districts and in the
          Neighborhood Business Districts should be designed with attractive
          street frontages that are pleasant for pedestrians with entrances and
          storefront windows directly on the street, wherever possible. Parking
          should not be located between the buildings and the public street.
          Parking should be located behind the buildings. Locating parking
          adjacent to the building and adjacent to the street should be avoided,
          unless not other option is available.
Chapter 2                                - 19 -                         Land Use Element

2.5.x Develop a pedestrian oriented town center at Alameda Point with
          community retail shops and services in close proximity to transit, ferry,
          and other transportation facilities.
2.5.y Complete the new Park Street and Webster Street streetscape projects
          in order to improve the pedestrian environment.
2.5.z     Expand the City’s technical assistance programs to support existing
          businesses in reaching their potential and meeting local demand.
2.5 zz Establish Green Building and/or Sustainable Design standards to be
          applied to all new retail developments and major retail additions and
          remodels.
2.5.zzz Require that all new development pay appropriate development impact
          fees.
2.6                    SPECIFIED MIXED USE AREAS
Because much of the City was built before zoning, both the richness and the
problems that can result from a mixture of land uses abound. The purposes of
the Specified Mixed Use classification are to stimulate economic development,
encourage creativity, provide flexibility, and avoid monotony in development
of large sites. Guiding policies set broad limits to the use mix for each mixed-
use area and establish a minimum required housing component where
appropriate.
Eight (GPA 01-01) mixed use areas are designated. Area-specific policies
follow the descriptions.
MU1 Island Auto Movie: This largest single open site on the Main Island
          (10 acres) will be under increasing pressure to generate more rent than
          can be paid by the 1990 tenants—a drive-in movie and a flea market.
Chapter 2                              - 20 -                        Land Use Element

 Homes on
 a lagoon
MU2 Mariner Square: The combination of views of an active stretch of the
          Estuary and of Oakland, boat berths, boat sales and repair, houseboats,
          and restaurants, all in a not-too-planned cluster, make this Alameda's
          most interesting waterfront segment. The General Plan preserves this
          character from possible market pressures by limiting additions of office
          space.
MU3 Ballena Isle: Created by tidelands fill during the 1960s, the 21-acre
          City-owned site is under lease until 2029. Because the California
          Tidelands Act of 1913 requires uses to promote "commerce and
          navigation," the site cannot be used for residential development. The
          view toward San Francisco is spectacular.
MU4 Northern Waterfront, Grand Street to Willow Street: The half-mile
          stretch of Clement Avenue east of Grand serves Alameda's most
          diverse employment area. Marinas, offices, boat sales, repair and
          storage, offices, woodworking, pencil manufacturing, auto repair and
          storage, several retail stores, and the City's Bureau of Electricity are
          among the dozens of users.
MU5 Northern Waterfront, Willow Street to Oak Street: The change
          anticipated in this segment provides an opportunity for Alameda to add
          highly desirable housing, stimulate improvement of housing east of
          Oak Street that is currently zoned for commercial-industrial use, and to
          provide waterfront access and open space. Half of the north frontage of
          Clement is occupied by the Naval Reserve Training Center. Other uses
          are steel fabricating, mini-storage, a dredging equipment yard, and a
          boatyard. The four blocks on the south side of Clement Avenue are
Chapter 2                               - 21 -                         Land Use Element
          occupied by a boat storage building/yard, Thompson Field (Alameda
          High School athletic field adjoining McKinley Park), a full block of
          housing, and a 5-acre site occupied by a die-casting plant and an
          automobile service establishment.
MU6 Northern Waterfront, Grand Street to Sherman Street: This area
          of the Northern Waterfront provides an opportunity to create a lively
          waterfront, mixed-use district with residential, commercial, office,
          maritime, park, and open space uses that reflect traditional Alameda
          neighborhoods and reconnect Alameda to its waterfront. Private and
          public development proposals within the MU-6 Northern Waterfront
          area shall be consistent with the objectives and policies for the area as
          described in Chapter 10 Northern Waterfront.
MU7 CATELLUS Mixed Use Commercial District: This area of the
          former Naval Air Station provides an opportunity to create a new
          waterfront oriented, mixed-use district with residential, commercial,
          research and development, and office uses and a major new public
          waterfront park. Implementation policies, standards, and guidelines for
          private and public developments and improvements in this mixed use
          area are included in the Catellus Mixed Use Master Plan.
AP1       Alameda Point Civic Core: Located in the center of Alameda Point,
          the Civic Core encompasses much of the NAS Historic District and
          many of the historic buildings of the former Naval Air Station. The
          Civic Core is envisioned with a major emphasis on public serving and
          civic uses. Business park, office, civic, residential, public/institutional,
          parks and public open space, commercial, and other supporting uses are
          allowed within the district. (GPA 01-01)
AP2       Alameda Point Inner Harbor: The Inner Harbor is a mixed-use area
          with major emphasis on research & development and light industrial
          uses. Light industry, office and supporting retail, commercial, and
          residential uses are allowed within the district. Supporting uses should
          be focused in or around a mixed-use neighborhood center along the
          extension of Pacific Avenue, associated with patterns of use in the
          adjoining Marina district. (GPA 01-01)
AP3       Alameda Point Marina: Marine-related industry, office, commercial,
          residential, recreation, and supporting retail are allowable uses within
          the district. Uses should be structured to promote waterfront activity
          and vitality along the open space spine located along the bay. (GPA 01-
          01)
Chapter 2                               - 22 -                          Land Use Element
Guiding Policies: Specified Mixed Use Areas
2.6.a     Island Auto Movie Area: Implement a development program that
          includes housing and may include offices. Require up to 200 single-
          family residences and/or duplexes and permit up to 30,000 square feet
          of office space. (GPA 96-01)
          Across the street from both Marina Village Shopping Center and
          Independence Plaza senior housing, this site can make a significant
          contribution to Alameda's housing needs while generating less traffic
          than if developed as a business park. The program would allow mixed
          use structures, highly visible office buildings along Constitution Way,
          or all-residential development. The proposed Business and Waterfront
          Improvement Project would provide public actions to stimulate
          development of this site.
2.6.b     Mariner Square: Preserve the existing mix of water-related uses and
          add onshore live-work space. To avoid displacing water-related uses,
          office space additions are limited to 10,000 square feet, and elder
          assisted living facilities may be permitted provided they are compatible
          with the marine uses in the vicinity.
          The proposed Business and Waterfront Improvement Project would
          provide public actions to stimulate development of this site.
2.6.c     Ballena Isle: Implement a development program consisting of a hotel
          of up to four stories and 220 rooms plus conference rooms, with
          improvements and maintenance of the 6.5-acre shoreline parcel for
          public open space as a condition of development approval.
          A Ballena Isle hotel would provide first-class hotel space, now lacking,
          and would generate less traffic than a similar floor area occupied by
          offices. The shoreline parcel, now used for fishing and viewing, should
          be improved as permanent public open space. See Policy 6.1.f in the
          Parks and Recreation Element.
2.6.d     Grand to Willow Street (Northern Waterfront): Continue efforts to
          minimize industrial-residential conflicts on the south side of Clement
          Avenue where current zoning matches current use at most locations.
          Live-work space for artists and artisans would be an appropriate use in
          many cases. To ensure maintenance of a working waterfront and to
          avoid employment densities that would create heavy traffic, office and
          retail space is to be limited to approximately its current share of total
          floor area. The intent is to maintain an environment suited to the types
          of businesses now located in the area—both those that are related to the
          waterfront and those that are not.
Chapter 2                                - 23 -                        Land Use Element

          The proposed Business and Waterfront Improvement Project would
          provide public actions to stimulate development of this site.
2.6.e     Willow Street to Oak Street (Northern Waterfront): Provide for
          redevelopment of existing industrial sites for up to 300 residential
          units, treating the area north of Clement Avenue as an extension of the
          residential neighborhood to the south.
          The proposed Business and Waterfront Improvement project would
          provide public actions to stimulate development of the site.
2.6.f     (Northern Waterfront): Create a continuous shoreline access along
          the Estuary from the Miller Sweeney Bridge to the western tip of
          Alameda Point.
          See Policy 3.2.i in the City Design Element and Policy 6.1.e in the
          Parks and Recreation Element.
          Implementing Policies: Specified Mixed Use Areas
2.6.g Mariner Square: Elder assisted living facilities may be permitted,
          provided they are compatible with the marine uses in the vicinity.
2.6.h Grand to Willow Street (Northern Waterfront): Limit
          office/industrial/retail development to .5 FAR, excluding area serving
          open uses, providing shoreline access, or used for vehicular access to
          other facilities within the Specified Mixed Use area.
          The intent of this provision is to support waterfront related and non-
          waterfront related uses of the types now existing. The policy would
          prevent overbuilding that would occupy open area needed to support
          viable marine-related activities. The industrial character is not to be
          replaced by typical business park landscaping or building intensity.
2.6.i     Willow Street to Oak Street (Northern Waterfront): Rezone
          existing nonresidential parcels to a residential-industrial mixed use
          district that would allow industrial use not more intense and not
          occupying more floor area than the 1990 use or residential development
          consistent with Measure A.
          Existing industry would not become nonconforming under zoning
          regulations, but could not expand in this area. Residential
          development would occur where a developer has a site large enough to
          create a residential environment. Uses would change only in accord
          with the plans and schedules of landowners.
Chapter 2                               - 24 -                         Land Use Element
2.7                    OFFICES
Offices are located in the business districts, in two administrative-professional
areas on Willow Street, and in high-density residential areas (R-5 and R-6
zoning districts). Office users offer a variety of accounting, insurance, real
estate, law and health-related services to Alameda residents and businesses.
Current (1990) zoning regulations permit offices in the Administrative-
Professional District, the R-6 Hotel Residential District, and in the industrial
districts. Offices are a conditional use in the R-5 District and in the C-1 and C-
2 districts if at ground level within the front half of the building floor space.
The mapped A-P districts are fully developed with offices and Alameda
Hospital.
Large offices are attracted to the business parks and small offices locate in the
Pacific Shops area north of Clement Avenue, the R-6 area near City Hall or in
the R-5 areas on Lincoln, Santa Clara, and Central avenues east of Grand or
between Webster and Eighth streets.
The issue is whether new administrative and professional office space should
continue to displace housing, or be limited to business parks or to upper floors
and neighborhood or community business districts.
Guiding Policies: Offices
2.7.a     Provide ample space for local-serving office by encouraging
          construction of offices on second and third floors over retail space.
          As Alameda nears residential buildout, demand for additional office
          space to serve residents will be moderate. New and refurbished space
          in the business districts can meet the need and would enhance both the
          small city character and the economic vitality of Park Street and
          Webster Street. Mixed office-retail is regaining acceptance in
          California cities after an extended period of rejection by office tenants
          who felt that pure office buildings lent prestige. If conversion of
          housing to offices in residential zones is eliminated as an alternative,
          there will be additional interest in offices over stores.
          The proposed Business and Waterfront Improvement Project would
          provide public actions and financing to stimulate the provision of new
          and refurbished upper floor office space in the business districts.
2.7.b     Do not permit offices in residential areas designated on the General
          Plan Diagram.
          Dispersing local-serving offices in existing higher-density residential
          areas would reduce housing opportunity and residential amenity.
Chapter 2                               - 25 -                         Land Use Element
          Without such a policy, market economics would result in substantial
          office intrusion into R-5 zones. The area adjoining City Hall used for
          offices and designated for continued office use on the General Plan
          Diagram (as on the CLUP and the Zoning Map) is less attractive for
          office developers than the R-5 areas. The reason is that there are few
          remaining one -family homes and the cost of acquiring apartment
          buildings to create office sites is high.
Implementing Policies: Offices
2.7.c     Revise zoning regulations to preclude approval of offices in areas
          designated for residential use on the General Plan Diagram.
2.7.d Assist owners of earthquake safe retail structures in Park and Webster
          Street Business District to render 2nd and 3rd floor office or residential
          uses accessible to the disabled. Extend the same assistance to owners of
          unreinforced masonry structures as they begin measures to bring the
          structures to life-safe status.
          The proposed Business and Waterfront Improvement Project would
          provide public actions and financing to facilitate these structural
          improvements.
2.7.e     Plan for multilevel parking to serve the office uses located within the
          intensely developed retail segments of Park Street and Webster Street.
2.7.f     Require that all new development pay appropriate development impact
          fees.
2.8       BUSINESS PARKS AND I NDUSTRIAL AREAS
Research and development, manufacturing, and distribution jobs are located
both in business parks and in traditional industrial areas along the city's
Northern Waterfront. Industrial tenants range from software and
biotechnology firms to lumber and oil handling, boatbuilding, and steel
fabrication. The distinction between light and heavy industry is increasingly
blurred as air quality regulations control emissions. Alameda's heavy
industries process bulky items, need rail and water access, and use large and
sometimes noisy equipment. Light industries, some of which have the
characteristics of offices, generate more traffic per acre during peak hours.
There are five business-industrial areas:
Harbor Bay Business Park: The approved development plan will add 4.1
million square feet of office and research and development space, plus a
conference hotel and retail space site. Handsome, generously landscaped one-
Chapter 2                                - 26 -                        Land Use Element
 and two-story buildings provide 1.1 million (1990) of the ultimate 5.2 million
 square feet that will house 17,300 or more employees. Highrise buildings, 100
 feet as of right and 156 feet subject to discretionary review, can be built at the
 business park.
 Marina Village: This 205-acre mixed use project on the site of the former
 Bethlehem Shipyard will include 1.3 million square feet of office-research and
 development space and 4,300 jobs. The project was 71 percent complete in
 1990. Business park development near the Posey Tube, while not a part of the
 Marina Village project, is of similar character.
Marina Village
 Alameda Gateway: The City owns about half of this 35-acre site of the
 former Todd Shipyard at the north end of Main Street, which is designated Port
 Priority by the Seaport Plan. A 1987 Development Agreement between the
 City and the lessor and owner of the remaining portion of the site extends to
 2034, and notes that uncertainties about a turning basin proposed by the U.S.
 Army Corps of Engineers at the urging of the Port of Oakland make planned
 development zoning impractical. Current tenants have short-term leases, and
 are marine-related or other types of businesses needing warehouse or office
 space. The developer projects an addition of 263,000 square feet of business
 park-warehouse space and a total of 800 jobs at buildout.
 Clement Avenue; Blanding Avenue: East of Grand Street, marine-related
 businesses, miscellaneous manufacturing, and offices line Clement Avenue. A
 700-foot stretch of Estuary frontage on Blanding Avenue east of Park Street is
 occupied by industry, half of which is marine-related.
 Chapter 2                             - 27 -                        Land Use Element
 Guiding Policies: Business Parks and Industrial Areas
 2.8.a     Support development of Harbor Bay Business Park consistent with
           existing approvals and agreements.
           The quality and size of this project enable it to make a major
           contribution to the identity of Alameda and to the economic health of
           the East Bay.
 2.8.b      Maintain existing and potential bulk cargo seaport capacity consistent
            with the Seaport Plan prepared by the Metropolitan Transportation
            Commission and the Bay Conservation and Development Commission
Harbor Bay
Business Park
  2.8.c Support continued operation of manufacturing and distribution
           industries using seaport and rail facilities.
           These businesses are efficiently located for employee access and for
           receiving and shipping bulky goods. They provide scarce blue-collar
           job opportunities and contribute about half as much traffic per acre as
           offices. This Plan supports their long-term presence. (GPA 99-01)
  2.8.d Continue working to eliminate residential-industrial conflicts.
           Where there is agreement that a boundary is firm, it is reasonable to
           expect development approvals to require developers to pay for
           improvements that mitigate conflicts.
 2.8.e     Maintain maritime character where the Northern Waterfront is to
           remain in industrial use.
 Chapter 2                               - 28 -                       Land Use Element
          Specified Mixed Use Area development programs in Policies 2.6.b,
          2.6.d and 2.6.i provide safeguards against displacement of water-
          related industries by offices or other commercial development.
2.8.f     Encourage major employers to contribute towards child care facilities
          and/or programs to help attract and maintain a productive work force.
Implementing Policies: Business Parks and Industrial Areas
2.8.g     Revise zoning regulations to remove cumulative provisions that permit
          all uses except housing in industrial areas.
          This policy may be critical to preservation of the sea-rail link and the
          existing industries that use it. If zoning regulations in force in 1990 are
          not revised, a strong demand for office space or waterfront hotels could
          suddenly displace industry.
          If future economic conditions warrant a major change from the
          designated industrial use, the City of Alameda should initiate revision
          of the General Plan.
2.8.h     Review zoning regulation performance standards and revise if
          necessary to improve equity and enforceability.
          Current (1990) regulations permit uses from which "noise, smoke, dust,
          noxious fumes and gases, glare, heat and vibration are confined to the
          premises or held to volumes, intensities and levels at the perimeters of
          individual properties which are no greater than those in the general
          area. This does not meet regional standards and cannot be effectively
          enforced.
2.8.i     Require that all new development pay appropriate development impact
          fees.
2.9                    FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FACILITIES
Three sites are in use: the U.S. Coast Guard (Coast Guard Island), the Naval
Reserve Training Center on Clement Avenue, and the Federal Center on
McKay Avenue. The City and the Federal agencies consult on development
issues, but the City has no power to regulate development on Federal sites.
However, the City does have the opportunity to evaluate environmental
impacts of any proposed development. (Text associated with Naval Air Station
and the Naval Supply Center, Oakland were deleted pursuant to GPA 99-05
and GPA 01-01) (Text associated with Naval Air Station and the Naval Supply
Center, Oakland were deleted pursuant to GPA 99-05 and GPA 01-01)
After nearly 60 years as a military post, the United States Navy closed the
Alameda Naval Air Station (NAS) and the Fleet Industrial Supply Center
Chapter 2                               - 29 -                          Land Use Element
(FISC) in 1997. In 2001, the FISC property was conveyed to the City, which
is transferring the property to the Catellus Development Corporation over time
for the development consistent with an approved master plan for the area.
Chapter 9 of the General Plan is the Alameda Point Element, which contains
policies relating to the reuse and redevelopment of the NAS property, known
as Alameda Point. (GPA 01-01)
Policies in other parts of the Plan concerning Federal government facilities are
found in the Open Space and Conservation Element, Section 5.1 and in the
City Design Element, Section 3.2.
Guiding Policies: Federal Government Facilities
2.9a      Deleted: (GPA 99-05)
2.9.b Maintain close communication with the United States Coast Guard
          regarding future planning and development of facilities on Coast-Guard
          Island.
2.10                   MANAGEMENT OF CITY -OWNED LAND
In addition to public buildings, parks, utilities, and right-of-way, the City of
Alameda owns about 100 acres of submerged land, tideland, and upland that
are not currently being used for a public purpose. Most of the larger holdings,
including City-owned portions of Alameda Gateway, Encinal Terminals, and
Ballena Isle, have leases and options that run until 2029.
Guiding Policies: City-owned Land
2.10.a Establish long-range management policies for City-owned real property
          based on comparative evaluation of potential for public use and
          enjoyment, public- or joint-venture enterprise development, or lease for
          development.
          A Port Authority Task Force appointed by the City Council in 1989 has
          discussed steps that could lead to more profitable asset management by
          the City as part of the Task Force's investigation of ways to ensure
          preservation and development of marine/harbor facilities in the public
          interest.
2.10.b Investigate and pursue potential opportunities to acquire underused
          State or Federal property in Alameda.
2.10.c Stop the trend toward private use of public property.
Chapter 2                              - 30 -                         Land Use Element
          This policy from the 1979 CLUP refers to obstruction of rights-of-way
          that provide access to the shoreline and to structures that encroach
          beyond the U.S. bulkhead or pierhead lines.
Implementing Policies: City-owned Land
2.10.d At locations where it is infeasible to provide public access to the
          shoreline, or allow public use or publicly owned shoreline, such as
          along the Tidal Canal, continued private use should be permitted only if
          mitigation is provided by improving public shoreline access elsewhere
          in the City.
2.10.e Support completion of the Bayview Shoreline Preserve.
Chapter 2                              - 31 -                         Land Use Element
  PARKS AND RECREATION, SHORELINE
6 ACCESS, SCHOOLS AND CULTURAL
  FACILITIES ELEMENT
  This element establishes policies for facilities that deserve more attention than they would
  receive if they were included in the Land Use or Open Space elements. Parks are especially
  valued in Alameda because existing acreage is small relative to population, and
  opportunities for expansion of the park system are few. Improved shoreline access has
  accompanied recent development, and additional opportunities to take advantage of the
  island setting are available. Acquisition of the site for the new Main Library and support for
  an arts center demonstrate interest in enriching the cultural life of Alameda.
  6.1                  PARKS AND RECREATION
  Five categories of park and recreational open space exist in Alameda:
  Neighborhood Parks are mainly for the use of elementary school age children, but also
  provide landscaped settings for picnicking or passive use by all ages, and greenery in a
  dense city. The City's dozen existing neighborhood parks range from 1 to 5 acres.
  Community Parks have adult facilities such as lighted baseball diamonds and tennis courts,
  but also function as neighborhood parks. The four community parks range from 6 to 15
  acres.
  Community open space consists of special purpose facilities such as the Model Airplane
  Field (1 acre) and the Shoreline Park on Bay Farm Island (22 acres).
         Chapter 6                                     6-1
Greenways are landscaped linear open spaces with paths for walking, jogging, and biking.
On Bay Farm Island they are owned and maintained by homeowners' associations; the
General Plan proposes a City-owned greenway on the Main Island.
Region-serving Park and Recreation Facilities include Crown Memorial Beach and the
Alameda Municipal Golf Courses.
Table 6-1 presents an inventory of existing parks and open space, and Table 6-2 lists five
additional sites proposed by the General Plan. Existing and projected park acreage per
1,000 residents appears in Table 6-3.
California cities typically strive to meet standards calling for 3 to 6 or more acres of
neighborhood and community park space per 1,000 residents, but this range is beyond reach
at this stage of Alameda's development. The 1979 CLUP called for 4 acres in newly
developed areas, a standard that will be met on Bay Farm Island if school open space is
included in the calculation. Counting school open space (Table 6-5) (Text related to NAS
Alameda deleted pursuant to (GPA 01-01), there are 2.0 acres of community and
neighborhood park space per 1,000 residents in 1990. The proposed parks listed in Table 6-
2 will raise the standard to 2.3 acres per 1,000 at buildout.
About 95 percent of Alameda's children live within 3/8 mile of a park, the maximum radius
for effective service as indicated by studies in other cities. The 1979 CLUP prescribed a
quarter-mile service radius for Alameda, a standard that is not met on Bay Farm Island or in
several Main Island neighborhoods.
EAST BAY REGIONAL PARK DISTRICT
Robert W. Crown Memorial State Beach is a regional shoreline jointly maintained by the
City and the East Bay Regional Parks District. EBRPD is responsible for management,
including planning and policy development. Heavy use during warm weather causes severe
congestion in the adjoining South Shore neighborhood. During revision of the General
Plan, street modifications that would limit use of Shore Line Drive were considered, but
were rejected in favor of less drastic traffic controls, such as diversion during peak periods,
that need not be a part of the General Plan.
San Leandro Bay Regional Shoreline, adjoining Alameda's East End, includes both public
recreation and habitat preservation areas. The Shoreline is contiguous to the City's former
trash disposal facility (affectionately known as Mt. Trashmore) on Doolittle Drive.
EBRPD's plans encourage integration of any future development of Alameda's San Leandro
Bay shoreline with the District's park and trail system.
       Chapter 6                                     6-2
       TABLE 6-1
       EXISTING PARKS AND OPEN SPACE, 1990
Type/Name               Acres   Planning Sector    Status(a)
Neighborhood Parks
Buena Vista               3.6   West Central           D
Franklin                  3.0   West Central           D
Godfrey                   5.4   Bay Farm Island        D
Jackson                   2.3   East End               D
Longfellow                1.1   West End               D
McKinley                  1.2   East Central           D
Neptune                   3.5   West Central           U
Parrott Mini-Park(b)      0.2   West Central           D
Rittler                   4.8   South Shore            D
Tillman                   3.5   Bay Farm Island        D
Woodstock                 4.2   West End               D
Subtotal                 32.7
Community Parks
Leydecker                 6.3   Bay Farm Island        D
Lincoln                   7.8   East End               D
Krusi                     7.9   East End               D
Washington               15.0   West Central           D
          Subtotal       37.0
Community Open Space
Boat Launches (c)        3.5    West End, Estuary      D
Bridgeview               1.5    East End               U
Harrington Soccer
Field (d)                2.0    Bay Farm Island        U
Mastick Senior Center    1.0    West Central           D
Model Airplane Field     1.3    Bay Farm Island        D
Portola Triangle         2.3    South Shore            D
Shoreline                22.0   Bay Farm Island        D/U
Subtotal                 32.6
              Chapter 6                        6-3
Type/Name                                      Acres              Planning Sector       Status(a)
Regional Park/Recreation Facility
Crown Memorial Beach                            80.0              South Shore                D
Municipal Golf Course                          350.0              Bay Farm Island            D
Subtotal                                       430.0
TOTAL                                          532.3
Notes:        See Table 6-5 for school open space.
              (a) D = developed, U = undeveloped, D/U = partially developed.
              (b) Alameda Housing Authority park.
              (c) Encinal = approximately 2 acres; Grand Street = approximately 1.5 acres.
              (d) Previously Oleander Park.
                                                     TABLE 6-2
                                       PROPOSED PARKS, 1990-2010
Name                          Acres                   Planning Subarea                   Type
Mt. Trashmore                 20.0                    Bay Farm Island                    Community Park
Estuary Park                  10.0                    East Central                       Community Park
Ballena Isle                  6.5                     West End                           Community Park
Greenways (Railroad
right-of-way)                 15.0                    West End                           Greenway
Park Street Pocket            0.5                     Park Street                        Community Open Space
                        Total 52.0
         Chapter 6                                                6-4
                                           TABLE 6-3
                       PARK ACREAGE PER 1,000 HOUSEHOLD RESIDENTS:
                                      1990 and BUILDOUT
                                Year               Increment  Year
                                1990               (Proposed) 2010
Neighborhood Parks               32.7               0.0        32.7
Community Parks                  37.0              36.5        73.5
School Open Space                70.0               0.0        70.0
         (Table 6-5)
Total                           139.7              52.0       176.2
Household Population            69,200                        76,400
Acres/1,000 Household Residents 2.0                           2.3
                 Chapter 6                              6-5
Guiding Policies: Parks and Recreation
6.1.a  Expand Alameda's park system.
6.1.b  Continue cooperation with the Alameda Unified School District to achieve optimum
       joint use of limited school open space and park space.
6.1.c  Pursue park and open space grant opportunities and cooperative agreements with
       local, regional, and state agencies for expansion of the City's park and open space
       system.
6.1.d  Promote the development and retention of private open space to compensate for the
       shortage of public open space.
Implementing Policies: Parks and Recreation
6.1.e  Work with property owner, Tidelands Lease holders, the Army Corp of Engineers,
       BCDC, the Coastal Conservancy, open space advocates, non-profits, and agencies,
       and to create a continuous shoreline access and park areas along the northern
       waterfront.
       Policy 2.6.f calls for a continuous shoreline access along the Estuary from the
       western tip of Alameda Point to the Miller Sweeney Bridge.                   Successful
       implementation will require that each new project approved on the waterfront
       provide public shoreline access improvements, that each new Tidelands Lease
       executed by the City attempt to provide for shoreline access and improvements
       wherever possible (some uses, such as industrial maritime uses may not be able to
       allow public access along the entire length of their frontage for safety reasons), that
       the City work closely with the Army Corp of Engineers to provide public access on
       Army Corp Lands, and that the City identify critical shoreline properties for
       acquisition. Local funding sources could include income from leases of public
       property to adjacent private property owners. Where provision of public access to
       the shoreline is infeasible, lease payments could include an amount to be used to
       provide shoreline access at another location.
6.1.f  Require development and maintenance of approximately 7 acres on Ballena Isle for
       public park and shoreline access use as a condition of approval of development of
       the remainder of the island.
       Ballena Isle is owned by the City of Alameda and is leased to a private party until
       2029. The 1979 CLUP designated the area west of Ballena Boulevard as open
       space; an adjoining half-acre is used by the public for fishing and viewing. No
       alternative site appears suitable for expansion of park land to serve the West End.
6.1.g  Prepare a park plan for Mt. Trashmore when environmental conditions indicate that
       development could occur.
       There were no restrictions in 1953 when the City placed log booms in the water to
       contain waste and began dumping. Since reclamation began, methane gas emission
      Chapter 6                                    6-6
        and settling indicate that extensive environmental analysis will be required, and
        development probably cannot occur before 2000.
6.1.h   Develop a continuous greenway, east of Main Street north of Atlantic Avenue, and
        along the general alignment of the railroad right-of-way between Webster Street and
        Sherman Street, provided that the greenway design on each parcel allows for
        connection throughout the length of greenway. (GPA 96-04)
        Long an eyesore, the 100-foot-wide strip west of Webster Street contains an
        underground utilities right-of-way that prevents building construction. Between
        Webster and Sherman, the greenway would occupy a portion of the Alameda Beltline
        Railroad yard, and could provide a buffer between residential and business park
        uses. The amount of land available for the buffer will depend on how much railroad
        yard space must be retained. The greenway should include a tree belt and paths for
        walking, running, and biking.
6.1.i   Develop a pocket park serving the Park Street Business District and the Civic
        Center.
        A half-acre with trees, benches, restrooms, and possibly a refreshment concession
        would be popular with Park Street shoppers and office workers. The pocket park
        could be within the Civic Center Specific Plan area or could be provided in
        conjunction with development of parking structures.
6.2                   SHORELINE ACCESS AND DEVELOPMENT
Boating, fishing, and hiking are important uses of the shoreline that are not covered under
the Conservation or Parks and Recreation headings.
Public boat launches and fishing piers exist on Navy land to the west of Encinal High
School (2 acres) and at the foot of Grand Street (1.5 acres). The Bay Conservation and
Development Commission (BCDC), which has regulatory jurisdiction 100 feet inland from
the line of highest tidal action, has required construction of shoreline paths along Mariner
Square, Marina Village, Park Street Landing, north of the Aeolian Yacht Club and adjacent
to the Fruitvale Bridge as conditions of approval of development projects. Public right-of-
way extends to the shoreline at 21 additional access points, which are indicated on Figure 6-
1.
MARINAS
Small boats have replaced large ships along most of the Northern Waterfront, as former
shipyards and docks have become sites for marinas. The citywide total of 3,124 berths in 11
marinas, designated as commercial recreation on the General Plan Diagram, is the largest
concentration in Northern California. With completion of Grand Marina in 1988 (362
berths), little space remains within the U.S. Pierhead Line for additional berths.
       Chapter 6                                     6-7
Scores of marina-related businesses—from small shipyards and woodworkers to yacht
brokers and manufacturers of navigational instruments—constitute a thriving sector of the
City's economy that has attained a critical mass and can expect continuing growth.
BAY TRAIL
ABAG is the lead agency for planning and implementation of a plan to create a continuous
public access corridor around San Francisco Bay, following the shoreline as closely as
possible. The trail is to circle the Alameda portion of Bay Farm Island and the Main Island,
except for the Naval Air Station, as shown in Figure 4-2. Most of the trail would consist of
existing paths or sidewalks. New multipurpose paths are planned along San Leandro Bay at
Mt. Trashmore and following former railroad rights-of-way in the West End. (See Policy
6.1.h.) A 10-foot bike lane would be cantilevered from the east side of the Bay Farm Island
Bridge.
Guiding Policies: Shoreline Access and Development
6.2.a   Maximize visual and physical access to the shoreline and to open water.
        Despite recent progress in securing public access, opportunities are still very limited
        on the north and east shorelines of the Main Island. At marinas where access to the
        shoreline is available, long floating piers and a forest of masts still may block visual
        access to open water. Along much of the Northern Waterfront where there are no
        marinas, the bulkhead and pierhead lines are close together, so access to open water
        is assured.
       Chapter 6                                    6-8

6.2.b  Regulate development on City-owned shoreline property to maximize public use
       opportunities.
       Although the City's shoreline properties are under long-term lease, existing terms
       are sufficiently favorable to the leaseholders to enable development to include
       substantial public amenities and still be profitable. Unless the City regains full
       control of its shoreline holdings, this policy appears to be the best available
       response to the CLUP policy calling for stopping the trend toward private use of
       publicly owned shoreline.
6.2.c  Ensure marina operating standards that prevent degradation of water quality.
       See also policies within Section 5.1 of the Open Space and Conservation Element.
6.2.d  Through design review of shoreline property, give consideration to views from the
       water.
Implementing Policies: Shoreline Access and Development
6.2.e  Remove impediments to enjoyment of shoreline access where legal access exists.
       Access points that are intentionally blocked or merely allowed to become overgrown
       prevent public use of public property.
6.2.f  Cooperate with property owners adjoining shoreline access points to ensure that
       public use does not cause unnecessary loss of privacy or unwarranted nuisance.
6.2.g  Prepare a Shoreline Access Plan in consultation with BCDC for areas where
       development proposals are expected to provide opportunities to improve or extend
       access.
6.2.h  Require shoreline access where appropriate as a condition of development approval
       regardless of whether development occurs within the area of BCDC regulation.
       Access should be provided even if there is no development within 100 feet of the
       water's edge.
6.2.i  Require off-site access as a mitigation when public access on-site is infeasible.
6.2.j  Coordinate efforts with the School District in obtaining shoreline access at Paden
       School, Lincoln School, and Encinal High School.
6.2.k  In cooperation with the U.S. Coast Guard and governmental agencies concerned
       with water quality, continue to maintain strict monitoring of compliance with
       environmental regulations by boat users.
       See policies within Section 5.1 of the Open Space and Conservation Element.
6.2.l  Seek grants for improvement of Bay Trail segments.
      Chapter 6                                    6-9
        Coordination of implementation efforts will be handled by the City of Alameda
        Department of Public Works and the local advisory group to the Bay Trail Project
        for the East Bay Region.
6.3                  SCHOOLS
Alameda Unified School District (AUSD) operates nine elementary schools (grades K-5),
three middle schools (grades 6-8), two high schools and a continuation high school (grades
9-12). As in most California school districts, enrollment grew faster than district population
during the 1980s. AUSD projections for 1990-1997 anticipate a 28-percent enrollment
increase, three quarters of which will be in grades 6 through 12. Re-opening Paden School
and completion of the new Bay Farm Island school will provide more than enough capacity
in grades K-5, and only moderate capacity increases will be needed in grades 6-12. Table 6-
4 presents enrollment data.
In 1989 Alameda voters approved $47.7 million in bonds for school rehabilitation and
seismic upgrading. Historic Alameda High School, long unavailable for school use because
it did not meet seismic standards, will be upgraded, and Encinal High School will be
expanded and refurbished. Other schools will be rehabilitated, and day care facilities will be
provided at all K-5 schools.
Buildout in accord with the General Plan will increase household population by 10 percent
above the 1990 level. Enrollment cycles can vary significantly over 20 years, making
attempts at projection potentially misleading. It appears that sufficient capacity could be
added on existing sites by shifting grade groupings or by opening closed schools.
       Chapter 6                                   6-10
                      TABLE 6-4, ALAMEDA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT:
                     EXISTING AND PROJECTED ENROLLMENT 1990-1997
   School/Grade                   Enrollment        Permanent    Projected  Percent Change
                                  (Jan. 1990)       Capacity     Enrollment (1990-1997)
                                                    (Jan. 1990)  (1997)
   Earhart/K-5                           645        550          484
   Edison/K-5                            367        420          356
   Haight/K-5                            540        532          500
   Longfellow/K-5                        538        504          500
   Lum/K-5                               482        504          500
   Miller/K-5                            467        532          500
   Otis/K-5                              431        504          356
   Paden/K-5                               0        500          500
   New Bay Farm
   Island/K-51                             0        550          484
   Washington/K-5                        454        500          500
   Woodstock/K-5                         583        560          500
   Subtotal                             4,507       5,656        5,180      15%
   Chipman/6-8                           575        650          845
   Lincoln/6-8                           622        650          840
   Wood/6-8                              625        800          750
   Subtotal                             1,822       2,100        2,435      34%
    Alameda High School                 1,232       1,700        1,700
    Encinal High School                 1,045       1,550        1,700
   Island High School                    137        200          200
   Subtotal                             2,414       3,450        3,600      49%
   TOTAL                                8,743       11,206       11,215     28%
Source: Alameda Unified School District, July 1990.
The College of Alameda, a unit of the Peralta Community College District, has space on its
site to accommodate expanded enrollment. Eleven private primary and secondary schools
enrolled 1,336 students in 1990.
Most of Alameda's school sites reflect 19th-century urban school standards. Only Encinal,
Wood, Lincoln, Earhart and the new Bay Farm Island school have acreage that approaches
post-World War II standards. The rest have small playgrounds, minimal athletic facilities
and lack greenery. Nevertheless, schools provide important open space play areas for
neighborhoods, as discussed in Section 6.1, above; those areas are counted towards meeting
1 Also known as Village 4 school.
        Chapter 6                                           6-11
the City's parks standard. (See Table 6-3.) Table 6-5 provides an inventory of acreage for
school sites and school open space.
Guiding Policies: Schools
6.3.a   Support and cooperate with the Alameda Unified School District in its efforts that
        extend beyond classroom education, including:
        Making open space and recreation facilities available for community use;
        Offering and providing space for child care; and
        Contributing to the visual quality of Alameda and attitude of students toward their
        environment through the architecture, landscape treatment, and maintenance of the
        district's schools.
6.3.b   Support the Alameda Unified School District efforts to obtain school impact fees
        needed to maintain adequate educational facilities to serve enrollment generated by
        new development in the City.
Implementing Policy: Schools
6.3.c   Approval of residential, commercial and industrial development may be conditioned
        upon the mitigation of the impact of such development on the Alameda Unified
        School District.
      Chapter 6                                   6-12
                                TABLE 6-5, SCHOOL OPEN SPACE, 1990
                          Total               Open           Description                 Adjacent
                          Campus              Space          of School Open              City
School/Grade              Size (acres)        (acres)        Space Facilities            Park         (acres)
Alameda Unified School District
Earhart/K-5                8.7                 5.0           Playfields
Edison/K-5                 3.2                 1.4           Paved schoolyard,
                                                             landscaping
Haight/K-5                 3.8                 0.9           Paved schoolyard,
                                                              playfield
Longfellow/K-5             2.8                 1.0           Paved schoolyard             Longfellow 1.1
Lum/K-5                    4.2                 1.7           Paved schoolyard,           Rittler     4.8
                                                             landscaping
Miller/K-5                 5.0                 2.9           Paved schoolyard
Otis/K-5                   3.6                 2.8           Paved schoolyard            Krusi       7.9
          a
Paden/K-5                  4.2                 3.7           Paved schoolyard
New BayFarm                8.0                 4.0           Paved schoolyard,           Tillman     3.5
 Island                                                      landscaping
Washington/K-5             2.6                 1.4           Paved schoolyard
Woodstock/K-5              5.3                 2.5           Paved schoolyard            Woodstock   4.2
        b
Franklin                   1.2                 0.4           Paved schoolyard
          Subtotal         52.7               27.7
Chipman/6-8                4.0                 3.2           Paved schoolyard            Woodstock   4.2
Lincoln/6-8               12.0                 2.7           Paved schoolyard,
                                                             playfield
Wood/6-8                  10.1                 4.5           Schoolyard, track,          Rittler     4.8
                                                             playfields
          Subtotal         26.1               10.4
Alameda High               6.6                 1.8           Schoolyard, landscaping
Thompson Field             0                   2.3           Playfields                  McKinley    1.2
Encinal High              23.3                 9.0           Extensive athletic facilities
Island High                0.8                 0.6           Paved schoolyard
                 Subtotal              30.7                       13.7
Peralta Community College District
College of Alameda                     62.0                       19.2
          Total                       171.4                       71.0
__________________________________________________________________
                 a
Notes:             Paden School, used as an adult school, will be reopened as an elementary
                  school.
                 b
                   Franklin School is leased to Carden Redwood School (private) until 1992-93.
        Chapter 6                                                 6-13
6.4             CULTURAL FACILITIES ALAMEDA
                FREE LIBRARY
The Alameda Free Library, the fourth oldest public library in California, has three branches:
the Main Library at Santa Clara Avenue and Oak Street, the West End Branch Library on
Santa Clara Avenue at Eighth Street, and the Bay Farm Island Branch on Mecartney Road
adjacent to Leydecker Park. A Children's Library, known at its completion in 1926 as the
Boys and Girls Library, occupies a remodeled historic house behind the Main Library.
Figure 6-1 shows library locations.
In 1986, a study of space needs confirmed the critical problems of the 1903 Main Library.
In 1987, the City Council, upon recommendation of the Library Board, approved future
construction of a new Main Library building, and in 1990, the LinOaks Motel and
Apartments site at the corner of Lincoln Avenue and Oak Street was selected. The proposed
Main Library is programmed as a two-story, 45,000-square-foot facility with a partial
basement and adjacent below-grade and street-level parking. The City has applied to the
State Library for assistance with construction financing (Proposition 85) and is proceeding
with an environmental impact report on the new Main Library building. The historic Main
Library will be restored and rehabilitated for an appropriate new use.
SPACE FOR THE ARTS
The need for an arts center was strongly felt by participants in a community workshop on
the General Plan, who spoke of the richness of Alameda's artistic life and the lack of
performance, rehearsal, exhibit, and classroom facilities. Theater companies, dance troupes,
painters, sculptors, and filmmakers are continually searching for adequate space that might
most efficiently be provided in an arts center. An arts center would enhance Alameda's
cultural life and increase community awareness of arts resources.
ALAMEDA HISTORICAL MUSEUM
The Alameda Historical Museum was established in 1949 and is the official repository of
the City’s historic artifacts. It is currently located in leased space which is inadequate to
effectively house and display its collection and to enable it to conduct educational and
recreational programs for the benefit of the community. A permanent home for the museum
in a more appropriate setting would insure the continuation of an important cultural resource
that could better preserve and promote the rich history of Alameda.
Guiding Policies: Cultural Facilities
6.4.a   Design the new Main Library as an important element of a future Civic Center.
6.4.b   Encourage and support private groups in their efforts to create an arts center for
        Alameda. Encourage the use of an existing architecturally distinguished building as
        an arts center.
       Chapter 6                                      6-14

       Support could include assistance in obtaining grants, evaluation of the suitability of
       re-use of existing structures, and participation in making a site available at below-
       market cost.
6.4.c  Encourage and support the Alameda Historical Museum in its efforts to secure a
       permanent, suitable facility.
      Chapter 6                                   6-15
