                                 
                    
 CITY OF INDIAN WELLS
      GENERAL PLAN
       The City of Indian Wells
        44-950 Eldorado Drive
    Indian Wells, CA 92210-7497
Updated: November 7, 2013

                         TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.    Introduction
      A. Overview
          Community Profile                                        I A-1
          Purpose and Authority                                    I A-7
          Overview of the General Plan                             I A-8
II.   Community Development
      A. Land Use (Updated May 17, 2007)
          Introduction and Authority                               II A-1
          Organization of the Element                              II A-2
          Summary of Existing Conditions                           II A-2
          Description of the Land Use Plan                         II A-10
          Goals and Policies                                       IIA-15
          Implementation of the Land Use Element                   II A-19
      B. Housing (Updated October 15, 2009)
          Introduction and Authority                               II  B-1
          Organization of the Element                              II  B-2
          Community Profile (Summary of Existing Conditions)       II  B-7
          Assessment of the Previous Housing Program               II  B-46
          Housing Needs Assessment                                 II  B-57
          Goals and Policies                                       II  B-66
          Implementation of the Housing Element                    II  B-69
      C. Circulation (Updated October 2, 2008)
          Introduction and Authority                                II C-1
          Organization of the Element                               II C-2
          Summary of Existing Conditions                            II C-2
          Description of the Circulation Plan                       II C-14
          Goals and Policies                                        II C-32
          Implementation of the Circulation Element                 II C-35
 III.  Resource Management
       A. Conservation and Open Space (Updated March 19, 2009)
           Introduction and Authority                               III A-1
           Organization of the Element                              III A-2
           Summary of Existing Conditions                           III A-3
           Conservation and Open Space Plan                         III A-26
           Goals and Policies                                       III A-29
           Implementation of the Conservation & Open Space Element  III A-37
Table of Contents Continued
   IV.     Public Safety
          A. Community Safety
              Introduction and Authority                     IV A-1
              Organization of the Element                    IV A-2
              Summary of Existing Conditions                 IV A-2
              Goals and Policies                             IV A-13
              Implementation of the Community Safety Element IV A-16
           B. Noise
              Introduction and Authority                     IV B-1
              Organization of the Element                    IV B-1
              Summary of Existing Conditions                 IV B-2
              Description of the Future Noise Environment    IVB-10
              Goals and Policies                             IV 8-10
              Implementation of the Noise Element            IV 8-14
    V.     Glossary and Index
           A. Glossary of Terms and Index
              Introduction                                   V A-1
              Glossary of Terms                              V A-1
              Index                                          V A-27
List of Figures
Figure No.      Title                                               Page
IA-i            Regional Location Map                               IA-2
IA-2            Indian Wells General Plan Area                      IA-3
IIA-i           2006 Existing Land Uses                             IIA-4
IIA-2           Redevelopment Project Area                          IIA-6
IIA-3           Land Use/Zoning                                     IIA-li
IIB-i           Vacant Residential Property                         IIB-59
IIB-2           Affordable Housing Sites                            IIB-6S
IIC-i           General Plan Study Area                             IIC-3
IIC-2           Existing Geometry and Intersection Controls         IIC-5
IIC-3           Existing Posted Speed Limits                        IIC-6
IIC-4           Existing Average Daily Traffic (ADT)                IIC-i0
IIC-S           Existing Volume/Capacity (V/C) Ratio                IIC-13
IIC-6            Proposed RCIP Network                              IIC-16
IIC-7           Sunbus System Map                                    IIC-17
IIC-S           City of Indian Wells Truck Route Map                 IIC-iS
IIC-9           General Plan Buildout Average Daily Traffic (ADT)    IIC-19
IIC-i0           Recommended Arterial Roadway System                 IIC-20
IIC-ii           Recommended Roadway Cross-Sections                  IIC-2S
 IIC-12          General Plan Buildout Number of Through Lanes       IIC-26
 IIC-13          General Plan Buildout Volume/Capacity (V/C) Ratio   IIC-27
 IIC-14          Golf Cart Route Map                                 IIC-29
 IIC-iS          Proposed Bikeway Map                                IIC-30
 IIC-16          Recommended Bikeway Sections                        IIC-31
 IIIA-i          General Plan Area                                   IIIA-4
 IIIA-2          Parks, Recreation and Open Space Areas              IIIA-S
 IIIA-3          Soils Classification                                IIIA-14
 IIIA-4          Characteristics of Each Soil Group                  IIIA-1S
 IIIA-S          Mineral Land Classification                          IIIA-18
 IIIA-6          Open Space and Recreation Plan                       IIIA-28
 IVA-i           Regional Faults                                      IVA-4
 IVA-2           Seismic Response Zones                               IVA-S
 IVA-3           Flood Zones                                          IVA-9
  IVA-4          Emergency Evacuation Routes                          IVA-14
  IVB-i          Land Use Compatibility for Community Noise           IVB-6
  IVB-2          Calculated Noise Levels From Existing Traffic        IVB-8
  IVB-3          Existing Noise Contours                              IVB-9
  IVB-4          Area Potentially Exposed to Noise In Excess 60 DBA   IVB-ii
  IVB-S          Area Potentially Exposed to Noise in Excess 70 DBA   IVB-12
  IVB-6          General Areas Requiring Noise Analysis               IVB-16
  VA-i           Floor Area Ratios                                    VA-3
                                Chapter I: Introduction
                               IA.     OVERVIEW
Community Profile
                     Location and Setting
                     Indian Wells is a small-scale residential-resort community located within
                     the Coachella Valley in Riverside County. The City of La Quinta and the
                     City of Palm Desert, along with unincorporated areas of Riverside County,
                     adjoin the City (Figure IA-1). The current City limits encompass
                     approximately 9,240 acres, or 14.4 square miles. Primary access to the
                     City is from State Highway 111. Primary access to the region is by
                     Interstate 10. State Route 74 also provides access to the Coachella Valley
                     region from the south. Unincorporated lands to the northeast of the City
                     are included within the Indian Wells sphere of influence.
                     The sphere of influence is recognized by the Local Agency FormaticJ 1
                     Commission (LAFCO) as an area that must be considered when doing
                     long-term planning in Indian Wells, and is considered a future annexation
                     area. Indian Wells' land use regulations,however, do not apply to land
                     within the sphere of influence until such land is annexed into the City.
                     The sphere of influence area is approximately 387 acres. The General
                     Plan Area, including the sphere of influence and topographic information,
                     is identified in Figure IA-2.
                     Indian Wells is best known for its world class resorts, catering to golf and
                     tennis enthusiasts, and quality residential lifestyle. Residents of the City
                     enjoy an ideal climate, with over 330 days of sunshine each year. The
                     City's beautiful surroundings include views of the Santa Rosa and San
                     Jacinto Mountains.
                     Historical Perspective
                     The City of Indian Wells is fortunate to have its history well documented.
                     Mr. Ted Hamilton (1913-1991) authored The Legend ofIndian Wells and
                     the History of HigJn.vay 111. Ms. Carole Johnson furthered Mr.
                     Hamilton's work, and authored A Chronicle of Indian Wells.
City of Indian Wells                      lA-J                                        General Plan
                                                            Los Angeles  e San Bernardino
                                                             e                     ...______      ~
                                                                        Riverside      Palm Springs
                                                                        e
                                                                                     e .Indion Wells
                                                                                                 e    oachella
                                                                                eES...
                                                                                    CO-nd-i-dO----'   ~Salton Sea
                                •                          Area of Map          •
                                                                                  San Diego
                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                     EI Centro
                    N . T. 5 .
                                                                                                  Airport I1/1III.
          : The Lightfoot Planning Group, 1996
                                                                                                                               FIGURE
                                                                                                                               IA-1
II!                                            REGIONAL LOCATION MAP
111111111
PIIIIIII
6111P
                                                         IA-2

                                                 \ND\AN WELLS GENERAL
          : U.S.G.S. 7.5 Minute Topographic Series. La Quinta. Photorevised 1980
                                                                                      FIGURE
                                                                                      IA-2
III
\11111111
                                 INDIAN WELLS GENERAL PLAN AREA
11111111
it...
                                                                                 IA-3
I. Introduction                                                                      IA. Overview
                     All three documents were utilized for this brief discussion and should be
                     reviewed if one desires to learn more about the origins of Indian Wells.
                     Indian Wells officially became a city on July 14, 1967. At that time,
                     Indian Wells was the 16th city to incorporate in Riverside County and the
                     400th in California. It was the fourth city, after Indio, Coachella, and
                     Palm Springs, to incorporate in the Coachella Valley. The election for
                     incorporation was held on June 27, 1967 and, according to the League of
                     California Cities, had the largest percentage of approval for incorporation
                     of any city in California. The voter turnout was 87 percent of the 285
                     registered voters, with 93 percent in favor of becoming a city. At
                     incorporation, there were an estimated 855 legal residents and 585 homes.
                     The Indian Wells area was inhabited long before incorporation, however.
                     The name Indian Wells originated from a Cahuilla Indian hand-dug welt,
                     documented on the earliest maps of California prior to 1850. The original
                     well was generally located north of present day Highway 111 and east of
                     Miles Avenue. The well served as a stage station until a public well was
                     established around 1870, and remained in use until 1910. Like most
                     communities that were established in the Coachella Valley, Indian Wells'
                     origins are based on travelers' needs for water and a place to rest. Both
                     wells were destroyed by a massive flood in 1916.
                     Two of the area's first settlers were William Blair, who arrived around
                     1910, and Caleb Cook, who moved to the Indian Wells area in 1916. Mr.
                     Blair's blacksmith and ranching enterprises were soon closed due to
                     flooding and a lack of business. Mr. Cook, however, became a pioneer
                     of the date industry, establishing the first large Deglet Noor date garden
                     west of Indio. His fann was located in the area of what is now the
                     Highway 111 and Cook Street intersection.
                     The first golf course in the area was built in Palm Springs in the early
                     1950's. Soon, the area was converted from a primarily agricultural
                     community to that of a golf resort destination. In 1957, the Eldorac!,)
                     Country Club and Golf Course was developed. The Indian Wells Country
                     Club and Golf Course was also constructed in the late 1950's. The
                     residents of the Indian Wells area realized that they lived in a "truly
                     gracious oasis" and were detennined to protect it from encroaching
                     development.
                     In 1957, Mr. E. M. Peterson helped organize the first property owners
                     group in Riverside County, known as the Indian Wells-Eldorado Area
                     Property Owners Association. The Association functioned similar to a
                     local government until 1966. At that time, the Association's goals of
                     keeping the area a "distinctly fme residential, country club, and resort
                     hotels community with restricted highway frontage ... and to preserve the
City of Indian Wells                      IA-4                                         General Plan
/. Introduction                                                                      IA. Overview
                     unusual features" were threatened by Palm Desert's desire to incorporate
                     large parts of the mid-Coachella Valley, including the Indian Wells area.
                     In 1966, a Palm Desert contingent announced its intention to file an
                     application for incorporation to include the Indian Wells area as well as
                     Rancho Mirage, as far west as Rio Del Sol (Bob Hope Drive). The
                     Association realized that they could no longer work toward upgrading the
                     area in accordance with their master plan. Incorporation was the only
                     mechanism that would give them local control of zoning and construction
                     and provide the best means of assuring continued high class development.
                     The Indian Wells Association filed their incorporation papers with the
                     Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) on September 5, 1966,
                     beating the Palm Desert proposal by more than two weeks.
                     On February 24, 1967, the incorporation petition, which included 52
                     percent of those owning 43 percent of the total assessed value of the land,
                     was submitted to the LAFCO. The LAFCO accepted the petition and set
                     the election for incorporation for June 27, 1967. One day before the
                     election, the Daily News wrote,
                           "Under normal circumstances, a city as small as Indian Wells
                          would be impractical, even illogical, certainly so in a
                          metropolitan area; however, circumstances here are not normal.
                          Indian Wells has a special way of life, in the very hea~ of the
                          country club area, and needs to protect itself against
                          encroachment and unthinking exploitation. "
                     The first Indian Wells City Council was sworn in on July 14, 1967. Upon
                     taking office, the Council sent a bulletin to the residents of Indian Wells
                     stating that their work in drafting and adopting ordinances and resolutions
                     was "designed to make the City of .Indian Wells, in fact, the unique and
                     unusual city all of us want it to be. "
                     Indian Wells Today
                     The City oflndian Wells has maintained its residential-resort lifestyle since
                     incorporation. Indicative of the resort/vacation lifestyle, more than half
                     of the residential base of Indian Wells consists of seasonal and part-time
                     residents. Overall, the City includes approximately 3,100 full-time and
                     3,800 seasonal residents. According to information provided by the 1990
                     United States Census (1990 Census), City Building Division records, and
                     a windshield survey, approximately 3,236 total dwelling units, including
                     1,710 detached, 1,211 attached, and 315 multiple units are currently
                     developed in the City. The sphere of influence includes 133 detached
                     dwelling units.
City of Indian Wells                       JA-5                                       General P",m
I. Introduction                                                                                  IA. Overview
                                According to the 1990 Census, Indian Wells is a predominantly whit..;,
                                affluent community. In terms of ethnicity, approximately 97.0 percent of
                                the population is White, with the remaining three percent Asian/Pacific
                                Islander, Hispanic, and Black. The city-wide median age is 62.3 years,
                                with a per capita income of $70,411 per year. Housing values are high,
                                with a median home value of $375,400. More detailed demographic
                                information is included in the Housing Element (Section lIB).
                                Indian Wells has successfully maintained its high quality lifestyle and
                                physical development through the strong commitment of its residents,
                                elected officials, and City staff to the City's Mission and Value Statements
                                (adapted separately from the General Plan), identified in Table lA-A.
                                                  Table IA-A
    Mission Statement
    The Mission of the City of Indian Wells is to realize the community's value of exceptional quality;
    to encourage citizen involvement; to emphasize fiscal conservatism with prudent reserves; and to
    deliver responsive services which protect and enhance the public health, safety, and welfare.
    Value Statement
    We, the citizens of the City of Indian Wells, envision a community devoted to an exceptional
  ,quality of life. We expect excellence by placing a premium value on QUALITY, as expressed
  i accordingly ...
    Quality urban community for the discerning resident accustomed to a caliber of lifestyle reflected
    by beautiful surroundings, serenity, security, cultural opportunities and experiences, dignity, and
    pride;
    Unsurpassed pristine desert mountains viewed from fine homes, luxuriant resorts, and abundant
    golf courses;
    Aesthetically pleasing and healthy environment with expansive landscaped open spaces and
    flourishing date groves reflecting the City's heritage;
   Leadership in local, regional, and State political affairs;
   Incomparable personalized levels of municipal services delivered through financially prudent and
   contemporary management practices;
   Teamwork between citizens, elected and appointed officials respecting diverse viewpoints while
    supporting each other towards common goals; and
   Year-round recreational opportunities including private and public golf courses; clay, grass, and
  \hard tennis courts; bike trails; and pedestrian pathways.
City of Indian Wells                                  IA-6                                        General Plan
1. Introduction                                                                         IA. Overview
                      The City's primary mechanism for achieving the desires of the Mission
                      and Value Statements is the General Plan and its implementing measures,
                      including, but not limited to, design standards, specific plans, development
                      codes, and private codes and restrictions within residential developments.
                      Additionally, a continued effort on the part of the elected officials, Staff,
                      and the public is necessary to ensure that all City actions are consistent
                      with the General Plan.
Purpose and Authority
                      The State of California mandates that each jurisdiction prepare and adopt
                      a comprehensive general plan. Government Code Section 65300 et. seq.
                      requires the general plan to address all issues that affect the physical
                      development of the community, as well as land outside its boundaries that
                      potentially affect the City's long-term planning. The role of a general plan
                      is to act as a "constitution" for development, the foundation upon which
                      all land use decisions are based.
                      All general plans in California must meet minimum requirements, as
                      stipulated in the State Government Code. Each general plan is required
                      to address State mandated issues as they apply to the particular
                      community. State mandated issues, more commonly referred to as
                      "elements," include: Land Use; Housing; Circulation; Open Space;
                      Conservation; Noise; and Safety. Each jurisdiction has the authority to
                      include additional elements if the issue is important to the long-term
                      development of the community.
                      The organization of the general plan is also determined by the local
                      jurisdiction. Most general plans are organized by individual issue
                      sections, or elements. Although the State allows the local jurisdiction the
                      latitude to combine or place the elements in any order, all elements must
                      be internally consistent and have equal status. Equal status means that
                      each element is equally important, thereby giving the same authority to the
                      Land Use Element as to the Noise or any other element, including any
                      optional elements the local jurisdiction elects to include in their general
                      plan.
                      Prior to this update, the Indian Wells General Plan was last updated in
                       1988. In December, 1993, the Indian Wells City Council, recognizing its
                      responsibility to comply with California planning law, authorized
                      preparation of the Indian Wells General Plan update. The update was
                      pursued due to significant changes in the real estate market and additional
                       State regulations pertaining to solid waste, air quality, housing, and other
                      development-related issues. All City implementation mechanisms must be
                      consistent with the General Plan, as required by State law.
 City of Indian Wells                        IA-7                                         General Plan
I. Introduction                                                                      LA. Overview
f)verview of the General Plan
  \
  i
                     Organization
                     The Indian Wells General Plan is organized in a traditional element
                     oriented format. The elements, however, are organized into functional
                     chapters. The chapters, with the associated elements in parentheses, are
                     Community Development (Land Use, Housing, Circulation), Resource
                     Management (Conservation and Open Space), and Public Safety
                     (Community Safety, Noise). Each of the elements includes a statement of
                     authority, a summary of existing conditions, and the goals and policies
                     pertaining to the subject matter. The goals and policies represent the
                     City's position related to the future development of Indian Wells.
                     The final chapter of the General Plan is a glossary of terms, intended to
                     assist the reader in understanding terminology found in the plan. A brief
                     index of terms is also included in the fmal chapter.
                     Description     of the    Plan
                     The Indian Wells General Plan establishes a blueprint for the City'S long-
                     term development. The overall intent of the General Plan is to direct daily
                     City actions, through policy statements, toward improving and maintaining
                     a socially cohesive, economically viable, and physically attractive
                     community. The General Plan is intended to guide development within the
                     planning area for a twenty-year period, extending into the year 2015.
                     The City of Indian Wells understands that a long-range plan is essential to
                     ensure the citizens' health, safety, and welfare are maintained at
                     exceptional levels into the next century. To this end, the Indian Wells
                     General Plan is the document that addresses the issues that potentially
                     threaten the quality of life for City residents and businesses.
                     Land Use Element
                     Land use planning exemplifies the City'S desire to maintain it's distinctive
                     image and sound economic base. The Land Use Element's policies and
                     land use designations are intended to promote the resort nature of the City ,
                     while maintaining the exceptional quality of life the residents expect. The
                     Element reinforces the low-density residential character of the community,
                     especially in the vacant land areas south of Highway 111.
                     In the northernmost part of the City, the Sunrise Property is identified in
                     the Land Use Plan as an area that offers an opportunity to expand golfmg
                     and resort uses while also allowing a mixture of residential densities.
City of Indian Wells                       IA-8                                       General Plan
I. Introduction                                                                     lAo Overview
                     The sphere of influence area is another opportunity area that the City may
                     pursue in the future. The Land Use Plan designates significant portions
                     of the sphere area as Community Commercial, with the intent of providing
                     opportunities to capture regionally oriented commercial uses. Residential
                     uses in the sphere area vary from Low Density to Medium High Density.
                     Housing Element
                     The Housing Element provides programs and policies that will assist the
                     State and region in meeting their goals of providing affordable housing to
                     all socio-economic segments of the population. The Element discusses
                     city-wide housing and population demographics, regional fair-share
                     housing allocations, and implementation mechanisms to assist the City in
                     providing a full range of housing opportunities.
                     Circulation Element
                     The Circulation Element establishes a roadway system that will adequately
                     meet the buildout needs of the City. In terms of new roads, the
                     Circulation Plan identifies the extension of Eldorado Drive, north of Fred
                     Waring Drive, to Hovley Lane (42nd Avenue) as a private collector road.
                     Additionally, the Circulation Element includes policies for bike lanes,
                     street improvements, and other transportation issues.
                     Conservation and Open Space Element
                     The Conservation and Open Space Element assures the protection of the
                     pristine mountainous areas that serve as a backdrop for the community.
                     The Conservation and Open Space Element promotes the expansion of golf
                     course use, the preservation of a landscaped open space corridor along
                     Highway 111, and the preservation and enjoyment of the surrounding
                     mountain areas. Air quality issues are also addressed in this Element.
                     Safety and Noise Elements
                     The Safety and Noise Elements ensure that the City will continue to be a
                     place of safe living, with minimal intrusions into the high quality
                     neighborhoods enjoyed by the residents. The Safety Element addresses
                     issues such as emergency preparedness, flooding, earthquakes, hazardous
                     waste, and other public safety items. The Noise Element focuses on the
                     location of noise generating land uses in proximity to residential,
                     recreational, and other noise sensitive land uses, and provides policies to
                     alleviate potential impacts due to the noise.
                     Public Input
                     The Indian Wells General Plan was prepared with organized public input.
                     The City Council and Planning Commission acted as the primary General
                     Plan steering committee throughout the Plan preparation process. A total
                     of eleven (11) legally noticed meetings were held. Additional public input
City of Indian Wells                       JA-9                                       General Plan
1. Introduction                                                                     IA. Overview
                     was achieved through personal interviews with City officials and business
                     and citizen representatives. Additionally, a public opinion survey,
                     completed in March, 1993, was utilized. Six (6) community-wide
                     workshops were held during the process as well. The public input
                     provided direction and community consensus as to the methods the City
                     will utilize to achieve their long-term goals.
                     Updates and Amendments
                     Although a twenty-year planning period is identified for this Plan, general
                     plans are not intended to be static documents. Instead, they change and
                     evolve with each particular city. Because of this, State law permits cities
                     to amend their general plans as many as four times a year. It is prudent
                     for cities to review their general plans on an annual basis to determine if
                     any modifications are necessary. State law requires an annual monitoring
                     report be prepared regarding the implementation of the General Plan. The
                     monitoring report must be forwarded to the State Housing and Community
                     Development Department by October 1 of each year for purposes of
                     determining Housing Element compliance.
City of Indian Wells                      /A-JO                                      General Plan
       \NO\AN WELLS GENERAL PLAN 1 - - - - _
   ITo   ITNll~OlQ)1UJ~llnOJNI
         Ao Ov~~vn~w
  II.    COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
         A. LAND USE
         ~o H01UJ~nNCGi
         Co Cll~(c1UJLAllnON
ITllt    fl~~OU~~~ MANACGi~Ml~Nll
         Ao CON~~~VAlln©N ANlQ)
              OIP~N ~IPA(c~
 llVo    IPU~Ibll(c §)AlF~llV
         Ao COMlMl tUJNllllV §)AIF~llV
         ~o NOll~~
Va        GILO~§A~V ANlQ) llNlQ)~
         Ao GIbO~~A~V ©IF fi~Ml~
              ANlQ)   llNlQ)~

II. Community Development                                                                IIA. Land Use
                          Chapter II: Community Development
                                   IIA. LAND USE
Introduction and Authority
                           A conununity's quality of life is most often perceived in terms of the
                           physical development of the land and its setting within the
                           environmental surroundings. Aesthetically pleasing buildings, within
                           well organized and properly distributed developments, help exemplify
                           a community's values. The regulation of land usage, distribution, and
                           intensity is within the domain of the General Plan. The Land Use
                           Element specifically identifies these items, in both text and map format.
                           Because of this, the Land Use Element of a general plan is typically the .
                           most recognized and referenced element.
                           The City of Indian Wells originally incorporated in order to control
                           development, preserve the quality of life, and protect the City from the
                           increasing pressures of surrounding communities. The quality of life in
                           Indian Wells is quite unique and is defmed by its environmental beauty,
                           low-scale development pattern, and world class resorts. The City
                           recognizes that unwarranted encroachment into any of these factors·
                           potentially jeopardizes the community's lifestyle.
                           California Govemment Code Section 65302(a) states:
                               "The general plan shall include a land use element which
                               designates the proposed general distribution and general location
                               and extent of the use of the land for housing, business, industry,
                               open space, including agriculture, natural resources, recreation, and
                               enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public building and
                               grounds, solid and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other
                               categories of public and private uses of land. "
                           Land use designations, goals, and policies identified in this Element are
                           intended to promote orderly development and economic vitality with
                           community character, historical identity, and the stewardship of natural
                           resources.
                           The Land Use Element is consistent with all other elements of the
                           General Plan and is based on community values and goals.
City ofIndian Wells                         IIA-I                                         General Plan

II. Community Development                                                             IIA. Land Use
Organization of the Element
                           This Element is organized in a manner that facilitates clear
                          understanding of the land use conditions in Indian Wells, and the
                          direction for future development in the fonn of goals and policies.
                          Existing land use conditions are discussed, followed by a description of
                          the land use program, including text and maps. The description of the
                          plan is supported in the goals and policies section. Policy statements
                          are identified to provide specific directions for Indian Wells to achieve
                          the quality of life the residents expect. The final section of this
                          Element addresses various mechanisms the City is authorized to utilize
                          in order to implement the land use policies.
Summary of Existing Conditions
                          The purpose of this section is to generally describe the City's land use
                          conditions, infrastructure, community services, and fiscal plan as they
                          existed at the time of the Element's update in 2006.
                           Existing Development Pattern
                          Indian Wells is characterized by beautiful golf courses, private
                          communities, world-renowned resorts, and beautiful surroundings. The
                          residents of the City have successfully maintained their high quality of
                          life through prudent use of land use controls. The City currently has
                          many mechanisms to ensure quality development, including but not
                          limited to: the General Plan, Architecture and Landscape Design
                          Standards, the Zoning Code, and private community Covenants,
                          Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs).
                          Overall, developed land areas within the Indian Wells General Plan
                          Area encompass approximately 9,348 acres, accounting for 97 percent
                          of the total Plan Area. The majority of the undeveloped land is open
                          space, which includes private open space in golf course residential
                          communities and the steep terrain of the Santa Rosa Mountains in the
                          southern part of the City. The largest areas of vacant, but potentially
                          developable lands are located at the intersection of Miles Avenue and
                          Washington Street adjacent to the Indian Wells Tennis Garden and the
                          intersection of Miles Avenue and Highway 111. Other non-developed
                          lands include golf courses, The Living Desert, and drainage channels.
                          Approximately 20 percent of all developed lands are residential (not
                          including the private open space area associated with the residential
                          development) (1,980.5 acres). All single-family residential uses, with
                          few exceptions, are single story. Three story multi-unit structures are
                          located within the Vintage Club community and two-story multi-unit
                          structures are found in the easternmost area of the City, south of
                          Highway 111, in the Racquet Club HOA community.
                          Non-residential uses include mixed-use retail and office commercial
                          centers and hotel resorts. Four commercial centers are located on the
                          north and south sides of Highway 111, west of Cook Street. Additional
                          small-scale commercial developments are located along Highway 111,
City ofIndian Wells                         llA-2                                       General Plan
II. Community Development                                                               IIA. Land Use
                           including a center south of the Highway, on the east side of Club Drive
                           and an office on the southwest corner of Highway 111 and Manitou
                           Drive. The resorts are located on the north and south sides of
                           Highway 111, in the central part of the City. The retail and office
                           developments west of Cook Street are one and two stories in height,
                           while the Renaissance Esmeralda Resort, the tallest structure in the
                           City, is seven stories. The remaining vacant land in the City,
                          approximately 278.7 acres, is shown in Figure ITA-I.
                           Land Use Inventory
                           Existing Land Uses
                           A comprehensive land use inventory of all land areas in Indian Wells
                          was conducted between June 2005 and October 2006. The inventory
                          was completed utilizing City base maps, aerial photos and a visual
                          survey of the General Plan Area. Land uses, as existed in June 2005-
                          October 2006, are shown in Figure ITA-I. Land area estimates, by land
                          use type, are identified in Table ITA-I.
                           Redevelopment Areas
                          The City of Indian Wells is strongly committed to redevelopment
                          activities. Currently, the City has one redevelopment project area, the
                          Consolidated Whitewater Redevelopment Project Area. The
                          Redevelopment Project Areas is shown in Figure ITA-I.
                          Infrastructure and Community Services
                          The development of land is highly correlated with the ability to provide
                          sites with public infrastructure and services. Adequate distribution
                          systems, along with sufficient human and natural resources, are
                          necessary ingredients to the successful provision of urban services.
                          The following section provides summary background information on
                          the provision of public services and facilities to the City of Indian
                          Wells.
                          Water
                          Water for domestic use, fire flow, agriculture, and irrigation is provided
                          to Indian Wells by the Coachella Valley Water District (CVWD). The
                          District currently encompasses approximately 1,000 square miles.
                          Indian Wells is located within the 400-square mile Whitewater River
                          Subbasin, which includes areas one mile west of the junction of
                          Highway 111 and Interstate 10 to the Salton Sea, 70 miles to the
                          southeast The Whitewater River Subbasin is further divided into
                          subareas, with Indian Wells located in the Upper Thermal Subarea.
                          Water Facilities
                          The major east to west CVWD water lines are located in Highway 111,
                          Fred Waring Drive, Fairway Drive, and north of the Whitewater River
                          flood control channel in Miles Avenue. North to south lines are located
                          in Cook Street, Eldorado Drive, Indian Wells Lane, and Elkhorn Trail.
                          A booster pump station is located in the Vintage Club. The City also
                          includes private wells, such as wells located in golf courses for the
                          purpose of watering the facility.
City ofIndian Wells                        llA-3                                         General Plan
                                 TII P.   CI TY O F
                      INDI AN                  WE LLS
                                 C .\ L I FOR S 1 .1
                              General Plan
                    Hovley Ln East
                                                                                •
                                                      _   Park I Golf I Open Space
                                                          Sports Complex
                                                      _   Existing Commercial
                                                      D   Existing Residential
                                                          Natural Preserve
                                                      CIVIC
                                                      _   Public Facilities
                                                      _   Watercourse
                                                       OVERLAYS
                                                      o   Senior Housing
                                                      OTHER
                                                      .   Vacant Parcels
        I Miles
  o 0.5
                2006 Existing Land Uses
l                                                                              Figure IIA-1
                                                                      LAND USE ELEMENT
                                     IIA-4

II. Community Development                                                                      IIA. Land Use
                                           Table ITA-I. Existing Land Uses
     Land Use Type                         Acreage                         % ofTotal* No. of Units
Residential                                 1,980.5                             20.5   4,807**
Commercial, Office,                          244.0                               2.5      •
Sports Complex
Open Space, Parks,                         6,190.6                              64.3      •
Natural Preserve, Golf
Course Recreation
Overlay
Public Facilities                             27.4                               0.2      •
Watercourses,                                316.2                               3.2      •
Drainage Channels
Streets                                      589.3                               6.1      •
Vacant Land                                  278.7                               2.8      •
TOTAL                                      9,626.7                             100.0     4,807
Source: MBA/EPC GIS Data Base and Survey. Riverside County GIS.
• Percentages rounded to equal 100.
• ·Includes detached and attached housing units per CA. Dept. of Finance, \/1/2006
City of Indian Wells                                             llA-5                           General Plan

                                              General Plan
                                                           r,_·_··
                                                                .. J.. City Boundary
                                                            _          Parcels Removed from Redevelopment Area
                                                            D          Whitewater Redevelopment Area
                             I Miles
o             0.5            1
                                     Redevelopment Project Area
                                                                                                     Figure IIA-2
Source: 2006 Indian Wells General Plan

II. Community Development                                                                IIA. Land Use
                           Reclaimed Water
                           CVWD encourages plans to expand programs for reclamation and
                           reuse of water resources in accordance with California Department of
                           Health Water Quality Guidelines. Reclaimed water is presently
                           available from the CVWD's Plant No. 10, located northerly of the
                          Whitewater River Channel and easterly of Cook Street. Toscana
                           Country Club. signed a contract in September 2004 to use recycled
                           water on its two 18-hole golf courses.
                           Wastewater Service
                          Indian Wells' sewer services are provided by the Coachella Valley
                          Water District (CVWD). Effiuent is transported via sewer lines to the
                          Palm Desert treatment facilities located off Cook Street, northwest of
                          the City limits.
                          The District's three major wastewater reclamation plants each have an
                          ultimate capacity of handling 20 million gallons of effiuent a day. The
                          largest of the three, the Palm Desert Regional Wastewater Reclamation
                          Plant, serves Indian Wells. Tertiary, or third stage facilities at this plant
                          allow the District to provide water to serve several area golf courses,
                          including Toscana Country Club.
                          To handle growth, capacity is being increased at the District's regional
                          plant in Palm Desert. Improvements include construction of a
                          24-million-gallon per day sludge handling plant to be completed in
                          mid-2007.
                          Gas
                          Natural gas is currently supplied by the Southern California Gas
                          Company. Presently, 6-inch-high-pressure supply lines are located in
                          Highway 111 and Cook Street.
                          Electrical Distribution
                          The City of Indian Wells receives electrical service. primarily from
                          Southern California Edison Company (SCE). A small portion of the
                          eastern area of the City is served by the Imperial Irrigation District
                          (lID). Southern California Edison's major transmission circuits are
                          located 1 mile north of the City on Country Club Drive. An electrical
                          substation is located north of Fred Waring Drive, within the City limits.
                          Solid Waste/Landfills
                          Indian Wells contracts with Burrtec Waste and Recycling Services for
                          solid waste collection services. Solid waste generated in the area is
                          taken to the Edom Hill transfer station and then delivered to either the
                          EI Sobrante Land Canyon or Badlands solid waste. landfill.
                          Burrtec Waste and Recycling Services provides solid waste recycling
                          programs. The programs include recycling grass clippings and other
                          landscape materials into compost for reuse as fertilizer, as well as
                          backyard pick-up service for newspapers, glass, plastic, tin, and
                          aluminum from residential areas. Commercial recycling includes the
                          above materials plus cardboard and green waste.
City of Indian Wells                        llA-7                                         General Plan
II. Community Development                                                             !lA. Land Use
                          Educational Facilities
                          Desert Sands Unified School District
                          The City of Indian Wells is part of the Desert Sands Unified School
                          District (DSUSD). Gerald Ford Elementary School is the <;mly school
                          in the City and is located at the intersection of Fred Waring Drive and
                          Warner Trail. Palm Desert Middle School and Palm Desert High
                          School are located near the City.
                          Development Fees
                          The Desert Sands Unified School District bases its fees upon the
                          conclusions in the Residential Development School Fee Justification
                          Study 2005.
                          The Desert Community College District
                          The Desert Community College District, known as the College of the
                          Desert (COD), covers 5,479 square miles. It encompasses five K-12
                          districts and portions of three counties: Riverside, San Bernardino, and
                          Imperial. The District has three educational facilities with the closest
                          campus to Indian Wells located in Palm Desert. The other sites are the
                          Copper Mountain Campus in Joshua Tree and the Eastern Valley
                          Center in Indio.
                          Additional College Opportunities
                          Indian Wells is served by universities and colleges in other cities and
                          counties. The nearest university is the California State University,
                          San Bernardino's Palm Desert campus on which the Indian Wells
                          Center for Educational Excellence and Indian Wells Theater are
                          located. University of California, Riverside (UCR) also has a satellite
                          campus located in Palm Desert. Major universities in Los Angeles,
                          Riverside, and San Diego provide expanded opportunities. Private
                          colleges and vocational schools are also provided in nearby
                          communities.
                          Libraries
                          Four branches of the Riverside Public LibrarylRiverside County Free
                          Library system are located near Indian Wells. Two branches are in
                          Palm Desert, one branch is in Indio, and one branch is in La Quinta.
                          The City of Indian Wells presently participates in the Riverside County
                          Free Library System. In addition, the City of Indian Wells is also part
                          of the Rancho Mirage Public Library.
                          Civic Center
                          Located on the northeast comer of the Highway 111 and Eldorado
                          Drive intersection, the Civic Center Complex houses City Hall, a
                          Riverside County Sheriff substation, and Riverside County Fire Station
                          No. 55. A stand of date palms is preserved in front of City Hall, and
                          was dedicated as the City's first park, Indian Wells Date Palm Preserve.
                          City Hall is proposed to be expanded in its present location over the
                          next 5 years.
City of Indian Wells                       llA-8                                       General Plan
II. Community Development                                                              /lA. Land Use
                           Hospitals and Health Care Services
                           Both the private and public sectors are involved in the planning of
                           health facilities. Within the Coachella Valley, several private facilities
                           serve Indian Wells' residents. Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho
                           Mirage, Desert Regional Medical Center in Palm Springs, and John F.
                          Kennedy Memorial Hospital in Indio provide the most extensive
                          service at the local level. The Eisenhower Urgent Care Center is
                           located in the City of Indian Wells within the Wall Street West
                          Complex and provides non-emergency health care services to the
                          community.
                          In addition to the privately-owned facilities, the Riverside County
                          Health Department operates various health programs. Most of the
                          continuing community personal health and mental health services for
                          the desert area are located in County facilities in Indio.
                          Police Protection
                          Police protection is provided by the Riverside County Sheriffs
                          Department under contract with the City. A Sheriffs substation is
                          located in the Civic Center Complex. The Sheriffs Department
                          provides protective response, investigatory, and patrol services. As part
                          of the City's contract with the Sheriffs Department, a Community
                          Services Officer is assigned to patrol the City on a 24-hour basis.
                          In addition to police protection services provided by the Sheriffs
                          Department, most private, gated communities have private, internal
                          security services for their residents. These forces work in conjunction
                          with the Sheriffs Department.
                          Fire Protection, Paramedic/ Ambulance Services
                          The City of Indian Wells provides fIre protection and paramedic
                          services in Indian Wells under contract with Riverside County. Station
                          No. 55 is located within the Civic Center Complex. The paramedic
                          unit is housed in the fIre station and' provides no-cost treatment and
                          emergency transportation for City residents.
                          Flood Protection
                          The desert region is subject to intense storms which result in sudden
                          and substantial runoff and flash flooding. The City of Indian Wells has
                          two major flood control channels. The Whitewater River and Deep
                          Canyon flood control channels generally run west to east north of
                          Highway 111 and south of Highway 111, respectively.
                          The City's Floodplain Management Ordinance specifIes construction
                          standards for all areas of special flood hazard. All new construction
                          and improvements are required to be constructed using methods and
                          practices that minimize flood damage and provide adequate drainage.
                          The Flood Zones map (Figure IVA-3), along with additional detail
                          regarding flood hazards, is found the Community Safety Element.
City ofIndian Wells                          llA-9                                      General Plan
II. Community Development                                                              IIA. Land Use
                          Economic Conditions
                          Cities utilize Capital Improvement Programs (CIP) to chart how they
                          will achieve revenues and pay for capital improvements. The CIP is a
                          five-year program, revised annually. Capital Improvement Programs
                          are implementatiQn tools for the General Plan.
                          capital Improvement Program
                          The City of Indian Wells is currently operating within a Capital
                          Improvement Program for fiscal years 2004-05 through 2008-09. The
                          2004-2009 CIP identifies a total of 44 capital projects, costing an
                          estimated $134,288,775. Capital projects are organized into functional
                          groups, including: Streets & Highway, Traffic Safety, Government
                          Buildings, Parks & Landscaping, Golf Course Improvements, Drainage
                          & Improvements, and Miscellaneous Improvements. Revenues to pay
                          for the capital projects are provided by the Capital Improvement Fund,
                          Measure "A" Transportation Fund, Citywide Public Improvement
                          Fund, Art in Public Places Fund, RDA Whitewater Capital
                          Improvement Fund, Golf Resort Improvement Fund, and the
                          LowlModerate Housing Fund, and Transportation Uniform Mitigation
                          Fees (TUMF).
Df!scription of the Land Use Plan
                          The remaining sections of this Element describe the Land Use Plan for
                          the City of Indian Wells. The Land Use Plan is composed of both
                          descriptive text and an illustrative map. The text discusses the long-
                          term development vision of the City, including land use designations
                          and buildout assumptions. The Land Use/Zoning map identifies the
                          location and distribution of the land uses as shown in Figure llA-3.
                          The text and map are supported by land use goals and policies.
                          Land Use Plan
                          Indian Wells is a unique desert community that intends to remain the
                          premier residential/resort city in the Coachella Valley. The residential
                          quality of life is the City's primary concern. The Land Use Plan,
                          therefore, strives to maintain and preserve the existing residential
                          nature of the City. The quality of life will be maintained by a balance
                          of lower intensity residential densities with site development and
                          environmental quality standards. Additional development opportunities
                          are provided for near the intersection of Miles Avenue and Washington
                          Street adjacent to the Indian Wells Tennis Garden and the intersection
                          of Miles Avenue and Highway 111.
                          The predominantly residential character of the community will
                          continue to be supported through revenues from the resort industry.
                          The City has positioned itself, however, to diversify its revenue base by
                          designating significant portions of the area around the Indian Wells
                          Tennis Garden as Resort Commercial.
City of Indian Wells                       llA-lO                                        General Plan
                                                      TilE      C IT}   OP
                                               INDIAN                 WE LL8
                                                      C ,\ I. I FOR\"I \
                                                      General Plan
                                       Hovley Ln East
                                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                     Legend
                                                                           RESIDENTIAL                            COMMERCIAL
                                                                           D Very Low Density (1.0-3.0 dulac)            Professional Office
                                                                           D Low Density (3 .1-4.5 dulac)         _      Resort Commercial
                                                                              Medium Density (4.6-7.0 dulac)      _      Community Commercial
                                                                           _ Medium High Density (7.1-12.0 dulac) c::::J Sports Complex
                                                                           OPEN SPACE                             CIVIC I OTHER
                                                                           _  Golf Course Recreation Overlay      c::::J Parcel Boundaries
                                                                           C] Public Park                         -Streets
                                                                           _  Natural Preserve                    c:.:J Senior Housing Overlay
                                                                                                                  _      Public Facility
                                                                              Open Space
                                                                           _  Watercourse
                           I Miles
o            0.5           1
                                           Land Use I Zoning
                                                                                                                            Figure IIA-3
Source: CA GIS Library and                                                                                         LAND USE ELEMENT
        Indian Wells General Plan 2006
                                                                   IIA-11

 II. Community Development                                                                                IIA. Land Use
                                             Based on the Land Use/Zoning map, Figure lIA-3, full buildout within
                                             the current City limits could increase from 4,807 residential units to
                                             5,635 residential units. The City's population would increase to an
                                             estimate of 10,802 persons factoring in a vacancy rate of 0 percent.
                                             However, the City has a historical vacancy rate of approximately
                                             48 percent reflecting the seasonal nature of the population, therefore,
                                             the adjusted buildout population is approximately 5,185 (Note: The
                                             California Department of Finance uses the 48 percent vacancy rate in
                                             determining the City's "official" population). The buildout statistics
                                             are based on full development of all vacant lands. Land Use Plan
                                             buildout potentials and assumptions are shown in Table IIA-2.
                                             Existing demographics, including housing and population
                                             characteristics, are discussed.in detail in the Housing Element.
                                  Table IIA-2. 2025 General Plan Land Use Buildout Estimate
1J.'.''''LUlll ....I;:;U Population with Vacancy Rate per California
               of Finance
               : MBAIEPC GIS
   ) Based on acres per category times actual density of category as calculated by GIS
 (2) Assumes FAR unless otherwise noted in Table.
      General Plan allows lIdu per 40 acs. in Natural Preserve Area.
City of Indian Wells                                          llA-12                                       General Plan
II. Community Development                                                             IIA. Land Use
                          Land Use Plan buildout potentials are required to identifY the full
                          buildout of all designated lands in the Plan Area for environmental
                          analysis purposes. Because of this, projections are usually higher than
                          actual buildouts. Buildout also includes existing developed areas that
                          may currently be built at lower densities than permitted by the
                          designation, which also inflates the buildout figures.
                          Land Use Designations
                          The land use designations described in this section establish the type
                          and intensity of future development, as identified in the Land Use Plan
                          map and buildout table.
                          Residential
                          The Plan provides for residential densities which range from one
                          dwelling unit per 40 gross acres to twelve dwelling units per gross acre.
                          It should be noted that the upper end of each density range is not
                          guaranteed, but rather represents the potential density that could be
                          achieved after specified performance standards are met. To maintain
                          the City's existing low density residential character, the majority of the
                          residentially designated lands are identified as Very Low Density
                          (1.0-3.0 dulac). The following criteria will be used to determine
                          maximum residential density within each density range:
                          •     Compatibility with surrounding land uses;
                          •     Floodplain protection;
                          •     Adequacy of public infrastructure, including water, sewer, gas, and
                                electricity;
                          •     Proximity to health care facilities, commercial areas, and other
                                services;
                           •    Provision of neighborhood-serving open space and recreation;
                           •    Access and proximity to major streets;
                           •    Preservation of natural resources and vegetation; and
                           •    Mitigation of negative environmental impacts such as noise, traffic,
                                and light and glare.
                           Residential Designations
                           Very Low Density (1.0-3.0 dulac): Single family detached homes on
                           lots a minimum of 12,000 square feet (sq. ft.).
                           Low Density (3.1-4.5 dulac): Single family detached homes onlots a
                           minimum of8,500 sq. ft.
                           Medium Density (4.6-7.0 dulac): Single family detached homes, cluster
                           developments, and attached units.
                           Medium High Density (7.1-12.0 dulac): Attached dwelling units such
                           as townhouses, condominiums, and congregate care for seniors.
 City ofIndian Wells                         llA-J3                                      General Plan

II. Community Development                                                              llA. Land Use
                           Commercial
                           The resorts will continue to be the primary commercial use in the City.
                           A significant portion of the· area surrounding the Indian Wells Tennis
                           Garden is designated as Resort Commercial which would allow both
                           retail and office uses. The Land Use Plan also identifies 9.3 acres
                           designated for Professional Office development.
                          Commercial Designations
                           Community Commercial (FAR 0.75): Attractively designed retail,
                          office, and shopping areas. Uses may include retail shops, offices,
                          restaurants, personal service shops, grocery stores, movie theaters,
                          hotels and resort complexes, and similar uses.
                          Resort Commercial (No FAR Restriction): Attractively designed hotel
                          and resort complexes.          The developments will have quality
                          architectural design and extensive landscaping. Parking areas will be
                          screened from public streets with landscaping, buffer areas, or
                          decorative walls. Uses include hotels as the primary use with ancillary
                          tourist commercial uses that may include restaurants, related
                          convention facilities, and supporting retail and personal services.
                          Professional Office (FAR 0.50): Attractively designed professional
                          offices that are compatible with surrounding neighborhoods and
                          adjacent areas. Developments will be a maximum of two stories in
                          height and will have extensive landscaping. Parking areas will be
                          screened from public streets with landscaping, buffer areas, or
                          decorative walls. Typical uses would include administrative and
                          professional offices, medical and dental offices, and financial
                          institutions.
                          Civic
                          This designation includes, one category: Public Facility. As public
                          facilities follow, rather than lead development, new areas for public
                          facilities will be designated as development occurs. The uses within
                          this category, however, include utility agency substations, the Gerald
                          Ford Elementary School, and City Hall.
                          Civic DeSignation
                          Public Facility: Facilities such as the Civic Center, police and fire
                          stations, public utilities, schools and other governmental or public
                          facilities, such as auditoriums, museums, and libraries.
                          Open Space and Recreation
                          The Open Space and Recreation category encompasses five
                          designations, as described below. The designations are intended to
                          provide a range of public and private open spaces and recreational areas
                          for enjoyment and safety of the residents.             The Watercourse
                          designation, particularly, is applied to areas subject to flood hazard
                          within the IOO-year floodplain. Floodplain areas include the City's two
                          flood control channels and an area of unimproved floodway in the
                          Deep Canyon area.
City ofIndian Wells                         llA-14                                      General Plan

II. Community Development                                                             /lA. Land Use
                           Open Space and Recreation Designations
                           Public Parks: Publicly owned parkland which is dedicated or reserved
                           for passive recreational use by the public.
                           Golf and Recreation: Public and private golf courses and tennis
                           facilities.
                           Open Space: Privately and publicly owned lands maintained in a
                           natural state. Development in these areas is subject to the Hillside
                           Management Ordinance.
                           Natural Preserve (l.0 du140 gross ac): Privately owned lands with
                           limited residential development permitted subject to the restrictisons of
                           the Hillside Management Plan (HMP), consistent with the Coachella
                           Valley Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (CVMSHCP).
                           Sports Complex: Publicly and privately owned land and improvements
                           to accommodate professional or amateur sporting events. This includes
                           the Indian Wells Tennis Garden and related facilities.
                           Watercourse: Includes the Whitewater River and Deep Canyon flood
                           control channels and other areas subject to flood hazard. Federal
                           standards prohibit development in the floodway. Some Watercourse
                           areas, however, are used for golfmg. The IOO-year and 500-year flood
                           zones are depicted in the Community Safety Element, Figure IVA-3.
                           Goals and Policies
                           The land use goals and policies identified in this section translate the
                           City's long-range vision into public policy. The policies will be used
                           on a daily basis to evaluate development proposals and guide City-wide
                           decisions. The section is organized by goals and policies pertaining to
                           Land Development, City Image, Orderly Growth, and Economic
                           Development.
                           Land Development
                           GoalllAl
                           Development which maintains the City's quality residential and resort
                           character, with adequate provisions for the housing needs of all
                           economic segments of the community.
                           Residential Policies
                           IIAI.l: Require multifamily structures located adjacent to single-
                           family parcels to incorporate adequate screening into project design to
                          .prevent view intrusion.
                           lIA1.2: Assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the
                           needs of very low, low, and moderate income households through
                           implementation of the Housing Program set forth in the Housing
                           Element.
                           IIAl.3: Encourage clustering of residential uses to minimize impacts
                           from noise, flooding, slope instability, and other environmental
                           hazards, or to achieve other desirable City objectives. Clustering of
City ofIndian Wells                         lIA-15                                      General Plan
II. Community Development                                                              IIA. Land Use
                          units on smaller than identified lot sizes may be approved in all
                          residential categories,· except within the Very Low Density designation.
                          Clustering in the Very Low Density designation can only occur if a
                          specific plan or master plan is approved by the City Council, m
                          accordance with the procedures established in the Zoning Code.
                          IIA1.4: Prohibit residential development in areas of greater than
                          65 Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) unless effective
                          mitigation measures can be incorporated into project designs to reduce
                          noise levels to 65 CNEL in outdoor activity areas and 45· CNEL in
                          indoor areas.
                          IIA1.5: All residential developments are subject to the density and
                          lot size requirements established in the General Plan (unless clustering
                          is utilized). Residential development must also comply with any
                          adopted regulations, such as but not limited to, design guidelines,
                          environmental mitigation measures, and impact fees.
                          Commercial Policies
                          IIA1.6: Encourage new commercial development that relates to the
                          City'S resort industry.
                          IIAI.7: Commercial developments shall be located and designed to
                          minimize the impact on traffic circulation and residential land uses.
                          IIA1.8: Require physical separation (i.e., setbacks or barriers) where
                          commercial development abuts residential development, and where
                          land uses abut major arterial highways.
                          IIA1.9: All commercial development shall be consistent with the
                          requirements of the General Plan, including use types and must comply
                          with any applicable Use Permit conditions, design guidelines, impact
                          fees, or other development-related requirements for a particular site.
                          General Development Policies
                          IIA1.lO: Assist in the consolidation of contiguous smaller parcels for
                          development purposes.
                          IIAI.11: The following types of development shall be prohibited in
                          Indian Wells:
                          •    Linear or "Strip" Commercial Development;
                          •    Heavy Polluting Industry; and
                          •    Billboards.
                          IIA 1.12: Require development to utilize low intensity lighting and!or
                          screening to minimize light spillover and glare.
                          IIA1.13: Require all new development proposals to provide evidence
                          of land use compatibility with current and future land uses.
City of Indian Wells                       llA-J6                                       General Plan

11. Community Development                                                             llA. Land Use
                           IIAl.14: Require sufficient areas of open space in all new
                           development projects.
                           IIA1.15: All development projects will provide sufficient off-street
                           parking to adequately serve the projected vehicles generated by the
                           land use.
                           IIAl.16: Permit the use of solar panels to maximize energy efficiency
                          provided the panels are screened from public view in accordance with
                           the City's design guidelines.
                           IIA1.17: Require the installation of water conservation devices in new
                           development pursuant to the Uniform Building, Mechanical, and
                          Electrical Codes.
                           IIAU8: (1) The City will encourage green building design which
                          could include conserving non-renewable energy and materials,
                          promoting water efficient landscaping and other methods to support
                          environmental conservation and to assist in the concerns of global
                          warming.
                                      (2) The City will provide public information on Sustainable
                          Development Practices which will assist in acceptable levels of global
                          resource depletion and environmental pollution.
                          City Image
                          GoalllA2
                          Maintain the City of Indian Wells as a beautiful and aesthetically
                          pleasing community.
                          Public Improvement Policies
                          IIA2.I: Continue the Art in Public Places program, including the
                          identification of funding sources and potential sites for public art
                          display. The program may include, but is not limited to, City entry
                          monumentation, streetscape treatments (including street signs), and
                          other public area improvements.
                          Private Development Policies
                          IIA2.2: Encourage development which capitalizes on the area's
                          natural environmental setting and preserves views of scenic hillside
                          areas.
                          IIA2.3: Regulate building height to avoid obtrusive breaks in the
                          natural skyline and to be responsive to surrounding settings.
                          IIA2.4: Implement the Hillside Management Plan (HMP) consistent
                          with the Coachella Valley Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan
                          (CVMSHCP).
                          IIA2.5: Maintain and promote high quality urban design to ensure
                          and enhance the quality image and residential character of the City.
                          lIA2.6: All development in the City will comply with approved
                          design standards, including but not limited to, architecture,
City ofIndian Wells                        IIA-17                                       General Plan
II. Community Development                                                             IIA. Land Use
                          landscaping, site design, and other development related regulations
                          intended to enhance and promote the image of Indian Wells.
                          Orderly Growth
                          GoallIA3
                          New development which is coordinated with the provision of
                          infrastructure and public services.
                          Infrastructure and Community Services Policies
                          IIA3.1: Require right-of-way and other necessary improvements to
                          be installed by developers as each property develops.
                          IIA3.2: Locate new development where infrastructure and
                          community services are available or can be expanded without adverse
                          effects on existing uses.
                          IIA3.3: Encourage the provision of cost-efficient public services,
                          such as low maintenance, water efficient public landscaping.
                          IIA3.4: Continue to contract with public and private entities for the
                          provision of public services as long as these services are more
                          economical, more accessible, and/or better serve the needs of residents
                          than City-provided· services.
                          lIA3.5: Coordinate the planning of future public services and
                          facilities with adjoining cities and County service providers to ensure
                          the efficient delivery of services.
                          IIA3.6: Work with other public agencies in developing multi-
                          functional public service centers in the community.
                          IIA3. 7: Continue to work with Riverside County to provide
                          comprehensive planning and future fIre protection services.
                          IIA3.8: Continue to upgrade older water mains in the City as needed
                          to ensure adequate water pressure for fIre fighting.
                          IIA3.9: Periodically survey residents to assess the perceived
                          adequacy of City services and facilities.
                          IIA3.10:    Encourage the provision of community facilities.
                          Economic Development
                          GoalllA4
                          Protection of the fiscal integrity ofIndian Wells.
                          Revenue Generating Policies
                          IIA4.1: Maintain significant revenue-generating land uses in the
                          City, particularly Resort Commercial uses, to assure a balance of costs
                          and revenues over time.
City ofIndian Wells                        11A-18                                       General Plan

II. Community Development                                                             !lA. Land Use
                          IIA4.2: Continue to promote the City of Indian Wells through
                          regional and local business associations, tourist councils and
                          committees, and other methods.
                          IIA4.3: Assess the probability of market support for commercial
                          projects to ensure anticipated fiscal benefits can be realized and the
                          competitive position of the City is not jeopardized by undermining the
                          market performance of effective existing commercial uses.
                          IIA4.4: Continue to utilize Redevelopment activities. to improve the
                          City's fiscal position.
                          Expenditure Control Policies
                          IIA4.5: Require that development pay its pro-rata share of the cost of
                          public services and facility expansions required by that development.
                          IIA4.6: Defme benefit-related areas in which appropriate
                          development fees will be established to defray the costs necessary to
                          provide public services to the area.
                          lIA4.7: Review the fiscal viability of future development projects in
                          terms of net effect resulting from construction and probable land use
                          activities.
Implementation of the Land Use Element
                          Indian Wells is authorized by law to utilize a variety of mechanisms to
                          implement the policies of the Land Use Element. The following
                          summarizes the most common methods for implementing land use
                          elements. Indian Wells is not limited by the ordinances, plans, and
                          documents listed here.
                          Zoning Ordinance: The City will update and revise the zoning text and
                          map to ensure State mandated consistency between the General Plan
                          and Zoning Ordinance.
                          Capital Improvement Program: The City'S Capital Improvement
                          Program is possibly the most important implementation tool available.
                          Because of this, it will be consistent with, and implement the General
                          Plan.
                          Specific Plans: Specific plans are implementing tools for general plans
                          and must be consistent with the General Plan, as required by State
                          Government Code Section 65454.
                          Redevelopment Plan: The Redevelopment Plan must be consistent
                          with the General Plan.
                          Design Guidelines and Standards: Design guidelines and standards are
                          used to preserve and enhance the physical appearance of the City, and
                          therefore must be consistent with the General Plan.
City ofIndian Wells                        llA-19                                       General Plan
II. Community Development                                                              llA. Land Use
                          Public Facility and Service Plans: Although the City does not provide
                          water, sewer, fire, police, and other public services, all outside agency
                          plans must be consistent with the General Plan.
                          Hillside Management Plan: The City will revise the Hillside
                          Management Ordinance for the area within the Santa Rosa and San
                          Jacinto Mountains to be consistent with the Coachella Valley Multiple
                          Habitat Conservation Plan (CVMSHCP).
                          The Land Use Element's success is the responsibility of all City
                          residents and staff, the development community, service agencies, and
                          City decision-makers. All land use actions by the City should be
                          directed towards the implementation of the policies identified in this
                          Element.
 City ofIndian Wells                       llA-20                                         General Plan
          CHAPTER II: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
                                         IIB. Housing
INTRODUCTION
Housing Elements are required components of all General Plans and are intended to guide
residential development and preservation in a way that is consistent with the overall social and
economic values of the community, as well as meeting State laws pertaining to the provision of
housing opportunities for all income groups.
Article 10.6 of the Government Code describes the content requirements of local housing
elements. This legislation requires that a housing element include an assessment of housing
needs; an inventory of resources and constraints; a statement of goals, policies, and objectives;
and implementation programs. Section 65580 of the Government Code identifies the State
housing goal as follows:
 The availability of housing is of vital statewide importance, and the early attainment of decent
   housing and a suitable living environment for every Californian, including farmworkers, is a
                                     priority of the highest order.
This Housing Element is consistent with the other General Plan elements, with a high degree of
association with the Land Use and Circulation Elements. The Land Use Element identifies land
use designations and intensities of residential uses. The Circulation Element discusses the City's
roadway improvements and establishes policies that provide the ability to access residentially
designated properties.
The Housing Element is required to be updated every eight years. Pursuant to State law, this
Housing Element covers the planning period of October 15, 2013 through October 15, 2021,
consistent with the update cycle for jurisdictions in the Southern California Association of
Governments (SCAG) region. During this planning period, cities in the SCAG region are required
to make good-faith efforts to achieve the goals and policies of the Housing Element. At the end
of the planning period, the cities are required to analyze the Elements’ successes and make
programmatic and policy changes in order to meet the community’s housing needs.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                            IIB-1

Housing Element
Organization of the Element
The State of California defines Housing Element content. Organization of the Element, however,
is determined by local jurisdictions. This Housing Element is comprised of the following
components:
    ·    Introduction: Outlines the purpose and contents of this Housing Element.
    ·    Community Profile: Provides an assessment of the existing and projected housing
         needs in the community based on demographic trends and housing market conditions.
    ·    Housing Constraints: Provides an assessment of the constraints confronted by the City
         in meeting the housing needs of the community.
    ·    Housing Resources: Provides a discussion of financial resources available to the City to
         address its housing needs and opportunities for energy conservation.
    ·    Assessment of Previous Housing Element: Provides an overview of the City’s
         achievements under the previous Housing Element (adopted in 2009).
    ·    Future Housing Needs and Development Potential: Presents the City’s available sites
         inventory in meeting the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) for the 2014-
         2021 RHNA period.
    ·    Housing Plan: Presents the City’s goals and policies, as well as implementing programs
         to address the City’s housing needs and State mandates.
    ·    Appendix A. Community Outreach: Includes the input received through public
         participation activities.
Public Participation
State law requires that local jurisdictions consult with all socioeconomic segments of the
community, particularly low and moderate income households and those with special needs,
when developing the Housing Element.
To understand the housing needs in the City, the City invited input from citizens and
community stakeholders prior to the preparation of the Draft Housing Element. The City held a
public workshop to receive input into the preparation of the Draft Housing Element on April 16,
2013. The workshop was advertised in the City’s newsletter, through emails, and on the City’s
website. A summary of the input received at the workshop is provided in Appendix A.
In addition the City held a study session with the Planning Commission and City Council on May
16, 2013. The meeting was open to the public and publicly noticed.
IIB-2                                                          City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                Housing Element
In order to address specific concerns raised during the Public Participation process, this Housing
Element includes the following policies and programs:
Policies:
     · IIB1.1 Continue enforcement of the codes and regulations establishing minimum
         construction standards.
     ·   IIB1.2 Encourage maintenance and repair of existing housing to prevent deterioration
         within the City.
Implementation Programs:
     ·   IIB3.A Monitoring Potential Constraints
     ·   IIB3.C Development Guidelines and Procedures
General Plan Consistency
California law requires that General Plans be “internally consistent.” That means that the goals,
policies, and objectives in one Element cannot be in conflict with another Element. The two
elements most closely associated with the Housing Element are the Land Use Element and the
Circulation Element. The Land Use Element defines the City’s location and intensity of land
uses and the Circulation Element sets forth the policies for a comprehensive transportation
network for both vehicles and pedestrians.
The Land Use Element was updated in 2007 and the Circulation Element was updated in 2008.
This Housing Element was prepared to be consistent with both of those Elements, as well as all
other Elements of the General Plan. There are no land use changes or roadway changes
required to fully implement the policies contained in this Housing Element. In addition, the
policies of this Housing Element are also consistent with all other Elements of the General Plan.
Department of Housing and Community Development
Review
As required by State law, the Draft 2013-2021 Housing Element will be reviewed by the
Department of Housing and Community Development. Table 1 summarizes the components of
the Housing Element that are required by State law and where those components can be found
in the document.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                            IIB-3

Housing Element
                       Table 1. State Housing Element Requirements
                       Required Housing Element Component                                   Reference
 A. Housing Needs Assessment
 1. Analysis of population trends in Indian Wells in relation to countywide            IIB-7
    trends
                                                                                       IIB-8
 2. Analysis of employment trends in Indian Wells in relation to regional trends
 3. Projections and quantification of Indian Wells’ existing and projected             Starting on IIB-10
    housing needs for all income groups
 4. Analysis and documentation of the City’s housing characteristics,
    including:
                                                                                       IIB- 11
     a. Level of housing cost compared to ability to pay
                                                                                       IIB-11
     b. Overcrowding
                                                                                       IIB-12
     c. Housing stock condition
 5. An inventory of land suitable for residential development including                Starting on IIB-50
    vacant sites and having redevelopment potential and an analysis of
    the relationship of zoning, public facilities and services to these sites
 6. Analysis of potential and actual governmental constraints upon the                 Starting on IIB-18
    maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income
    levels
 7. Analysis of potential and actual nongovernmental constraints upon                  Starting on IIB-36
    the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all
    income levels
 8. Analysis of special housing need: elderly, persons with disabilities (including    Starting on IIB-12
    developmental disabilities), large families, farmworkers, and families with
    female heads of household
 9. Analysis of housing needs for families and persons in need of                      IIB-15
    emergency shelter
 10. Analysis of opportunities for energy conservation with respect to                 IIB-38
      residential development
 11. Analysis of assisted housing developments that are eligible to change from        IIB-12
       Low-Income housing during the next 10 years
 B. Goals and Policies
 12. Identification of goals, quantified objectives and policies relative to           Starting on IIB-60
      maintenance, improvement and development of housing
IIB-4                                                                   City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                             Housing Element
                      Table 1. State Housing Element Requirements
                       Required Housing Element Component                       Reference
 C. Implementation Program
 13. Identify adequate sites which will be made available through          IIB-550
     appropriate action with required public services and facilities for a
     variety of housing types for all income levels
 14. Programs to assist in the development of adequate housing to meet     IIB-59 to 60
     the needs of Low and Moderate-Income households.
 15. Address, and where appropriate and legally possible, remove           IIB-60
     governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and
     development of housing
 16. Remove constraints to or provide reasonable accommodations for        IIB-60
     housing for persons with disabilities
 17. Conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable         IIB-58
     housing stock in Indian Wells
                                                                           IIB-61 to 62
 18. Promote housing opportunities for all persons
 19. Programs to address the potential conversion of assisted              N/A
     housing development to market-rate housing
Public Hearings
Public hearings will be conducted before the Planning Commission and City Council prior to
adoption of the Housing Element. The Draft Housing Element will be made available on the
City’s website and to housing and community organizations prior to the hearings.
Public Noticing
All public meetings/hearings will be duly noticed in a newspaper with general circulation,
including the City newsletter.
Data Sources
In preparing this Housing Element, various sources of information were consulted. The 2010
Census and the American Community Survey (ACS) provide the basis for population and
household characteristics. However, several other sources are used to provide demographic,
housing and market information:
     ·   Population and demographic data provided by the California Department of Finance
         (DOF)
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                         IIB-5

Housing Element
    ·  Housing market information, such as home sales and rents
    ·  Special needs populations and the services available to them
    ·  Lending patterns for home purchase and home improvement loans
    ·  Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Comprehensive
       Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data
IIB-6                                                        City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                 Housing Element
COMMUNITY PROFILE
Demographic Profile
The population and housing characteristics of Indian Wells are very different than most
California communities. Only a small portion of the total population resides in the City on a
year-round basis. This is reflected in the fact that approximately 42 percent of the total housing
units in Indian Wells are utilized for seasonal, recreational, or occasional use only, according to
the 2007-2011 ACS.
Population Characteristics
The ethnicity of the population of Indian Wells is predominantly White (95.8 percent), with 4.2
percent of the residents being of Hispanic origins. In response to the 2010 Census question
regarding race (which is different from ethnicity), approximately 1.7 percent of the population
reported Asian, 1.05 percent reported Some Other Race and 1.03 percent reported Two or
More Races.
The 2010 Census identifies a citywide median age of 66.7 years. About 55 percent of the
residents were age 65 or over.
                                    Table 2. Age Distribution
                              Age Ranges           Total         Percent
                                   0-4               60           1.2%
                                  5-19              276           5.6%
                                 20-24               50           1.0%
                                 25-44              283           5.7%
                                 45-64             1,558          31.4%
                                   65+             2,731          55.1%
                                  Total            4,958          100%
                     Source: 2010 Census, DP-1
At incorporation in 1967, Indian Wells had an estimated 855 residents and 585 dwelling units.
By 1980, these numbers increased to 1,394 residents (a 63 percent increase) and 2,041
dwelling units (a 248 percent increase). As evidenced by the development rate during the 13-
year span from incorporation to 1980, the City experienced a high rate of second home or
seasonal home development. The 1990 Census reported a population of 2,647 residents (a 90
percent increase from 1980) and 3,019 dwelling units (a 48 percent increase from 1980). The
2000 Census reported a population of 3,816 residents, a 44 percent increase from the 1990
Census. The 2010 Census reported 4,958 residents in Indian Wells, almost a 30 percent increase
from 2000. According to the State Department of Finance, the population in Indian Wells is
estimated to be 5,081 persons as of January 1, 2013.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                             IIB-7
Housing Element
Vacancy and Tenure
As stated previously, Indian Wells is unique in that there are a significant number of units used
only on a seasonal basis. Because of this, Indian Wells has a high vacancy rate. The 2007-2011
ACS indicated that approximately 51.1 percent of all units within Indian Wells were vacant.
Seasonally occupied units accounted for 42 percent of all units in the City or 82 percent of the
vacant units.
Among the year-round occupied housing units in the City, 17.6 percent were renter-occupied
and 82.4 percent were owner-occupied. Tenure of occupied housing units, by age of
householder, is illustrated below:
                           Table 3. Tenure by Age of Householder
            Age Ranges             Owner-Occupied           Renter-Occupied         Total
               15-24                       0                       0                  0
               25-34                       25                      0                  25
               35-44                       50                      11                 61
               45-54                      195                     151                346
               55-64                      449                      66                515
               65-74                      629                      75                704
                 75+                      783                     153                936
                Total                    2,131                    456               2,587
        Source: 2007-2011 ACS, B25007
Most households in Indian Wells were owner-households, according to the 2007-2011 ACS,
with the majority of those being headed by people approaching retirement age (55-64 years) or
seniors (65+ years).
Vacancy status is summarized below. As shown, considering only those units that were
available for rent and for sale, the citywide vacancy rate was 4.6 percent according to the 2007-
2011 ACS.
                                     Table 4. Vacancy Status
                          Type of Unit/Status                 Number         Percent
             For Rent                                           119           4.4%
             For Sale Only                                      139           5.1%
             Rented or Sold, Not Occupied                       125           4.6%
             Seasonal, Recreational or Occasional Use          2,226          82.2%
             All other Vacant                                    98           3.6%
                                                      Total    2,707         100.0%
            Source: 2007-2011 ACS, B25004
Employment Characteristics
Employment characteristics are determined for all persons over 16 years of age living within
the community. The 2007-2011 ACS identifies a labor force of 1,742 persons, of which 133 (7.6
percent) were unemployed. The occupations of employed persons are summarized below.
IIB-8                                                          City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                                                       Housing Element
              Table 5. Summary of Employed Persons 16 Years and Over
                                                                                         Percent of
                               Occupation                                 Persons        Employed
      Management, business, science, and arts occupations                  942             58.5%
      Service occupations                                                  146             9.1%
      Sales and office occupations                                         427             26.5%
      Natural resources, construction, and maintenance                      65             4.0%
      occupations
      Production, transportation, and material moving                       29             1.8%
      occupations
     Total                                                                1,609           100.0%
    Source: 2007-2011 ACS, DP-03
Income Characteristics
Per capita income is determined for all persons 15 years of age and older. Indian Wells' per
capita income, according to the 2007-2011 ACS, is $100,300. The ACS differentiates between
family and household when identifying income levels.2 The overall median household income
was $111,078. The median family income was $145,714.
                             Table 6. Income by Household Type
                                                              Households
            Income Range              Families       Non-Families           Total         Percent
     0-$24,999                            70            322                    392           15.2%
     $25,000-$49,999                     214            214                    428           16.5%
     $50,000-$74,999                     157            105                    262           10.1%
     $75,000-$99,999                      78             57                    135            5.2%
     $100,000-$149,999                   373             73                    446           17.2%
     $150,000-$199,999                   194             45                    239            9.2%
     $200,000 or more                    590             95                    685           26.5%
     Total                              1676            911                  2,587          100.0%
    Source: 2007-2011 ACS, DP-03, B19201
Housing Characteristics
Housing Stock
Based on the Department of Finance 2013 estimate, there are 5,163 housing units in Indian
Wells, consisting of 3,390 single-family detached units (65.7 percent), 1,140 single-family
attached units (22.1 percent), 633 units (12.3 percent) within multiple-unit structures, and no
mobile home units.
2
    A household is an occupied housing unit, which can be a single person living alone, unrelated
    persons living together (e.g. roommates), or a family. A family is therefore a subset of households.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                                   IIB-9
Housing Element
Cost of Housing
The 2007-2011 ACS identifies a total of 2,587 occupied units. Approximately 82 percent of
these units were owner occupied. The ACS estimates that the overall median value of owner
occupied units was $703,100. According to DQ News (an online real estate news provider), the
median price of homes (both single family attached and detached) sold in April 2013 was
$565,000, down 17.52 percent from the homes sold during the same month in 2012. These
prices were significantly higher than most communities in Riverside County. Across the County,
the median sales price in April 2013 was $248,000, up 24 percent from April 2012.
Rentals comprised 17.6 percent of the occupied units. There are few apartments or
condominiums available for rent in Indian Wells. Most rentals in the City are single-family
homes. Rents in Indian Wells vary significantly depending on the size of the unit and location.
                                         Table 7. Typical Rents
                          Type of Unit                                  Rent
          Studio                                                        $900
          Two-Bedroom                                              $1,500-$5,500
          Three-Bedroom                                            $1,800-$9,000
          Four-Bedroom                                            $2,500 to $45,000
         Source: Trulia.com, accessed June 6, 2013
Housing Affordability
Housing affordability is determined by Section 50053 of the California Health and Safety Code
and varies by income level and family size. Households are delineated into five different income
levels.
                            Table 8. HCD Defined Income Categories
                         Income Level                          % of Area Median Income (AMI)
          Extremely Low                                                  Less than 30%
          Very Low                                                         30 to 50%
          Low                                                              51 to 80%
          Moderate                                                         81 to 120%
          Above Moderate                                                More than 120%
        Source: California Health and Safety Code, Section 50053.
 Housing Problems
HCD requires that all cities provide for the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) and
also address the needs of households with existing housing problems. Existing housing needs
include overpayment, overcrowding, and substandard housing conditions. The Comprehensive
Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data developed by HUD provides estimates of households
with housing problems by the following income groups:
IIB-10                                                                   City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                                                              Housing Element
                       Table 9. Income Groups with Housing Problems
                         Income Level                           % of Area Median Income (AMI)
           Extremely Low                                                       0 - 30%
           Very Low                                                          31 to 50%
           Low                                                               51 to 80%
           Moderate /Above Moderate                                         80%+ of AMI
           Source: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
 Overpayment
 Households experiencing overpayment are those that are paying more than 30 percent of their
 gross income for housing and related costs. Overpayment among Moderate/Above Moderate
 income households are typically not a concern since such households typically have more
 discretionary income and are able to expend more on housing. In Indian Wells, 390 households
 in the Extremely Low, Very Low, and Low categories had overpayment issues, according to
 CHAS data.
                            Table 10. Households with Overpayment
                                           Household Type                       Tenure
                                       Elderly
                                        (62+            Large                                       Total (Renter
    Income                             years)       Households           Renter       Owner          and Owner)
                         Total            80              0                 35           85              120
Extremely Low
                    Overpayment           60              0                 35           55               90
                         Total           120              0                 30           90              120
Very Low
                    Overpayment           95              0                 20           75               95
                         Total           195              0                 40          215              255
Low
                    Overpayment          165              0                 30          175              205
Moderate/                Total          1,485            15                185         1,920            2,105
Above
                    Overpayment          310              0                 10           45               55
Moderate
                         Total          1,880            15                290         2,310            2,600
Total
                    Overpayment         1,860             0                 95          350              445
 Notes:
 1. Characteristics of households are not mutually exclusive, e.g. a large household can either be owner or renter.
     Larger households are those with five or more persons. Similarly, a senior household can be either renter or
     owner.
 2. Data based on 2005-2009 ACS sample data and therefore, totals deviate slightly from the 100 percent data.
 Source: HUD CHAS based on 2005-2009 ACS
 Overcrowding
 Overcrowding refers to housing units with more than one person per room, excluding
 bathrooms, hallway, porches, etc. According to the 2007-2011 ACS, there are no households
 experiencing overcrowding in Indian Wells.
 City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                                         IIB-11
Housing Element
Substandard Housing Conditions
Based on a windshield survey, housing in the City is in excellent condition as of the preparation
of this Housing Element in 2013. No more than a few units would require rehabilitation or
minor improvements (such as a paint, window replacement and weatherization). No units
were determined to need major renovations or rehabilitation. Because of this, rehabilitation of
existing units is not considered to be a significant issue in Indian Wells. Additionally, due to the
high quality condition of the housing stock, private or public demolition is not anticipated.
Publicly Assisted Housing at Risk of Converting to Market Rate
There are no units in Indian Wells constructed under State or Federal programs. All affordable
housing constructed in the City was locally funded and required to be affordable in perpetuity
and therefore, no units are "at-risk" of converting to market-rate housing.
Special Needs
State housing law requires each jurisdiction to prepare an analysis of special housing needs.
These needs refer to households having atypical characteristics, such as persons with
disabilities, the elderly, large families, farmworkers, female headed households, and families
and persons in need of emergency shelter.
Large Households
A large household is defined as having five or more members. Large households require
housing units with higher bedroom counts and may experience overcrowding if the units
available to them are undersized.
According to the 2007-2011 ACS, only 36 units (1.4 percent) of all households in the City have
five or more persons. Twenty-five of the large households were owner-occupied and 11 were
renter occupied.
Elderly
Individuals over the age of 65 often require special housing needs and services. Many seniors
may live on fixed incomes, alone, or with their children. They may also be dependent upon
public transportation for accessing vital services and life essentials, such as food, medicine,
health care, or other necessities. The financial capacity for coping with increased housing costs
depends heavily on tenure; that is, the owner or renter status of the elderly households. With
infrequent and small increases in income and potentially large increases in housing costs, the
senior renter is at a continuing disadvantage compared to the senior homeowner.
According to the 2010 Census and 2007-2011 ACS, the senior housing characteristics of Indian
Wells were as follows:
IIB-12                                                           City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                                                   Housing Element
            Table 11. Characteristics of the Elderly Population (Age 65+)
                       Gender                      Number                Percent
              Male                                   1,311                 48.0%
              Female                                 1,420                 52.0%
              Total                                  2,731                100.0%
                        Tenure of Householder 65+ years                 Households
              Renter-Occupied                                               228
              Owner-Occupied                                               1,412
              Total                                                        1,640
            Source: 2010 Census, DP-1; 2007-2011 ACS, B25007
Among the 1,640 elderly households in the City, 475 were elderly persons living alone. Overall,
the 2007-2011 ACS (B17017) identified a total of 49 seniors in the City with incomes below the
poverty level.
Persons with Disabilities
The 2010 Census and 2007-2011 ACS do not provide information on persons with disabilities in
Indian Wells. The last enumeration of persons with disabilities was conducted in 2000. The
2000 Census provides employment data by age and disability status. Employment data may be
relevant in that a person's disability that prevents them from working may cause financial
hardship. According to the 2000 Census, 587 persons (15.8 percent) of the City’s residents at
that time had one or more disabilities, and the rate of disabilities increased with age. Among
the age group in labor force (age 21 to 64), almost half of the disabled residents were
employed.
                   Table 12. Disability and Employment Status by Age
            Disability/
       Employment Status                Age 5-15       Age 16-20 Age 21-64      Age 65+      Total
Total Persons                             176             88       1,647         1,806       3,717
With a Disability                           0             11        242           334          587
% Disabled                                 0%           12.5%     14.7%          18.5%       15.8%
   Employed                                 0              0        114            0           114
   % Employed                              0%             0%      47.1%           0%         19.4%
Source: 2000 Census
Certain persons with disabilities may live comfortably without special housing
accommodations, but persons with ambulatory disabilities often require specially-designed,
barrier-free housing. Conventional housing may require modifications to ensure its suitability
for occupancy by a person with a disability.
Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly (RCFE) provide care, supervision and assistance with
activities of daily living, such as bathing and grooming. They may also provide incidental
medical services under special care plans. The facilities provide services to persons 60 years of
age and over and persons under 60 with compatible needs. RCFEs may also be known as
assisted living facilities, retirement homes and board and care homes. The facilities can range in
size from six beds or less to over 100 beds. The residents in these facilities require varying levels
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                             IIB-13

Housing Element
of personal care and protective supervision. There was one RCFE in Indian Wells, St. Mary’s
Loving Care Home, but it has relocated to Palm Desert.
SB 812, which took effect January 2011, amended State Housing Element law to require the
analysis of the disabled to include an evaluation of the special housing needs of persons with
developmental disabilities. A "developmental disability" is defined as a disability that originates
before an individual becomes 18 years old, continues, or can be expected to continue,
indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. This includes Mental
Retardation, Cerebral Palsy, Epilepsy, and Autism. The US Census does not have specific
information regarding persons with developmental disabilities. However, each nonprofit
regional center contracted with the California Department of Developmental Services
maintains an accounting of the number of persons served. The Inland Regional Center serves
the City of Indian Wells and other cities in Riverside and San Bernardino Counties. The Inland
Regional Center currently has six clients residing in Indian Wells.
There are a number of housing types and opportunities appropriate for people living with a
developmental disability, including rent subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-
family homes, Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD housing, and SB
962 homes. SB 962 homes are licensed residential facilities for adults with developmental
disabilities who are medically fragile and require around the clock licensed nursing support. The
design of housing-accessibility modifications, the proximity to services and transit, and the
availability of group living opportunities are some of the considerations that are important in
serving this group. Incorporating ‘barrier-free’ design in all, new multifamily housing (as
required by California and Federal Fair Housing laws) is especially important to provide the
widest range of choices for disabled residents. Special consideration should also be given to the
affordability of housing, as people with disabilities may be living on a fixed income.
Single-Parent Households
Single-parent households, and those headed by females in particular, face challenges in
providing shelter and income for their families. Female-headed households often have incomes
that are less than those of two-parent households and historically have had the highest
incidence of poverty among all household types.
The 2010 Census identified 47 single-parent families with children in Indian Wells, including 24
male-headed families and 23 female-headed families. No single-parent families in the City
were identified as living below the poverty level.
Farm Workers
The 2007-2011 ACS identified no Indian Wells residents in the City's labor force as employed in
farming, forestry, and fishing occupations.
Since 1990, private property owners that owned active farm lands in the City of Indian Wells
have for the most part discontinued farming of dates within the City. In recent years, date
farms have re-established orchards in areas of Thermal, Mecca, Coachella and toward the
Salton Sea, according to the California Farm Bureau Federation. There is currently a sod farm
IIB-14                                                           City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                   Housing Element
within the City, located at the southwest corner of Miles Avenue and Washington Street.
However, this use is anticipated to be an interim use as the property is within a commercial
zone. Farm labor housing does not represent a special housing need for Indian Wells.
The City has recently amended its Zoning Code to include farmworkers housing as part of the
“Agriculture” definition, to be treated the same as a single family home, as outlined by
California Health and Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6 and required by Government
Code Section 65583(c)(1)(B).
In addition, to the above provisions, zoning is available for housing for farm workers through
the variety of other housing types encouraged in the zoning code including multifamily, single-
room occupancy, manufactured housing and second units.
Homeless
The County of Riverside conducted a homeless count in 2013. The count identified 2,978
homeless persons in the County; however, no homeless person was found in Indian Wells. 4
Services and facilities available to the homeless in the Coachella Valley include:
         ·    Coachella Valley cold weather shelter at Martha’s Village and Kitchen in Indio. This
              shelter has a capacity to accommodate up to 120 persons (96 beds for families and
              24 beds for individuals).
         ·    Coachella Valley Rescue Mission in Indio has 75 beds to serve men, women and
              children and serves and over 150 additional individuals and families.
         ·    Roy’s Desert Resource Center is the first comprehensive homeless center built in
              the Western Coachella Valley. Located in Palm Springs, the center offers shelter
              and numerous supportive services to 90 homeless individuals each night.
Furthermore, for homelessness that arises out of an emergency situation (such as a fire, an
earthquake, or a flood, etc.), the Red Cross has designated the Southwest Community Church
(77701 Fred Waring Drive) as an emergency shelter location.
Extremely Low Income Households
Extremely low-income is defined as households with income less than 30 percent of the AMI.
Extremely low-income households have a variety of housing situations and needs, such as
overcrowding and overpayment. Most families and individuals receiving public assistance, such
as Social Security insurance or Disability Insurance are considered extremely low-income
households. At the same time, a lower wage worker may be an extremely low-income
household.
4
     Riverside County Department of Public Social Services, Riverside County 2013 Homeless Count and
     Subpopulation Survey.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                            IIB-15

Housing Element
          Table 13. Housing Needs for Extremely Low-Income Households
                                                        Renters     Owners        Total
     Total Number of Extremely Low-Income                 35             85             120
     Households
     Percent with Any Housing Problems                    35             55             90
     Percent with Cost Burden (30 to 50% of income)       25             0              25
     Percent with Severe Cost Burden (>50% of             10             55             65
     Income)
Source: HUD CHAS based on 2005-2009 ACS
AB 2634 mandates that each locality calculates the portion of very low income (50 percent or
less of AMI) regional housing need that constitutes the community’s need for extremely low
income housing (30 percent or less of AMI). The jurisdiction may assume that half of the very
low income category is represented by households of extremely low income. As a result, from
the City has a projected need of 20 units for extremely low-income households. (See Table 24).
Many extremely low-income households will be seeking rental housing and most likely facing
an overpayment, overcrowding or substandard housing condition. Some extremely low-income
households could be with mental or other disabilities and special needs.
Strategies to Meet Special Needs
To address the range of housing needs in the City, the City provides for the following:
Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Units
SRO units are defined as small units ranging from 150 to 250 square feet. Tenants often share
kitchen and sometimes bathroom facilities with other tenants. With increasing housing costs in
California, SRO units have become popular alternative housing options for seniors, single
workers, or single-parents. The City recently amended its Zoning Code to allow SRO units by-
right in the Medium High Density Residential zone.
Adaptability/Accessibility Regulations
Appropriate housing for persons with mental or physical disabilities include very low cost units
in large group home settings (near retail services and public transit), supervised apartment
settings with on or off-site support services, outpatient/day treatment programs, and
inpatient/day treatment programs, crisis shelters and transitional housing.
In 1984, Title 24 of the State Uniform Building Code mandated that all multiple-family
residential construction projects containing in excess of five units under construction after
September 15, 1985, would conform to specific disabled adaptability/accessibility regulations.
In 1988, the Federal government enacted the U.S. Fair Housing Amendment Act, also with the
intent of increasing the number of rental units being built that would be accessible to
handicapped individuals. In July 1993, the State of California issued “California Multifamily
Access Requirements” based upon the Act. The City currently implements these requirements.
IIB-16                                                        City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                 Housing Element
Building Code and Development Requirements
The City does not require special building codes or onerous project review to construct,
improve, or convert housing for persons with disabilities. Both the Federal Fair Housing Act and
the California Fair Employment and Housing Act impose an affirmative duty on local
governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e., modifications or exceptions) in their
zoning and other land-use regulations when such accommodations may be necessary to afford
disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. For example, it may be a
reasonable accommodation to allow covered ramps in the setbacks of properties that have
already been developed to accommodate residents with mobility impairments.
Pursuant to Municipal Code Section 21.29.200, the City Council may also approve a Conditional
Use Permit modifying the minimum property development standards for affordable housing in
a Senior Housing Overlay Zone. Modifications to the standards may include, but are not limited,
to the number of required parking spaces, the parking enclosure requirement, and open space.
The specific standards(s) from which the applicant is requesting relief shall be identified and
alternative development standard(s) proposed.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
The housing needs of several other categories of persons with disabilities, including persons
with developmental disabilities and those with a mental illness are typically not addressed by
Title 24 Regulations. The housing needs of persons with these types of disabilities, in addition
to basic affordability, range from needing slight modifications of existing units to the need for a
variety of supportive housing arrangements. Some of this population can only live successfully
in housing which provides a semi-sheltered, semi-independent living state, such as clustered
group housing or other group- living quarters; others are capable of living independently if
affordable units are available.
Consistent with State law, the City permits Small Residential Care Facilities in all residential
zones by right and Large Residential Care Facilities in the Medium and Medium High Density
Residential zones with approval of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP). Potential conditions for
approval of care facilities for more than six persons may include hours of operation, security,
loading requirements, noise regulations, and restrictions on loitering. Conditions would be
similar to those for other similar uses and would not serve to constrain the development of
such facilities.
Second Units
Chapter 1062, Statutes of 2002 (AB 1866), effective July 2003, required local governments to
use a ministerial process for considering second-unit applications for the           purpose      of
facilitating production of affordable housing. In July 2003, the City Council amended the Zoning
Code to permit second units ministerially in all single-family residential zoning districts and the
Natural Preserve zoning district. In addition, the City also amended the Zoning Code to allow
Ancillary Quarters in conjunction with a single-family residence in all residential zones.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                            IIB-17
Housing Element
HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
Local governments can affect the supply, distribution, and cost of housing through land use
controls, building codes, development permits, and fees. Compliance with State-mandated
requirements, such as environmental impact assessments, approval procedures, and energy
insulation and/or interior noise standards can influence the cost and nature of residential
development. In addition, property taxes and special assessments contribute to the
governmental impact on housing.
Historically, the provision of affordable housing has been almost exclusively a function of the
public sector. Market-rate housing has not been, overall, affordable to households other than
the upper ranges of Moderate income households (80-120 percent of the AMI) and Above
Moderate income households (above 120 percent of AMI). With the cost of housing increasing
at a rate faster than the increase in income, more people are being eliminated from the
"starter" home market. The demand for housing in Indian Wells is strong due to the fact that it
is an attractive area.
Through the Indian Wells Redevelopment Agency, the City was previously able to more active
in the area of affordable housing. The Redevelopment Agency was dissolved in 2012, consistent
with the dissolution of redevelopment agencies statewide. As a result, Redevelopment Housing
Set-Aside funds are no longer available to provide financial assistance for housing programs.
Land Use Policies
Land use policies are established by cities to regulate the distribution, location, and intensities
of development, as well as site-specific construction, such as building height, bulk, and
materials. The primary land use control mechanisms are the General Plan Land Use Element
and City Zoning Code. Other regulations include subdivision ordinances, design standards, and
public facility plans.
The Land Use Element designates four residential categories: Very Low Density (1-3 du/gross
acre), Low Density (3.1-4.5 du/gross acre), Medium Density (4.6-7 du/gross acre), and Medium-
High Density (7.1-12 du/gross acre). Residential development may also occur in the Natural
Preserve designation (1-du/40 acres), with limitations.
Affordable Housing Overlay Zone
The Indian Wells Zoning Code also identifies residential overlays, intended to guide affordable
and senior housing. The Affordable Housing Overlay applies to designated affordable housing
sites only, and indicates the City Council's intent to utilize developer incentives for the provision
of affordable housing. The incentives currently described in the Zoning Code for the Overlay
include:
     ·   Fast track processing;
     ·   Waiver of City fees;
     ·   Land purchase subsidization;
IIB-18                                                            City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                               Housing Element
     ·   Land acquisition and assembly;
     ·   Subsidizing of development cost;
     ·   Construction loan and/or permanent land subsidization;
     ·   Purchase mortgage assistance;
     ·   Renter assistance;
     ·   Direct City ownership and/or management;
     ·   Relaxation of City standards, including density increases;
The City will ensure appropriate development standards are used to facilitate the development
of affordable housing that is of good quality and utilizes the land in an efficient manner. To
further facilitate the use of the Affordable Housing Overlay, the City recently amended the
Zoning Ordinance to establish a density of up to 20 units per acre for projects using this
designation.
Senior Housing Overlay Zone
The purpose of the Senior Housing Overlay is to provide standard incentives for the
development of a wide variety of specialized housing designed for and restricted to residents
over the age of 55. Congregate living, independent living and active retirement communities
are permitted uses. This overlay offers several incentives, including:
     ·   Reduced minimum unit sizes (studio: 360 to 450 square feet; one-bedroom: 500 to 600
         square feet; and two-bedroom: 700 to 800 square feet);
     ·   Reduced parking requirements (active retirement community: two spaces per unit;
         independent living facility: 1.5 spaces per unit; and congregate living: 0.5 space per
         unit);
If affordable senior housing is provided, the City Council may approve additional modifications
to development standards. Modifications to the standards may include, but are not limited to,
the number of required parking spaces, the enclosed parking requirement, and open space
requirements.
State of California Density Bonus Requirements
Municipal Code Section 21.20.040 (Density) establishes the number of residential units per
gross square feet of lot area, calculated on a tract map basis. A developer may apply to the City
to construct affordable housing in any residential zone, concurrent with the application of the
Affordable Housing Overlay in accordance with Chapter 21.28. If the developer agrees to
construct at least (1) 20 percent of the total units of the proposed housing development for
persons and families of low-or moderate- income, as defined in the California Health and Safety
Code, or (2) 10 percent of the total units of the housing development for very low-income
households as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, or (3) 50 percent of the total
dwelling units of the housing development for qualifying residents, as defined in the California
Civil Code, the City shall grant a density increase of 25 percent and one of the concessions or
incentives identified in California Government Code Section 65915 (h); the City may make
written findings that the additional concessions or incentives are not required in order to
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                         IIB-19

Housing Element
provide for affordable housing costs defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code;
or provide other incentives of equivalent financial value based upon the land use per dwelling
unit.
City Assisted Housing
The City recognizes land costs as a potential market constraint. The City addresses this
constraint through the density bonus program and additional incentives through the Affordable
Housing Overlay.
 The Zoning Code also makes provisions for the modification of development standards for
affordable housing. The modifications can include parking spaces, parking enclosures, open
space requirements, and minimum unit sizes. Pursuant to State law, the City has approved
affordable housing projects with smaller unit sizes ranging from 640 to 680 square feet.
Mountain View Villas is an example of an affordable housing project that the City provided
flexibility in meeting development standards. The development standards for both phases of
Mountain View Villas were modified to facilitate the construction of the affordable housing,
including reducing the required number of off-street parking spaces, eliminating open space
requirements, and allowing for reduced unit size.
Variety of Housing Types
State law requires local jurisdictions address the city’s ability to provide a variety of housing
options in the Housing Element, including:
     ·    Housing for persons with extremely low income households (AB 2634)
     ·    Emergency shelters for the homeless (SB 2)
     ·    Housing for persons with disabilities (SB 520)
The Housing Element must address the opportunities for all housing options including, but not
limited to, single-family housing, attached units/multi-family housing, second units, farmworker
housing, emergency shelters, transitional housing, supportive housing, and single-room
occupancy units. These requirements and provisions are discussed below:
Single-Family Housing: Single-family units are permitted in Very Low Density and Low Density,
Medium Density and Medium High Density Residential zones.
Attached Units/Multi-Family Housing: Attached units include apartments and are permitted in
the Medium and Medium High Density Residential zones, and conditionally permitted in the
Very Low and Low Density Residential zones. Multi-family developments without a Home
Owners Association (HOA) and Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs) are permitted
with a site plan review and approval by the Community Development Director or designee.
Multi-family developments with HOAs and CC&Rs are subject to the Subdivision Map Act and
the Conditional Use Permit process.
IIB-20                                                         City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                   Housing Element
Second Units: Pursuant to State law, second units are permitted in all residential zones where a
primary single-family unit already exists.
Farm Worker Housing: The City of Indian Wells does not have any agriculturally designated
land, but permits agricultural uses with a conditional use permit in all zones except for the
Sports Complex Zone. The Census does not report any Indian Wells’ residents identified as
permanent or migrant farm workers. The City amended its Zoning Code to include
farmworkers housing as part of the “Agriculture” definition, to be treated the same as a single
family home, as outlined by California Health and Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6
and required by Government Code Section 65583(c)(1)(B).
In addition, to the above provisions, zoning is available for housing for farmworkers through
the variety of other housing types encouraged in the Zoning Code including multifamily, single-
room occupancy, manufactured housing and second units.
Emergency Shelters: Government Code Section 65582 mandates that local jurisdictions
strengthen provisions for addressing the housing needs of the homeless, including the
identification of a zone or zones where emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted use
without a conditional use permit. Section 50801(e) of the California Health and Safety Code
defines emergency shelters as housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons
that is limited to occupancy of six months or fewer by a homeless person.
The City permits Emergency Shelters by-right in the Community Commercial zone. The Zoning
Code includes development standards and requirements for Emergency Shelters to ensure that
shelters do not adversely impact adjacent parcels or the surrounding neighborhood, and to
ensure that development occurs in a manner that protects the health, safety and general
welfare of nearby residents and businesses while providing for the housing needs of the
homeless.
Emergency Shelters are required to comply with the following:
    ·     An emergency shelter shall contain a maximum of 20 beds.
    ·     The shelter shall operate only from 5:00 pm to 8:00 am.
    ·     The objective of the shelter is to assist clients in obtaining permanent housing, income
          and services.
    ·     Residency at the shelter is limited to a maximum of 180 days.
    ·     The shelter shall have a written Management Plan that details staffing, training and
          qualifications, neighborhood outreach, transportation, security, volunteers and
          donation procedures, intake screening, treatment programs, and emergency plans.
    ·     Attention to the size and location of interior and exterior waiting areas shall be
          included in the design of the facility.
    ·     Exterior security lighting and appropriate off-street parking are required.
Transitional Housing: Transitional housing is a type of housing used to facilitate the movement
of homeless individuals and families to permanent housing. Transitional housing can take
several forms, including group quarters with beds, single-family homes, and multi-family
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                            IIB-21

Housing Element
apartments, and typically offers case management and support services to return people to
independent living (usually between 6 and 24 months). Transitional housing is permitted by-
right in the Medium and Medium High Density Residential zones. The City is currently
processing a Zoning Code Amendment to permit transitional housing by-right in the Very Low
and Low Density Residential zones in order to comply with the provisions of SB 2. This Zoning
Code Amendment is anticipated to be approved in October 2013.
For transitional housing facilities that operate as group quarters, such facilities will be
permitted as community residential care facilities. Potential conditions for approval of large
residential care facilities (for more than six persons) as transitional housing may include hours
of operation, security, loading requirements, noise regulations, and restrictions on loitering.
Conditions would be similar to those for other similar uses and would not serve to constrain the
development of such facilities.
Supportive Housing: The California Health and Safety Code (50675.14 [b]) mandates that City’s
provide supportive housing that is defined as housing with no limit on length of stay that is
occupied by a target population as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 53260, and that is
linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the
housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when
possible, work in the community. Target population includes adults with low incomes having
one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic
health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman
Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5, commencing with Section 4500, of the
Welfare and Institutions Code) and may, among other populations, include families with
children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting
from institutional settings, veterans, or homeless people.
Similar to transitional housing, supportive housing can take several forms, including group
quarters with beds, single-family homes, and multi-family apartments. Supportive housing
usually includes a service component either on- or off-site to assist the tenants in retaining the
housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when
possible, work in the community. Supportive housing is permitted by-right in the Medium and
Medium High Density Residential zones. The City is currently processing a Zoning Code
Amendment to permit supportive housing by-right in the Very Low and Low Density Residential
zones in order to comply with the provisions of SB 2. This Zoning Code Amendment is
anticipated to be approved in October 2013.
For supportive housing facilities that operate as group quarters, such facilities will be permitted
as residential care facilities. Potential conditions for approval of supportive housing for more
than six persons may include hours of operation, security, loading requirements, noise
regulations, and restrictions on loitering. Conditions would be similar to those for other similar
uses and would not serve to constrain the development of such facilities.
Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Units: SRO units are small units ranging from 150 to 250 square
feet. Tenants often share kitchen and sometimes bathroom facilities with other tenants. With
increasing housing costs in California, SRO units have become popular alternative housing
IIB-22                                                          City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                         Housing Element
options for seniors, single workers, or single-parents. SRO units are permitted by-right in the
Medium High Density Residential zones.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities: Pursuant to SB 520, the Housing Element must address
constraints to housing for persons with disabilities, such as land use controls, building codes,
and process for requesting reasonable accommodation.
The City recognizes that disabilities can take many forms and have numerous implications for
housing need. Many persons with disabilities can live in conventional housing without any
modifications, or with only minor modifications. Accessible units are more expensive to build,
which can include features such as ramps, extra wide doors, handrails, lowered counters, raised
toilets and a variety of other accessibility features. The City constructed 128 senior affordable
units known as Mountain View Villas Phase I. Five units are handicapped accessible and 123
units are handicapped adaptable. Phase II has two units that are fully handicapped accessible
and 57 units are handicapped adaptable.
The Lanterman Development Disabilities Service Act (Sections 5115 and 5116) of the California
Welfare and Institutions Code declares that mentally and physically disabled persons are
entitled to live in normal residential surroundings. The use of property for the care of six or
fewer persons with disabilities is a residential use for the purpose of zoning. A State-licensed or
certified family care home, foster home, or group home serving six or fewer persons with
disabilities or dependent and neglected children on a 24-hour-a-day basis is considered a
residential use that is permitted in all residential zones.
The City recently amended its Zoning Code to identify Small (6 or fewer persons) or Large
Residential Care (more than 6 persons) Facilities as uses allowed in residential zones. The City
permits Small Residential Care Facilities in all residential zones by-right and Large Residential
Care Facilities in the Medium and Medium High Density Residential zones with approval of a
CUP. Conditions for approval will be established as objective criteria that pertain to
performance standards, such as parking, security, hours of operation, and management.
Definition of Family: A restrictive definition of “family” that limits the number of and
differentiates between related and unrelated individuals living together may illegally limit the
development and siting of group homes for persons with disabilities, but not for housing
families that are similarly sized or situated.5 The City recently removed the definition of
“family” from the Municipal Code.
5
     California court cases (City of Santa Barbara v. Adamson, 1980, and City of Chula Vista v. Pagard,
     1981, etc.) have ruled an ordinance as invalid if it defines a “family” as (a) an individual; (b) two or
     more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; (c) a group of not more than a specific
     number of unrelated persons as a single housekeeping unit. These cases have explained that
     defining a family in a manner that distinguishes between blood-related and non-blood related
     individuals does not serve any legitimate or useful objective or purpose recognized under the zoning
     and land use planning powers of a municipality, and therefore violates rights of privacy under the
     California Constitution.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                                     IIB-23

Housing Element
Building Codes: Indian Wells has adopted the 2001 California Building Code, 2010 California
Mechanical Code, 2010 California Electrical Code, and the 2010 California Plumbing Code.
These codes are utilized by most cities in California. Enforcement is typically complaint-driven.
Reasonable Accommodation: Under State and Federal fair housing laws, local governments are
required to provide “reasonable accommodation” to persons with disabilities when exercising
planning and zoning powers. For example, it may be reasonable for a person with a disability to
request the waiving of setback requirements in order to install a handicap access ramp. The
reasonableness of the request can be determined on a case-by-case basis. However, local
jurisdictions should establish a formal policy or procedure for providing such accommodation,
including objective criteria for establishing reasonableness.
The City maintains general processes for individuals with disabilities to make requests for
reasonable accommodation through the Zoning Code, permit processing and building codes.
The City makes efforts to remove constraints on housing for person with disabilities, such as
ADA retrofit efforts, an evaluation of the zoning code for ADA compliance and flexibility with a
written request by an applicant to review zoning, permit processing or building laws with
respect to reasonable accommodation.
The City has an application for requesting reasonable accommodations with a written policy in
the Building Department Manual for procedures for handling the applications. The purpose of
the application is to ensure that requests for reasonable accommodations meet all applicable
building codes and ADA requirements.
There are no restrictions of requests for retrofitting of homes for accessibility, such as ramps
and handrails. Requests for such retrofits are handled as any other minor improvement to a
home necessitating a permit, with the exception that the design must meet all applicable
standards and ADA requirements.
Manufactured Housing: The Zoning Code permits manufactured housing in any residential
district where single-family detached units are permitted and subject to the same property
development standards. The construction of manufactured homes is regulated under the
State’s Manufactured Housing Program. Indian Wells requires compliance with additional
regulations related to floodplain management. All new and replacement manufactured homes
and additions to manufactured homes must be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above
the base flood elevation and must be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Development Standards
In terms of zoning, the Indian Wells Zoning Code identifies development standards for each
residential zone, along with a residential use matrix.
IIB-24                                                         City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                                            Housing Element
                                        Table 14. Residential Development Standards
     Residential                                                                                                                           1
                              Unit Type      Min Lot        Building                         2       Min Du        Density        Setbacks
         Zone                                                                Parking Per/Du
                                              Area           Height                                    Size
 NPR-                     Single-Family    40 acres      One-story        2 spaces                   2,000 SF     1du/40 ac      50’ (f)
 Natural                  Detached                       18’ (max)                                                               100’ (r)
 Preserve                                                15’ (for     at                                                         25’ (s)
                                                         least 70%    of
                                                         roof area)
 RVLD-                    Single-Family    12,000 SF     One-story        2 spaces                   2,000 SF     3 du/ac        20’ (f)
 Residential Very         Detached                       18’ (max)                                                               10’ (r)
 Low Density                                             15’ (for     at                                                         8’ (s)
                                                         least 70%    of
                                                         roof area
 RLD- Residential         Single-Family    8,500 SF      One-story        2 spaces                   2,000 SF     4.5 du/ac      20’ (f)
 Low Density              Detached                       18’ (max)                                                               10’ (r)
                                                         15’ (for     at                                                         8’ (s)
                                                         least 70%    of
                                                         roof area
 RMD-                     Single-Family    12,000 SF     Two-story        Single Family              1,000 SF     4.6–7.0        20’ (f)
 Residential              Detached                       30’ (max)        Detached: 2 spaces;                     du/ac          10’ (r)
 Medium Density           Single-Family                  25’ (for     at                                                         8’ (s)
                          Attached                       least 70%    of  Multi-family:
                          Multi-family                   roof area)
                                                                           a.   Studio/1
                                                                                bedroom: 2
                                                                                spaces
                                                                           b.   2 or more
                                                                                bedrooms: 2
 RMHD-                    Single-Family    12,000 SF     Two-story              spaces plus ½      1,000 SF       12 du/ac       20’ (f)
 Residential              Detached                       30’ (max)              space per unit                                   10’ (r)
 Medium High              Single-Family                  25’ (for at            of guest parking                                 10’ (s)
 Density                  Attached                       least 70% of
                          Multi-family                   roof area)
Source: Indian Wells Zoning Code, 2013.
1. f – front; r – rear; s – side
2. Guest Parking: In addition to the above required parking, 1 parking space shall be provided and designed for guest parking for
   every 4 units unless guest parking can be provided on private streets.
                  The Zoning Code also makes provisions for the modification of development standards for
                  affordable housing. The modifications can include parking spaces, parking enclosures, open
                  space requirements, and minimum unit sizes. With the flexibility allowed by the Affordable
                  Housing Overlay Zone and the Senior Housing Overlay Zone, development standards have not
                  be an impediment to constructing affordable housing in the City.
                  City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                                     IIB-25

               Housing Element
                          Table 15. Uses Permitted and Conditionally Permitted1 by Zone
                                                                               Zone Designations
      Residential Unit Type          Natural Preserve        Very Low Density         Low Density        Medium            Medium/
                                                                                                          Density         High Density
                             2
  Manufactured Housing                       CUP                 Permitted             Permitted        Permitted          Permitted
                   3                             5
  Attached Units                            CUP                       --                    --              CUP               CUP
  Detached Units                             CUP                 Permitted             Permitted        Permitted          Permitted
                           4
  Second Dwelling Unit                       CUP                 Permitted             Permitted        Permitted          Permitted
Source: Indian Wells Zoning Code, 2013
Notes:
1. A Conditional Use Permit (CUP) is required to assure compliance with appropriate development codes.
2. Pursuant to State law, manufactured/mobile homes installed on permanent foundation meeting applicable State standards will
be considered single-family homes and permitted where single-family uses are allowed by right. Manufactured homes will be
conditionally permitted where single-family uses are conditionally permitted.
3. Attached units are multiple dwelling units sharing common walls. May include apartments, condominiums and other attached
units.
4. Ordinance No. 537 adopted on June 11, 2003 allows second units as a permitted use, removing the discretionary review
requirements. A minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet is required.
5. Cluster residential developments with attached units are permitted, subject to a CUP.
               Building Codes
               Indian Wells has adopted the 2001 California Building Code, 2010 California Mechanical Code,
               2010 California Electrical Code, and the 2010 California Plumbing Code. These codes establish
               minimum construction standards, and are utilized by most cities in California. The codes are a
               compendium of laws and ordinances setting minimum safety standards and arranged in a
               systematic manner for easy reference. They include all aspects of building construction to
               protect the public from hazards related to fire, structural collapse, seismic risk, and general
               deterioration. The local enforcement of building codes does not add significantly to the cost of
               housing in Indian Wells.
               Building Heights: Approximately 90 percent of all development lands are residential.
               Residential development within the City is primarily one-story. In the Medium and
               Medium/High Density Residential Zones the building height is 25’ with two living stories
               allowed above the pad elevation. Three story multi-unit structures are located within the
               Vintage Club community and two-story multi-unit structures are found in the easternmost area
               of the City, The City has been meeting its affordable housing allocation with the construction of
               one-story units. A request to exceed the minimum height standards could be processed with
               the development permit application. Therefore, building height requirements are not
               considered a constraint to the construction of affordable housing.
               IIB-26                                                                    City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                 Housing Element
Permit Processing
Development processing times can function as a constraint on residential development. The
high cost of housing is often attributed, in part, to governmental delays. The typical
development applications that are associated with residential development are listed below:
     ·   Tract Maps/Parcel Maps                        ·  Zone Change
     ·   General Plan Amendment                        ·  Conditional Use Permit
     ·   Master Development Plan/Specific              ·  Variance
         Plan                                          ·  Administrative Relief
Most residential developments require only a few applications from the above list, and are
typically processed concurrently. Such procedures save time, money, and effort for both the
public and private sectors. City planners meet with the developer to strategize about project
design, City standards, necessary public improvements and funding strategies. The City
complies with the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920) and City staff
assists the developer through the permit processing to ensure a rapid processing time.
A two to three-month processing time is typical for discretionary actions. The preparation of an
Environmental Impact Report may lengthen the process, if required. Both the Planning
Commission and City Council hear all discretionary actions. Review and processing time is
reasonable for a City of this size, presenting no undue constraints to residential development.
Indian Wells requires all development to comply with the City's Architecture and Landscape
Committee (ALC) review procedures. The Committee reviews all building proposals to
determine whether the proposed standards meet the design standards established by the City.
Pursuant to Municipal Code Section 21.60.070(b) a complete application must be submitted
only seven days in advance of an ALC meeting. Thus, there is not a lengthy delay in the
processing of applications.
Local Homeowner's Associations (HOA) have jurisdiction over proposals within their projects.
The ALC may review HOA approvals if City staff determines the need. Among the residential
design requirements are that all rear yards must have a masonry block wall along the property
(with some exceptions), mailbox design, and landscape planting pallets. Although these
requirements and procedures do provide for quality, attractive developments, they represent
potential governmental constraints that increase the cost of housing. The fee assessed for ALC
review and associated review time are not considered constraining to the development or
improvement of housing. Fees can be waived when approved by the City Council. Fees have
been waived for past affordable housing projects; thereby further reducing any potential
financial hardship.
A review to determine zoning compliance is conducted for all developments in the City to
ensure that a proposed development complies with all applicable City Codes and any previously
approved plans or maps for the site. Regulations checked during this review include setbacks,
landscaping, building height, parking, and other requirements of this Zoning Code. In addition,
this review cheeks all previously applied conditions of approval to ensure that the development
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                          IIB-27

Housing Element
meets these requirements. This review is conducted by the Director of Community
Development prior to the issuance of building permits.
The following discussion outlines the Findings required to approve various land use
entitlements associated with the development of housing in the City:
Tract Maps/Parcel Maps
Projects requiring a subdivision of land must have an approved tract map or parcel map
pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act. The following findings must be made to approve a tract
map or parcel map, consistent with California Government Code Section 66474:
      (1)      The proposed map is consistent with applicable general and specific plans.
      (2)      The site is physically suitable for the type of development.
      (3)      The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development.
      (4)      The design of the subdivision nor the proposed improvements are not likely to
               cause substantial environmental damage or substantially nor avoidably injure
               fish or wildlife or their habitat.
      (5)      The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is not likely to cause
               serious public health problems.
      (6)      The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with
               easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property
               within the proposed subdivision.
General Plan Amendment
An amendment to the General Plan may be adopted only if all of the following findings are
made:
         (1)     The proposed amendment is internally consistent with the General Plan; and
         (2)     The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest,
                 health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the City; and
         (3)     The proposed amendment would maintain the appropriate balance of land
                 uses within the City; and
         (4)     In case of an amendment to the General Plan Land Use Plan (i.e., Map), the
                 subject parcel(s) is physically suitable (including, but not limited to access,
                 provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of
                 physical constraints) for the requested land use designation(s) and the
                 anticipated land use developments(s).
IIB-28                                                           City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                                                 Housing Element
Master Development Plan/Specific Plan
The following findings must be made to approve a Master Development Plan or Specific Plan
request:
         (1)     The proposed Master Development Plan or Specific Plan is consistent with the
                 City of Indian Wells General Plan.
         (2)     The proposed Master Development Plan or Specific Plan is consistent with any
                 applicable zoning policies and regulations and with the intent of this Zoning
                 Code.
         (3)     The proposed Master Development Plan or Specific Plan is in the best interests
                 of the health, safety and welfare of the community.
Zone Change
 The following findings must be made to approve a Zone Change request:
         (1)     The proposed Zone Change is consistent with the City of Indian Wells General
                 Plan or any amendment approved concurrently with the Zone Change.
         (2)     The proposed Zone Change is consistent with the intent and objectives of this
                 Zoning Code.
         (3)     The proposed Zone Change is consistent with any applicable area Master
                 Development Plan or Specific Plan.
         (4)     The proposed Zone Change is in the best interests of the health, safety and
                 welfare of the community.
         (5)     Adequate sewer and water lines, utilities, sewage treatment capacity, drainage
                 facilities, police protection, fire protection/emergency medical care, vehicular
                 circulation and school facilities will be available to serve the area affected by
                 the proposed Zone Change when development occurs.
Conditional Use Permit
 The following findings must be made to approve a Conditional Use Permit:
         (1)     The proposed location of the conditional use is in accord with the objectives of
                 this Zoning Code and the purpose of the General Plan and zoning land use
                 category in which the site is located.
         (2)     The proposed conditional use will not be detrimental to the public health,
                 safety or welfare, or be materially injurious to properties or improvements in
                 the vicinity.
         (3)     The proposed conditional use will comply with each of the applicable
                 provisions of this Zoning Code except for approved Variances.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                           IIB-29
Housing Element
Variance
The following findings must be made to grant a variance:
      (1)       The strict application of this Zoning Code deprives the property of privileges
                enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification
                because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size,
                shape, topography, location, or surroundings.
      (2)       The granting of the Variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety
                or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.
      (3)       The granting of the Variance does not constitute a grant of special privileges
                inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and same
                zoning classification.
      (4)       The granting of the Variance does not authorize a use or activity which is not
                otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulation governing the parcel of
                property.
Administrative Relief
Section 21.06.090(3) contains provisions for administrative relief without the need for a
variance. The following is applicable to residential development:
    ·    Residential Zones—Front Yard Setback. In Residential Zones, a front yard setback
         reduction of not more than 20 percent of that required by City Code, provided that
         such requires is specific to “carport conversion.”
    ·    Residential Zones—Corner Cutback Areas. In Residential Zones, the “corner cutback
         area”, may be measured from the curb line rather than from the property line,
         provided that such measurement does not interfere with the visibility at and around
         the intersection and there is no street widening planned or contemplated for the
         frontage at issue.
    ·    Residential Zones—Location of Front and Corner Lot Walls. In Residential Zones, the
         location of front and corner lot walls on a single family lot may be adjusted to be
         consistent with the setbacks of existing front and corner lot walls in the immediate
         area, provided the character of the area is not detrimentally affected.
    ·    Residential Zone—Driveway Widths. In Residential Zones within a private gated
         community, driveway widths may be increased at that point at which they meet the
         street (or easement) to be consistent with driveway widths in the immediate area,
         provided such increase does not detrimentally affect the character of the
         neighborhood.
IIB-30                                                           City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                   Housing Element
    ·    Residential Zones—Building Pad and Finished Floor Elevations. Modifications of
         residential building pad and/or finished floor elevations may be reviewed and approved
         through the process of administrative relief provided that the building height does not
         exceed the maximum building height permitted under the originally approved building
         pad elevation.
    ·    Residential Zones—Emergency generators that do not exceed 15,000 kilowatts.
    ·    Alternative energy devices—Ground mounted equipment used to generate residential
         energy that is located completely within an enclosed structure.
The Administrative Relief provisions offer another way in which development standards can be
made flexible for the construction of housing.
The following findings must be made prior to approval of the administrative relief:
         (1)       The findings for a Variance as set forth in Section 21.06.050(d).
         (2)       That the proposed project is categorically exempt from the California
                   Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”) pursuant to Public Resources Code Section
                   21083 and CEQA Guidelines Section 15300 et seq. (14 C.C.R. Section 15300 et
                   seq.);
         (3)       The intent of the Zoning Code and of the specific regulation in question is being
                   preserved.
         (4)       The measures proposed by the applicant make the strict application of the
                   requirements of this division inappropriate.
         (5)       Any other findings required by this Zoning Code for the particular project.
With respect to making findings for any discretionary application, the primary factors are:
    ·    Access;
    ·    Provision of utilities;
    ·    Compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of physical constraints; and
    ·    Adequate sewer and water lines, utilities, sewage treatment capacity, drainage
         facilities, police protection, fire protection/emergency medical care, vehicular
         circulation and school facilities will be available to serve the area.
In addition, the City must make the following findings for development projects within
designated “hillside” areas:
         (a)     The proposed development concepts and plans are compatible with the natural
                 topography of the site;
         (b)     That the proposed development will provide for minimal disturbance of the
                 existing terrain and natural habitat; and,
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                            IIB-31

                  Housing Element
                            (c)    That the proposed development conforms to the spirit and intent of the
                                   Development Guidelines and Design Standards as set forth within this Chapter.
                  The remaining vacant sites in Indian Wells are all located in developed areas (See Figure IIB-1)
                  and are considered “infill” sites. That means that all infrastructure and utilities necessary to
                  support development are in place. A project needs only to connect to existing infrastructure or
                  utilities. Therefore, making the Findings necessary to grant approval of housing developments
                  is not a constraint.
                  Overall, the City review process has not served to impede affordable housing development.
                  Since 1990, the City has considered three affordable housing projects, all of which have been
                  approved and or constructed providing 275 affordable units.
                  Development Fees
                  Payment of development fees is required by development approvals. Development fees are
                  charged for processing development applications, and as part of compensation for City
                  services. The City of Indian Wells’ fees are comparable to, and in many cases lower than, those
                  of other cities within the Coachella Valley. Therefore, these fees are not likely to constrain
                  housing development. A comparison of the fees with other cities in the Coachella Valley is
                  shown in Table 16.
                  Fees may be waived by the City Council. Therefore, City fees are not considered a constraint to
                  the provision of affordable housing.
                                                Table 16. Comparison of Planning Fees
     FEE SCHEDULE-                             2       Cathedral                    2      La                       2                  2
                                Indian Wells                   2              Indio             2       Palm Desert      Rancho Mirage
       PERMIT TYPE                                        City                           Quinta
 General Plan                                                                          1
                                     $4,821 (D)          $2,570 (D)          $5,500 (D)    $4,000                $2,007          $3,930
 Amendment
                                                                                       1               Consultant cost +
 Specific Plan                       $4,799 (D)          $5,950 (D)         $10,000 (D)    $4,000                               $11,537
                                                                                                                   10%
                                                                                       1
 Zone Change                         $4,821 (D)          $2,570 (D)          $3,500 (D)    $2,710                $2,007          $3,930
 Conditional Use                                                                       1
                                         $8,387          $2,170 (D)          $2,500 (D)    $2,000            $2,894 (D)          $5,203
 Permit
                                                                                       1
 Variance                                $1,285          $2,170 (D)          $2,500 (D)    $1,700            $2,924 (D)          $3,695
                                                         $2,980 (D)                    1                                       $4,414 to
 Tentative Tract Map                     $4,231                              $5,000 (D)    $3,500            $3,308 (D)
                                                       plus $19/lot                                                              $9,774
                                                         $2,170 (D)                    1
 Tentative Parcel Map                    $3,803                              $2,500 (D)    $1,000                $1,203          $1,888
                                                       plus $19/lot
                                     Cost + 20%
 Environmental                                                                         1               Consultant cost +
                                 Administrative         $15,000 (D)          $5,000 (D)   Deposit                               $13,354
 Impact Report                                                                                                     10%
                                         Charge
(D) = Deposit Based Fee
1. Average hourly rate of $142 billed against deposit
2. All jurisdictions require applicant pay third party costs as applicable.
Source: Respective Planning Departments of surveyed cities, 2013.
                  IIB-32                                                                  City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                 Housing Element
Site Improvements
All new residential development in the City requires the construction of infrastructure
improvements, such as streets, sidewalks, storm drains, sewer lines, water lines, utilities etc.
Following are excerpts from the City’s Municipal Code in regard to site improvement
requirements for subdivisions:
20.80.010 Streets
         The minimum requirements for subdivision streets shall be as follows:
         (a)   Collector Streets. Collector streets shall have 72 feet of right-of-way and
               concrete curbs and gutters with 48 feet between curbs (4 - 12 foot lanes, 2 - 8
               foot lanes);
         (b)   General Local Streets. General local streets shall have 60 feet of right-of-way and
               concrete curbs and gutters with 40 feet between curbs (2- 12 foot lanes and 2- 8
               foot lanes) and asphalt pavement;
         (c)   Restricted Local. Restricted local streets shall have 50 feet of right-of-way and
               concrete curbs and gutters with 32 feet between curbs (2 traffic lanes, restricted
               parking), asphalt pavement;
         (d)   Alleys. Alleys shall have 20 feet of right-of-way and asphalt pavement full width;
         (e)   Street Name Signs. All streets and roads shall be identified by street name signs;
               and
         (f)   Dead-End Streets. Barricades with a length equal to the width of the right-of-way
               shall be required at the end of dead-end streets.
20.80.020 Domestic Water
         The minimum requirements for the supply and distribution of domestic water for
         subdivisions shall be as follows:
         (a)   Available Water Source. A water source shall be available which can provide 500
               gallons per day per single family residence lot and 450 gallons per day per lot for
               all other lots, in all cases deliverable in a two-hour period;
         (b)   Installation of a Piped Water System. A piped water system shall be installed;
               and
         (c)   Required Service Connections. The following service connection sizes shall be
               required: single family residence lot— one inch; multiple family residence lot—
               two inch; commercial or industrial lot—two inch.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                           IIB-33

Housing Element
20.80.040 Sewage Disposal
        The minimum requirements for sewage disposal systems to be installed in or to serve
        subdivisions shall be as follows:
        (a)    Sewer mains and laterals shall be installed to serve all lots for which the
               Commission determines that a satisfactory sewage disposal plant is or will be
               available.
        (b)    The subdivider shall provide, or contribute on a pro rata basis to the provision of,
               a sewage disposal plant to serve any subdivision for which the Commission
               determines that there is not satisfactory sewage plant capacity available.
        (c)    The extent of improvements will be based upon a sewer study performed for and
               paid by the applicant.
20.80.050 Flood Protection
        The minimum requirements for the control of flood waters crossing or f lowing           into
subdivisions shall be as follows:
        (a)    The basis of design shall be a storm having a frequency of once in 100 years;
        (b)    The flood control agency shall approve all plans for flood control facilities; and
        (c)    Streets and highways shall not be used as flood channels without the prior
               approval of the Engineer.
        (d)    Consideration of flood plain management techniques, when feasible, such as
               linear parks, golf courses, and/or open space preservation in lieu of
               channelization.
        These improvements are consistent with other jurisdictions in the Coachella Valley and
        do not typically impede the construction of housing. Because all of the vacant
        residential land in the City is located in developed areas and is considered “infill”
        development the requirement for site improvements will not be a significant
        constraint.
Taxes
Property taxes on homes which are sold today are based on a maximum of one and one quarter
percent of the purchase price, plus a possible two percent annual increase. New homebuyers
may face higher taxes than those who remain in their current residences. Renters maybe
vulnerable since they are unable to control the sale of property in which they live and the rent
paid may be raised to cover a new property owner's taxes and mortgage payments. This is not
considered a governmental constraint since it is controlled by market forces.
Provisions of the Federal income tax laws affect property owners' practices in buying, holding,
maintaining, and selling residential property. Although not the most important economic factor
IIB-34                                                         City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                  Housing Element
in all cases, Federal income tax laws do have a direct bearing on housing conditions. For
example, tax exemptions or credits could affect a homeowner's decision to expand, upgrade, or
even sell (or rent) his house. The same may hold true, to a lesser degree, with State taxes.
Local assessments affect the cost of housing as well. Any assessment that is attributed on a per-
unit basis (such as HOA fees and Fire Access Maintenance District Fees) increases the cost of
housing.
Restrictions on Public Housing
The City of Indian Wells constructed a 128-unit senior housing development in the northeast
area of the City, known as Mountain View Villas Phase I. Pursuant to Article 34 of the California
Constitution, public approval is required for the Redevelopment Agency to own and develop
the site. The City Council held an election to consider the project as being a 100 percent senior
affordable housing development. The ballot was held in March 2000 and was passed with
overwhelming support for the City/Agency to build, own and operate the development.
The previous senior housing development known as the Indian Wells Villas was completed in
June 1996. The development consisted of 90 units. This City held a ballot for this development
to be a 100 percent affordable housing development. In April, 1994, the election passed with
overwhelming support for the City/Agency to build, own and operate the development.
Non-Governmental Constraints
While the actions, policies, and regulations of cities, counties, and the State create constraints
upon housing opportunities, the largest obstacles to residential development is found outside
the sphere of government. It is the dynamics of the marketplace that directly influence the
availability of land, the cost of land, construction costs, and purchasing costs. These factors are
also affected by the perceptions about desirable housing that individuals hold and their
attitudes towards acceptable levels of housing density, traffic, and noise.
Land Cost: Although 90 percent of the City is residentially-designated land, the cost of such
land is quite high. The cost of land may contribute up to 30 to 50 percent to the final cost of a
single-family house. The holding cost of land during construction also adds to the price of
housing. Land holding costs can be lessened by reducing processing times for building permits.
However, Indian Wells' processing times are not lengthy, and do not represent a constraint to
housing development. The cost of land is governed by such factors as interest rates,
speculation, demand, supply, and location.
Construction Costs: Construction costs include the materials and labor, which are involved in
building the structures. These costs vary widely depending on the quality of features, which are
incorporated in the structure.
RS Means, a construction cost data provider, estimates that a single-family detached dwelling
may cost anywhere from $80 to $200 per square foot or more to build. Multi-family
developments are estimated to cost $75 to $125 per square foot. Lower sales prices could
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                           IIB-35
Housing Element
result from a reduction in amenities or quality of materials (above a minimum level consistent
with health, safety, and adequate performance standards).
Interest rates have the greatest impact on the ability to construct or purchase a home. Interest
rates, however, are determined by national policies and economic conditions, rather than local
land use regulations.
Home Purchase Costs: Housing costs in Indian Wells are, on average, higher than most other
cities in Riverside County. Because of the high cost of housing, many people are excluded from
living in the area. The median home sales price in Indian Wells in April 2013 was $565,000,
compared to $248,000 countywide. According to recent new and resale home sales activity,
Indian Wells has the highest resale value for homes in all cities within Riverside County, as
shown below:
                      Table 17. Comparison of Median Home Prices
                   Location              # Sold         April 2013       April 2012       % Change
           Cathedral City                 100            $181,000         $151,250         19.67%
           Coachella                       18            $159,000         $132,500         20.00%
           Desert Hot Springs              52            $115,000         $100,000         15.00%
           Indio                          189            $206,500         $170,000         21.47%
           Indian Wells                    37            $565,000         $685,000         17.52%
           La Quinta                       14            $379,000         $357,000          6.16%
           Palm Desert                    257            $277,000         $265,000          4.53%
           Palm Springs                   232            $265,000         $215,000         23.26%
           Rancho Mirage                   93            $430,000         $363,000         18.46%
           Thousand Palms                   8            $127,000          $55,000         130.91%
           Riverside County              3,773           $248,000         $200,000         24.00%
       Source: www.dqnews.com, 2013
Beyond the actual cost of the home, selling costs must be factored. Escrow fees, mortgage
processing, title acquisition, and realtor fees can reach 9 to 10 percent of the transaction. Local
lending institutions have stated that financing of homes in Indian Wells is available at
competitive rates.
IIB-36                                                          City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                                                     Housing Element
HOUSING RESOURCES
Energy Conservation
In relation to new residential development, and especially affordable housing, construction of
energy efficient buildings does add to the original production costs of ownership and rental
housing. Over time, however, housing with energy conservation features should result in
reduced occupancy costs as the consumption of fuel and electricity is decreased. This means
the monthly housing costs may be equal to or less than what they otherwise would have been
if no energy conservation devices were incorporated in the new residential buildings. Reduced
energy consumption in new residential structures, then, is one way of achieving more
affordable housing, as those costs are measured in monthly carrying costs as contrasted to
original sales price or production costs. Generally speaking, utility costs are among the highest
components of ongoing carrying costs. The City implements California Building Code Article 24
requirements as mandated by State law. Indian Wells is located in Zone 15, which is one of the
strictest energy conservation zones in California.
In 2009, the City updated the Conservation and Open Space Element of the General Plan to
include additional policies for energy conservation. Goal IIB7 and Objective A-5 requires that the
City include energy conservation measures in the construction of housing.
Since 2009, the City of Indian Wells has partnered with the Coachella Valley Association of
Governments (CVAG) as part of its Desert Cities Energy Partnership. In the fall of 2011, CVAG
developed a "green government initiative" on behalf of member jurisdictions to promote energy
efficiency, green building and sustainability, with funding received from Southern California Edison
and the California Public Utilities Commission. As part of this initiative, the Green for Life
Program, City staff has participated in ongoing coordination and review with CVAG and the Green
for Life consultant team on various program elements. The Green for Life Program, adopted on
June 6, 2013 includes:
     ·   Voluntary Green Building Program. The Green Building Program is a voluntary program to
         increase building efficiency 15 percent over current state requirements. It has been
         adopted by the cities of Desert Hot Springs, Cathedral City, Palm Springs, and Rancho
         Mirage and will be considered for adoption by Indian Wells.
     ·   Climate Action Plan. A 2010 greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory has been completed and a
         Climate Action Plan, a greenhouse gas reduction plan, has been prepared. The Climate
         Action Plan is the strategic blueprint for the City to reach the GHG reduction targets
         identified through the GHG inventory.
Financial Resources
The City's primary financial resource for affordable housing development was previously the
redevelopment housing set-aside fund. With the dissolution of the Indian Wells Redevelopment
Agency, those funds are no longer available. The City is not an entitlement jurisdiction for
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                              IIB-37

Housing Element
Federal CDBG and HOME funds. The City receives a suballocation of CDBG funds through the
County of Riverside Economic Development Agency. Indian Wells receives approximately
$30,000 annually and uses the funds for maintenance and modifications to existing affordable
senior housing projects within the City.
IIB-38                                                   City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                                           Housing Element
ASSESSMENT OF THE PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
When updating a Housing Element, State law requires all Housing Elements to provide an
assessment of the previous housing program. The assessment is intended to assist cities in
identifying effective and non-effective policies and programs, in order to better direct
resources and achieve their housing goals for the next planning period.
As such, the following discussion is a program-by-program analysis of the implementation of
the 2008-2014 Housing Element.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                    IIB-39
Housing Element
                                   Table 18. Review of 2008-2014 Housing Element Past Performance
             Policy/Implementation Program                        Objective                            Progress/Status
IIB1.1 Continue enforcement of the codes and                                         The City continues to enforce building and zoning
regulations establishing minimum construction standards.                             codes through the plan check, permitting, and
                                                                                     inspection processes. In addition, the City
                                                                                     conducts code enforcement activities on a regular
                                                                                     basis.
IIB1.2 Ensure that new affordable housing meets all of                               No new housing projects for lower-income
the construction and development standards of the City.                              households have been constructed within the
                                                                                     planning period. However, all new housing
                                                                                     development is required to meet the City’s
                                                                                     development standards and construction
                                                                                     requirements. The City ensures compliance
                                                                                     through the building plan check, permitting and
                                                                                     inspection processes.
IIB2.1 Address the existing housing needs through                                    Indian Wells residents may receive Section 8
participation in the Section 8 Housing Assistance or other                           Housing Choice Vouchers through the County of
similar program(s).                                                                  Riverside Housing Authority.
IIB2.2 Contribute financially toward emergency shelters                              From 2008 to 2010, the City contributed $311,172
for the Coachella Valley area and join other jurisdictions in                        for funding emergency shelters.
designating a feasible site, or sites, with appropriate
zoning, infrastructure and utilities, for emergency
shelters.
IIB2.3 Work with the County to identify potential sites                              From 2008 to 2010, the City contributed $311,172
for additional homeless facilities in the region and                                 for funding emergency shelters.
contribute funds to relief organizations that address the
valley-wide homeless situation.
IIB2.4 Continue to provide affordable housing                                        The City continues to encourage affordable
opportunities in Indian Wells through a density bonus                                housing development by providing density bonus
incentive for the development of low and moderate                                    incentives consistent with current State density
income units.                                                                        bonus law.
IIB2.5 Utilize the Affordable Housing Fund to facilitate                             The Affordable Housing Fund was comprised of
the construction of new housing.                                                     the Redevelopment Housing Set Aside. The Indian
IIB-40                                                                                             City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                                                        Housing Element
                                    Table 18. Review of 2008-2014 Housing Element Past Performance
              Policy/Implementation Program                        Objective                            Progress/Status
                                                                                      Wells Redevelopment Agency was dissolved in
                                                                                      2012, consistent with the dissolution of
                                                                                      redevelopment agencies statewide. The
                                                                                      Affordable Housing Fund is no longer available.
IIB3.1 Ensure an adequate inventory of land sufficient                                In August 2013, the City adopted an amendment
to meet the City's "share of regional housing need."                                  to the Affordable Housing Overlay that allows for
Rezone properties for residential uses as needed.                                     the development of up to 20 du/ac. The City
                                                                                      identified sites within the 2006-2014 Housing
                                                                                      Element to meet its RHNA need.
IIB4.1 Continue to utilize zoning standards, and overlay                              The City continues to facilitate development of
districts, that facilitate the development of affordable                              affordable housing units by providing the
housing units.                                                                        Affordable Housing Overlay. This overlay can be
                                                                                      applied to any residential zone and allows for
                                                                                      density bonuses and other incentives consistent
                                                                                      with State density bonus law.
IIB4.2 Utilize the Affordable Housing Fund to mitigate                                The Affordable Housing Fund was comprised of
the cost constraints generated by both governmental and                               the Redevelopment Housing Set Aside. The Indian
non-governmental constraints.                                                         Wells Redevelopment Agency was dissolved in
                                                                                      2012, consistent with the dissolution of
                                                                                      redevelopment agencies statewide. The
                                                                                      Affordable Housing Fund is no longer available.
IIB5.1 Enforce all applicable laws and policies pertaining                            The City continues to enforce laws and policies
to equal housing opportunity through the City's                                       pertaining to equal housing opportunity. The City
participation in programs funded by the Federal                                       is not an entitlement jurisdiction that receives
Community Development Block Grant Program and/or                                      Federal CDBG funds directly. However the City
Redevelopment Agency's Affordable Housing Fund.                                       receives a suballocation from the County of
                                                                                      Riverside Economic Development Agency. The
                                                                                      City has used the funds to provide for
                                                                                      maintenance and modifications to existing
                                                                                      affordable senior housing projects in the City. The
                                                                                      Affordable Housing Fund was comprised of the
IIB-41                                                                                               City of Indian Wells General Plan
Housing Element
                                 Table 18. Review of 2008-2014 Housing Element Past Performance
              Policy/Implementation Program                               Objective                                  Progress/Status
                                                                                                   Redevelopment Housing Set Aside. The Indian
                                                                                                   Wells Redevelopment Agency was dissolved in
                                                                                                   2012, consistent with the dissolution of
                                                                                                   redevelopment agencies statewide. The
                                                                                                   Affordable Housing Fund is no longer available.
IIB6.1 Utilize the Redevelopment Agency Affordable                                                 The Indian Wells Redevelopment Agency was
Housing Fund to purchase and rehabilitate existing                                                 dissolved in 2012, consistent with the dissolution
housing for use by qualifying low and moderate income                                              of redevelopment agencies statewide. The
residents.                                                                                         Affordable Housing Fund is no longer available.
IIB6.2 Utilize the Redevelopment Agency to perform                                                 The Indian Wells Redevelopment Agency was
land development and management, including purchase,                                               dissolved in 2012, consistent with the dissolution
construction, and property management of affordable                                                of redevelopment agencies statewide.
housing projects.                                                                                  Redevelopment funds are not available to support
                                                                                                   this program.
IIB6.3 Maintain and update a Redevelopment Housing                                                 The Indian Wells Redevelopment Agency was
Implementation Plan consistent with California State                                               dissolved in 2012, consistent with the dissolution
Redevelopment law requirements.                                                                    of redevelopment agencies statewide. The
                                                                                                   Redevelopment Housing Implementation Plan is
                                                                                                   no longer required or applicable.
A1. Land Use Element and Zoning Code                      Objective A.1: Amend the Affordable      The City amended the Affordable Housing Overlay
Establish and monitor a Land Use Element and Zoning       Housing Overlay to establish a density   to include a density of 20 du/ac in August 2013.
Code that ensures an adequate supply of sites with        of up to 20 units per acre for the
appropriate development standards and public facilities   Medium and Low Density land use
and services for the development of a variety of housing  designations as an option in 2010.
types, sizes, and prices to meet the future housing needs Objective A.1.2: The City will implement The sites shown in the Housing Element are still
of Indian Wells.                                          a formal procedure to annually monitor   available for development. The City removed the
                                                          approved development on Sites A, B, C,   affordable housing covenant from Site B (Golden
                                                          and D of Table 27 relative to the        View Villas), but has placed an affordable housing
                                                          development capacity and affordability   covenant on Site D.
                                                          estimate for these sites to ensure
                                                          adequate capacity to accommodate the     The City amended the Affordable Housing Overlay
IIB-42                                                                                                            City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                                                                                                       Housing Element
                                  Table 18. Review of 2008-2014 Housing Element Past Performance
              Policy/Implementation Program                                  Objective                                  Progress/Status
                                                            City’s RHNA of 150 units as an ongoing    to include a density of 20 du/ac in August 2013.
                                                            activity during the planning period. If
                                                            sites are not developed as planned, the
                                                            City will identify alternative sites with
                                                            equivalent capacity and allowable
                                                            densities to maintain adequate sites to
                                                            accommodate the regional housing
                                                            need for lower income households,
                                                            including families throughout the
                                                            planning period. The City will annually
                                                            report on the results and effectiveness
                                                            of this program pursuant to
                                                            Government Code Section 65400.
A2. Vacant and Underdeveloped Land Survey                   Objective A.2: Certify the survey on an   The City continues to utilize the vacant and
Prepare and maintain a comprehensive land use survey        annual basis. This is an on-going policy  underdeveloped land survey developed as part of
identifying parcels and/or structures suitable for          that is evaluated annually as part of the the 2008-2014 Housing Element.
residential development and use for all income              Housing Element Implementation.
categories.
A3. Zoning/Development Standards                            Objective A.3: Review and revise the      The City has reviewed density bonus provisions
Maintain development regulations that promote the           density bonus provisions if needed.       and development standards in the Zoning Code
development of affordable housing. This includes a full                                               and has not found any necessary revisions.
range of residential densities, the provision of density
bonuses or other equivalent financial incentives, and the
ongoing review of development standards that may make
construction of affordable housing impractical. Financial
incentives may include, but are not limited to, land write-
downs, on and off-site improvement financing, fast track
processing, and fee waivers.
A4. Redesignation/Rezoning                                  Objective A.4: The City has adequate      The City continues to utilize the vacant and
The City will review the results of the Vacant and          vacant land to accommodate the            underdeveloped land survey developed as part of
Underdeveloped Land Survey on an annual basis and, if it    regional housing needs for the 2008-      the 2008-2014 Housing Element and monitor
IIB-43                                                                                                              City of Indian Wells General Plan

Housing Element
                                   Table 18. Review of 2008-2014 Housing Element Past Performance
              Policy/Implementation Program                                    Objective                                  Progress/Status
is apparent that there are an inadequate number of sites      2014 cycle. (See “Residential Sites      vacant land. The City amended the Affordable
to provide affordable housing to meet the City's regional     Inventory for Future Development”        Housing Overlay to include a density of 20 du/ac
requirement, rezone or redesignate residential and/or         Pages IIB-58 through IIB-62 This is an   in August 2013.
commercial property to an appropriate density to achieve      on-going policy that is evaluated
any unmet regional housing need requirement. With the         annually as part of the Housing Element
adoption of the General Plan, the City of Indian Wells will   Implementation. Currently there is no
have a sufficient amount of land available to provide         vacant land in Indian Wells at risk of
housing opportunities for all income levels.                  being converted from a residential use
                                                              to a non-residential land use.
A5. Energy Conservation                                       Objective A.5: The City will update the  The City updated the Conservation and Open
The City supports the goals and objectives of                 Conservation and Open Space Element      Space Element in 2009 to address additional
environmental sustainability, and directs staff, all          of the General Plan to expand the        energy conservation and sustainability objectives.
commissions, and all committees to consider                   current energy conservation policies by
environmental sustainability in all of its official acts. The the end of 2011 to address sustainable   From 2008 to 2010, The City invested $4.2 million
City will address the impacts placed on the environment       housing development, water               in renewable energy systems including solar in the
and will pursue the development of green buildings for        conservation, energy conservation        Indian Wells Villas. The project will reduce energy
housing and sustainability programs wherever possible.        recycling conservation, use of           bills by at least 80 percent.
Green building is the practice of creating structures and     alternative energy, and public
using processes that are environmentally responsible and      awareness programs.
resource-efficient.
A6. Rehabilitation and Preservation                           Objective A.6: Assist in having 10 units The City continues to refer interested
Although no housing units were determined to need             participate in the Weatherization Direct residents/property owners to SCE for the rebate
major rehabilitation during this planning period, residents   Assistance program through Southern      programs.
in the City are eligible (based on income) for the            California Gas and/or the “Cool Roofs”
Weatherization Direct Assistance Program through the          Single-Family Energy Rebate Program
Southern California Gas Company. In addition, Southern        through SCE.
California Edison offers city residents participation in the
“Cool Roofs” Single-family Energy Efficient Rebate
Program if a cool roof is installed on a housing unit.
IIB-44                                                                                                                 City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                                                                Housing Element
                              Table 18. Review of 2008-2014 Housing Element Past Performance
             Policy/Implementation Program                             Objective                                 Progress/Status
B1. Zoning Code Amendments                            Objective B.1.1: Accommodate small        The City amended the Zoning Code to meet this
Amend the Zoning Code to address the provisions for a residential care facilities (six or fewer objective in August 2013.
variety of housing options.                           persons) as regular residential uses
                                                      permitted in all residential zones, and
                                                      large residential care facilities (more
                                                      than six persons) as conditionally
                                                      permitted uses in Medium and Medium
                                                      High Density Residential zones as
                                                      required by Government Code Section
                                                      65583(c) (3).
                                                      Objective B.1.2: Amend the Zoning Code    The City amended the Zoning Code permit
                                                      to permit emergency shelters the          emergency shelters by-right in the Community
                                                      Community Commercial zone without a       Commercial zone in August 2013.
                                                      Conditional Use Permit or other
                                                      discretionary permit as required by
                                                      Government Code Section 65583(a)(4).
                                                      Objective B.1.3: Provide provisions for   The City amended the Zoning Code to meet this
                                                      transitional and supportive housing that  objective in August 2013.
                                                      considers them as a residential use and
                                                      only subjects them to those restrictions
                                                      that apply to other residential uses of
                                                      the same type in the same zone as
                                                      required by Government Code Section
                                                      65583(c)(1).
                                                      Objective B.1.4: Amend the Zoning Code    The City amended the Zoning Code to meet this
                                                      to permit farmworker housing by right,    objective in August 2013.
                                                      including density and development
                                                      standards that could accommodate and
                                                      facilitate the feasibility of the
                                                      development of farmworker housing for
IIB-45                                                                                                        City of Indian Wells General Plan
Housing Element
                                   Table 18. Review of 2008-2014 Housing Element Past Performance
              Policy/Implementation Program                                  Objective                                   Progress/Status
                                                             low-and very low income households as
                                                             required by Government Code Section
                                                             65583(c)(1)(B).
                                                             Objective B.1.5: Amend the Zoning Code    The City amended its Zoning Code in August 2013
                                                             to allow SRO units in the Residential     to permit Single Room Occupancy (SRO) units by
                                                             Medium High Density and the Resort        right in the Medium High Density Residential
                                                             Commercial zones. The City will           zone.
                                                             establish appropriate development
                                                             standards in the Zoning Code for SRO
                                                             units as required by Government Code
                                                             Section 65583(c) (1).
                                                             Objective B.1.6: Evaluate the reasonable  City continues to maintain a written policy in the
                                                             accommodation procedures on an            Building Department Manual for reviewing and
                                                             annual basis and revise it as appropriate approving requests for reasonable
                                                             to ensure consistency with fair housing   accommodations. The City has not identified any
                                                             requirements.                             revisions necessary to maintain consistency with
                                                                                                       fair housing requirements.
B2. Development Guidelines and Procedures                    Objective B.2: Provide information via    Information about development guidelines and
Maintain development guidelines, which specify the           the Internet, public counter and have     procedures is provided at the public counter at
procedures, materials, time frames, and costs associated     City staff communicate with the local     City Hall and on the City’s website. The planning
with various zoning and subdivision applications. The        Building Industry Association. This is an handouts and forms includes typical development
objective is to provide potential developers with an         on-going policy that is evaluated         applications and information on the Green for Life
informational package clearly explaining the development     annually as part of the Housing Element   Program.
review procedure as well as the possible financial           Implementation.
incentives available for affordable housing development.
C1. Financial Incentives                                     Objective C.1: Consider all affordable    The Indian Wells Redevelopment Agency was
The City will consider financial incentives to developers of housing development applications to       dissolved in 2012, consistent with the dissolution
affordable housing. The principal financial resource to      determine appropriateness of financial    of redevelopment agencies statewide.
enable the development of affordable housing in the City     incentives for each particular proposal.  Consequently, Redevelopment funds are currently
of Indian Wells is the Redevelopment 20 Percent Set-         Quantified objective is to assist in the  not available to support this program.
Aside Fund.                                                  development of 47 moderate income on
IIB-46                                                                                                                City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                                                                           Housing Element
                                   Table 18. Review of 2008-2014 Housing Element Past Performance
              Policy/Implementation Program                                      Objective                                  Progress/Status
                                                               Site D (Table 27), and 26 low income       Sites C and D have not been developed.
                                                               and 20 very low units on Sites C and D
                                                               (Table 27) (i.e. the City’s remaining
                                                               RHNA during the planning period). This
                                                               is an on-going policy that is evaluated
                                                               annually as part of the Housing Element
                                                               Implementation.
D1. Fair Housing Enforcement                                   Objective D.1: Enforce all policies        The City continues to refer fair housing
The City will enforce all policies pertaining to equal         pertaining to equal housing opportunity
housing opportunity and fair housing. The City will            and fair housing. This is an on-going
maintain a listing of fair housing groups serving Riverside    policy that is evaluated annually as part
County.                                                        of the Housing Element
                                                               Implementation.
D2. Fair Housing Policy Procedures                             Objective D.2: Provide information on      The City continues to provide information about
Discrimination complaints made to the City Staff will be       fair housing services and policy at public fair housing to inquiring parties through City Hall.
processed by the City Manager and City Attorney. Fair          counters and at City website. This is an
housing policy procedures will be available at City Hall and   on-going policy that is evaluated every
advertised in the City Newsletter on a periodic basis.         year as part of the Housing Element
                                                               Implementation.
D3. Promote Fair Housing Opportunities                         Objective D.3: The City will remove the    The City amended the Zoning Code to meet this
Promote opportunities for all persons regardless of race,      definition of “family” from the City’s     objective in August 2013.
religion, sex, age, marital status, familial status, ancestry, Zoning Code by the end of 2011.
national origin, color, source of income, sexual
orientation, or any other arbitrary factor.
E1. Redevelopment Housing Report                               Objective E.1: Update the                  The Indian Wells Redevelopment Agency was
The City will require that the Redevelopment Agency            Redevelopment Housing                      dissolved in 2012, consistent with the dissolution
maintain an updated housing report that specifies the          Implementation Plan every five years to    of redevelopment agencies statewide. The
number of units the Redevelopment Agency is required to        report the Agency’s inclusionary and       Redevelopment Housing Report is no longer a
rehabilitate and/or construct to meet the housing              replacement housing obligations, as        requirement.
requirements of State Redevelopment law.                       well as planned use of Redevelopment
                                                               20 Percent Set-Aside Funds.
IIB-47                                                                                                                   City of Indian Wells General Plan

Housing Element
                                  Table 18. Review of 2008-2014 Housing Element Past Performance
              Policy/Implementation Program                               Objective                                 Progress/Status
E2. Acquisition/Development/Management                   Objective E.2: Develop twenty (20) very  The City continues to work with interested
The Redevelopment Agency may utilize 20 Percent Set-     low, twenty-six (26) low, and forty-     developers to provide affordable housing. The
Aside Funds to purchase, develop, and manage affordable  seven (47) moderate income units by      City has placed a covenant on one site (Site D)
housing projects. This program may also include the      the end of the planning period (June     that only allows for development of affordable
ability to provide land write-downs to developers and/or 2014). Additionally, the City staff will housing on that site. The Indian Wells
low interest rate mortgages to homeowners. Other         continue to pursue opportunities to      Redevelopment Agency was dissolved in 2012,
provisions provide for the ability to purchase and/or    purchase existing units and/or vacant    consistent with the dissolution of redevelopment
rehabilitate existing units for use by low and moderate- land, seek out opportunities with non-   agencies statewide. With the dissolution of the
income residents as well as provide monthly assistance   profit affordable housing developers for Redevelopment Agency, the City is unable to
payments. Currently, the Agency has budgeted             affordable housing projects every two    provide financial incentives for the development
expenditures of over approximately $7 million on the 68- (2) years during the planning period,    of affordable housing.
unit non-age restricted affordable housing project known and prioritize funding for extremely
as Garden View Villas.                                   low-income household project(s) This is
                                                         an on-going policy that is evaluated
                                                         annually as part of the Housing Element
                                                         Implementation.
IIB-48                                                                                                           City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                                                        Housing Element
FUTURE HOUSING NEEDS AND DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
Regional Housing Needs Assessment
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) prepares the RHNA, which
allocates future housing needs to all jurisdictions within the Coachella Valley Association of
Governments (CVAG) subregion. For this new Housing Element update, the planning period
covers from January 1, 2014 through October 15, 2021. The following table illustrates the
RHNA allocations for this planning period.
                                              Table 24.
                          Regional Housing Needs Assessment
                           January 1, 2014 to October 15, 2021
                     Income Level                  Units               Distribution
                Very Low (Extremely                     40 (20)                    25.0%
                    1
                Low )
                Low                                          27                    16.9%
                Moderate                                     31                    19.4%
                Above Moderate                               62                    38.8%
                Total                                       160                  100.0%
                1.  AB2634 mandates that each locality calculates the portion of very low
                    income (50 percent or less of AMI) regional housing need that
                    constitutes the community’s need for Extremely Low Income housing
                    (30 percent or less of AMI). 50% of the Very Low-Income need is
                    assumed be Extremely Low Income. This is a subset of the Very Low
                    Income need (not additive).
Residential Sites Inventory for Future Development
As of March 2013, the City has approximately 296 acres of vacant residential sites with a
potential for 1,013 additional units. These units are assumed to be affordable to Above
Moderate Income households. These sites are presented in Figure IIB-1 and Table 26.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                                 IIB-49

   Housing Element
                          Table 26. Vacant Residential Land
             Maximum   # of                        Total
  Zoning      Density Parcels     Acres            Units                   Comment
Subdivided
                                                             Includes 339 units from future phases
RVLD        3 du/ac    582         229              582      of Toscana project and 112 units from
                                                             The Province
RLD         4.5 du/ac   21         6.8               21      21 units from The Province project
                                    Not Yet Subdivided
                                                             Average density of 3 du/ac is used to
RLD         4.5 du/ac    2          7             21-32
                                                             estimate lower end of potential units
                                                             Average density of 5.5 du/ac is used
RMD         7 du/ac      3        53.4           293-378     to estimate lower end of potential
                                                             units
Total                  608        296.2        917 - 1,013
   IIB-50                                                  City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                           Housing Element
                 Figure IIB-1: Vacant Residential Property
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                    IIB-51
Housing Element
As shown in Table 24, the City has a remaining regional housing need for 98 units Very Low,
Low, and Moderate Income units after accounting for the capacity of vacant residential land in
the City that would meet the Above Moderate Income need. The following portion of the
Housing Element addresses the requirements of Government Code Sections 65583 and
65583.2, requiring a parcel-specific inventory of appropriately zoned, available, and suitable
sites that can provide realistic opportunities for the provision of housing to all income segments
within the community.
The remaining 98 units of the City’s share of the regional housing need will be primarily met by
addressing the adequate sites requirement through the identification of available vacant and
non-vacant sites that are suitable and appropriately zoned. The sites suitability analysis
demonstrates these sites are currently available and unconstrained so as to provide realistic
development opportunities during the planning period. To demonstrate the realistic
development viability of the sites, the analysis also discusses: (1) whether appropriate zoning is
in place, (2) the applicable development standards and their impact on projected development
capacity and affordability, (3) existing constraints including any known environmental issues,
and the (4) availability of existing and planned public service capacity levels.
The City’s land inventory was developed with the use of a combination of resources including
the City’s GIS database, Assessor’s data, field surveys, and review of the City’s Land Use
Element and Zoning Ordinance. The compilation resulted in not only an identification of sites,
but also an estimate of potential development capacity for these sites. The majority of the land
available for residential development is located north of Highway 111 and west of Washington
Street.
The City’s Affordable Housing Overlay allows the construction of affordable units in all
residential designated zoning districts at any location within the City. The Overlay incentivizes
affordable residential development by allowing up to 20 units per acre in the Low and Medium
Density zoning districts. This provides flexibility in the location of sites.
IIB-52                                                            City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                                      Housing Element
        The following sites inventory was developed in July 2013.
                                Table 27. Affordable Housing Sites Inventory
 Site     Location          Zone       Allowable             GP          Acres     Realistic     Existing     Utilities  Environmental
                                                1
                                        Density         Designation                  Unity         Use       Available   Constraints
                                                                                   Capacity
A     N/S of Hwy.111      RMD              4.6-        Med. Density       7.59         57         Multi-         Yes          None
      E/O Cota Way                     7.0/du/ac.                                                 family
      (APN: 633-410-
      039 in part)
B     E/O      Warner     RLD         3.1-4.5du/ac     Low Density        4.2          63        Vacant          Yes          None
      Trail adjacent
      to        Tennis
      Garden (APN:
      604-630-032)
                                                  2
C     S/S of Miles        RC          8.75/du/ac       Resort              15         225        Vacant          Yes          None
      W/O                                              Commercial
      Washington
      (APN: 633-300-
      007)
Total                                                                    26.79        345
        1
           Density based on maximum density of 20 du/ac with 75% of maximum density achieved.
        2
           Current General Plan Zone designation is Resort Commercial; density has been calculated using 20 du/ac with
            75% of maximum density achieved.
        Capacity Analysis
        Site A: As shown in Table 27, Site A has been approved for an additional 57 affordable, senior
        units as Mountain View Villas Phase II and has not yet been constructed. A portion of the site
        was developed in 2004 with 128 affordable, senior apartments in Mountain View Villas Phase I
        by National Community Renaissance (CORE) housing.
        Site B: This is a site that is adjacent to existing urban development with all utilities available
        and no significant environmental, topographical, utility, or other physical constraints are
        anticipated to restrict development potential. Site B has a covenant in place that requires the
        site be developed with affordable housing units. The number of units and level of affordability
        is not specified. With the option to increase the density up to 20 du/ac with the Affordable
        Housing Overlay, the site has adequate capacity to provide up to 63 units assuming 75 percent
        of maximum density is achieved.
        Site C: This is a site that is adjacent to existing urban development with all utilities available
        and no significant environmental, topographical, utility, or other physical constraints that are
        anticipated to restrict development potential. With the option to increase the density up to 20
        du/ac with the Affordable Housing Overlay, the site has adequate capacity to provide up to 225
        units assuming 75 percent of maximum density is achieved.
        City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                                         IIB-53
Housing Element
Site Suitability of Vacant Residential Land
The primary constraints that may impact future development of the vacant residential land
shown in Figures IIB-1 and IIB-2 includes biological resources, drainage and flood control,
seismic hazards, and sewer and water infrastructure.
Biological Resources
The Coachella Valley Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (CVMSHCP) was finalized by
the Coachella Valley Association of Governments (CVAG). The City of Indian Wells approved the
plan on October 4, 2007 and is a “permittee” under the plan. All of the vacant residential land
in the City as shown in Figure IIB-1 is located outside a Conservation Area identified by the
CVMSHCP. Thus, the vacant residential land is not likely to be restricted by biological
constraints that cannot be mitigated by the CVMSHCP.
Drainage and Flooding
The Coachella Valley Stormwater District was assimilated by the Coachella Valley Water District
(CVWD) in 1935. The district protects 590 square miles from flooding. Backbone of the system
is 25 miles of naturally-occurring Whitewater River riverbed. Because the river spreads across
the lower valley during flooding, it was channelized. It is the Coachella Valley Stormwater
Channel, downstream from Point Happy in La Quinta near Highway 111 and Washington
Avenue. The riverbed and 25 mile channel are fed by several smaller channels, dikes and levees
designed and built to collect rapidly moving floodwater as it pours from the adjacent mountains
onto the valley floor.
Within CVWD's boundaries there are 16 stormwater protection channels. These and other
facilities have a length of 138 miles. Many of these were built or improved in the 1970s in
cooperation with cities and other agencies following severe floods. There are adequate
drainage and flood control facilities to serve future residential development in the City.
Seismic Hazards
The City of Indian Wells, as well as the rest of Southern California, has a moderate to high
seismic risk due to numerous faults and extensive historical and ongoing seismic activity. The
actual potential for seismic damage depends on a number of factors, such as the proximity to
active or potentially active fault zones and on the type of geologic structures. Seismic damage
is generally less intense in consolidated materials, such as bedrock, than in unconsolidated
materials, such as alluvium. The City of Indian Wells is not within an Alquist-Priolo Fault Zone.
With mandatory compliance with codes which are similar to other jurisdictions in the Coachella
Valley, seismic risks would not be a significant impediment to the construction of housing.
Sewer Facilities
Presently, there are six water reclamation plants (WRP) providing wastewater treatment as
well as recycled water supply in the CVWD service area. WRP-10 serves the City of Indian Wells.
IIB-54                                                          City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                              Housing Element
The combined secondary wastewater treatment design capacity of the WRP is 18 mgd. WRP-10
treats an annual average daily flow of 10.8 mgd from the activated sludge plant. Approximately
60 percent of this plant’s effluent receives tertiary treatment for reuse and is delivered to
customers through an existing recycled water distribution system. The remaining secondary
effluent is piped to a holding basin and/or the 6 storage basins, and then to the 21 infiltration
basins for final disposal. WRP-10 has adequate capacity to provide wastewater service for the
future development of the vacant residential land in the City. Any project will be required to
meet the City’s and CVWD requirements. These requirements are consistent with other
jurisdictions in the area and do not impeded the construction of housing.
Water Facilities
The 2010 Urban Water Management Plan for the CVWD projects water usage for the CVWD
service area for through 2035. The total water demand for domestic water is expected to
increase from 104,309 acre-ft/year in 2010 to 234,800 acre-ft/year in 2035. The water demand
estimates were based on a planning model using land use plans, local demographic changes,
parcel data, and CVWD billing rates. Local demographic changes were analyzed using land use
data and Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) projections of population,
households, and employment for each city and census tract combination.
The planning model included the City of Indian Wells General Plan Land Use plan which
included the vacant residential sites shown in Figures IIB-1 and IIB-2. The UWMP concluded
that the CVWD will be able to meet 100 percent of the projected water demand for the period
2010 to 2035.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                         IIB-55

Housing Element
                Figure IIB-2: Affordable Housing Sites
IIB-56                                      City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                                              Housing Element
HOUSING PLAN
Goals, Policies and Implementation Programs
The goals, policies and implementation programs presented in this Section express the City's
intent to provide housing opportunities to all income groups. Seven goals focus the City's
efforts to meet State law, with corresponding policies pertaining to Conservation and
Improvement of Housing, Development of Housing, Adequate Sites, Removal of Governmental
Constraints, Equal Housing Opportunity, Redevelopment, and Energy Conservation.
Conservation and Improvement of Housing
Goal IIB1
Conserve and improve the condition of the existing housing stock.
Conservation and Improvement Policies
IIB1.1 Continue enforcement of the codes and regulations establishing minimum construction
         standards.
IIB1.2 Encourage maintenance and repair of existing housing to prevent deterioration within
         the City.
Conservation and Improvement Implementation Programs
IIB1.A Rehabilitation and Preservation
Although no housing units were determined to need major rehabilitation during this planning
period, property owners may be eligible for rehabilitation assistance including rebates, grants
and loans, through outside programs provided by utility providers and other organizations. The
City will provide refer property owners to these programs upon inquiry or with code
enforcement programs.
Responsibility:         Community Development Department
Financing:              General Fund
Objective:              Refer property owners to applicable agencies/organizations for
                        rehabilitation assistance.
Timing:                 Ongoing
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                       IIB-57
Housing Element
Development of Housing
Goal IIB2
Support and encourage the development of housing affordable for all income segments of the
population.
Development of Housing Policies
IIB2.1 Ensure adequate housing sites are available through appropriate zoning and
         development standards and with public services and facilities needed to facilitate and
         encourage the development of a variety of types of housing for all income groups.
IIB2.2 Continue to provide affordable housing opportunities in Indian Wells through a density
         bonus incentive for the development of lower and moderate income units.
IIB2.3 Encourage private entities (both non-profit and for-profit) to participate in attaining
         housing goals.
Development of Housing Implementation Programs
IIB2.A Production of New Housing Units
The City has a 2014-2021 projected RHNA need of 160 housing units including 67 housing units
for extremely low, very low, and low income households. The City will continue to monitor the
sites currently designated by the City to accommodate its projected growth needs and use of
the Affordable Housing Overlay. If during the planning period, the City finds that the sites are
no longer available to meet the City’s RHNA allocation, the City will ensure additional
alternative sites are made available in locations at appropriate densities to permit housing at
the necessary affordability level.
Additionally the City will continue to provide incentives and flexibility in development standards
to encourage affordable housing development as outlined in Section 21.12.040 of the City’s
Municipal Code and will evaluate potential incentives and flexibility in development standards
to encourage new housing construction within one year of the Housing Element Adoption. The
City will proactively outreach to the housing development community to assist in the
evaluation of potential incentives. This program will be in conjunction with the evaluation of
alternative funding and financing in Program II2.C. Upon completion of the evaluation, the City
shall establish additional incentives and flexibility in development standards, as appropriate,
and promote the benefits of this program to the development community by posting
information on its web page and distributing information during pre-development application
meetings.
The City understands the housing challenges of extremely low-income households, which are a
subset of very low income households who earn 30 percent or less of the median income. This
income group is most likely to experience a housing crisis when faced with rent increases,
foreclosure, or other adverse event. The City will collaborate with housing developers to seek
state, federal, and other appropriate funds and incentives targeted for the development of
IIB-58                                                          City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                Housing Element
housing affordable to extremely low-income households through this strategy and the strategy
developed in Program II2.C.
Responsibility:           Community Development Department
Financing:                General Fund
Objective:                20 extremely low income units; 20 very low income units, 27 low
                          income units; 31 moderate income units; 62 above moderate income
                          units.
Timing:                   Evaluate and establish additional incentives as appropriate and develop
                          promotional materials within 1 Year of the Housing Element Adoption
IIB2.B Vacant and Underutilized Land Survey
The City will maintain a comprehensive land use survey identifying vacant and underutilized
parcels suitable for residential development.
Responsibility:           Community Development Department
Financing:                General Fund
Objective:                Update the survey
Timing:                   Annually
IB2.C Evaluate Alternative Funding and Financing Mechanisms
The City of Indian Wells will collaborate with private, non-profit, state and federal entities to
investigate alternative methods for funding and financing the construction of new housing units
and rehabilitation and preservation of existing units citywide. Indian Wells will establish
continued communication with local, state and federal legislators to encourage the
establishment of alternative funding and financing mechanisms. The City will identify an initial
list of potential funding and financing mechanisms within six months of the Housing Element
adoption and within one year prepare a strategy to seek for funding for housing construction
and rehabilitation when appropriate and available. On a bi-annual basis, the City will review
and update the strategy as appropriate.
Responsibility:           Community Development Department
Financing:                General Fund
Objective:                Evaluate Alternative Funding and Financing Mechanisms within 6
                          Months of the Housing Element Adoption; Develop Strategy within 1
                          Year of the Housing Element Adoption; Review and Update Strategy Bi-
                          Annually
Timing:                   Ongoing
Removal of Governmental Constraints
Goal IIB3
Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental constraints to the
maintenance, improvement and development of housing.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                          IIB-59
Housing Element
Governmental Constraints Policies
IIB3.1 Continue to utilize zoning standards and overlay districts that facilitate the
        development of affordable housing units.
Governmental Constraints Implementation Programs
IIB3.A Monitoring Potential Constraints
The City will periodically review City regulations, procedures and fees to identify any potential
constraints to the development and maintenance of housing. The City will outreach to the
development community to assist in this review. If the City finds that regulations, procedures
and/or fees are a constraint to housing, the City will revise requirements or policies as
necessary.
Responsibility:           Community Development Department
Financing:                General Fund
Objective:                Review and revise the zoning and development standards if needed.
Timing:                   Ongoing/Periodically
IIB3.B Monitoring Reasonable Accommodation Procedures
The City will evaluate adopted reasonable accommodation procedures annually and reviseas
appropriate to ensure consistency with fair housing requirements.
Responsibility:           Community Development Department
Financing:                General Fund
Objective:                Review and revise the reasonable accommodation procedures if
                          needed.
Timing:                   Annually
IIB3.C Development Guidelines and Procedures
The City shall maintain existing development guidelines, which specify the procedures,
materials, time frames, and costs associated with various zoning and subdivision applications.
The objective is to provide potential developers with an informational package clearly
explaining the development review procedure as well as the possible incentives available for
affordable housing development.
Responsibility:           Community Development Department
Financing:                General Fund
Objective:                Provide information online and at the public counter.
Timing:                   Ongoing
IIB-60                                                         City of Indian Wells General Plan
                                                                                 Housing Element
Equal Housing Opportunities
Goal IIB4
Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex, age, marital
status, familial status, ancestry, national origin, color, source of income, sexual orientation, or
any other arbitrary factors.
Equal Housing Policies
IIB4.1 Promote fair housing practices throughout the City.
IIB4.2 Promote a variety of housing types to meet the special needs of persons with physical
         and developmental disabilities, elderly households, and others who may need
         specialized residential living arrangements. .
Equal Housing Opportunities Implementation Programs
IIIB4.A Fair Housing Policy Procedures
The City will maintain a listing of fair housing groups serving Riverside County and refer fair
housing-related complaints to these groups. Fair housing policy procedures will be made
available at City Hall, on the City’s website and advertised in the City Newsletter on a periodic
basis.
Responsibility:           Community Development Department
Financing:                General Fund
Objective:                Provide information on fair housing services and policy at public
                          counters and at City website and refer complaints to appropriate
                          organizations.
Timing:                   Ongoing
IIB4.B Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers
The County of Riverside currently administers the Section 8 Rental Assistance program on
behalf of the City. Based on future congressional appropriations, the County Housing Authority
will apply for additional funding which will enable the Housing Authority to administer
additional vouchers for families, elderly, and persons with disabilities over the Housing Element
planning period. While the City is not authorized to administer a Section 8 program, the City
will continue to provide referral services on behalf of the County and disseminate information
to City residents.
Responsibility:           County of Riverside
Financing:                HUD
Objective:                Provide information on Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers at City Hall
                          and on the City’s website and refer inquiries to the County of Riverside.
Timing:                   Ongoing
IIB4.C Coordination on Homeless Issues
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                           IIB-61

Housing Element
The City will coordinate with the County of Riverside, adjacent jurisdictions and applicable
service providers to address homeless issues in the Coachella Valley.
Responsibility: Community Development Department
Financing:                General Fund
Objective:                Address homeless issues.
Timing:                   Ongoing
IIB4.D Support for Persons with Developmental Disabilities
The City shall support the ability of persons with developmental disabilities to live in integrated
community settings by coordinating with the Inland Regional Center to identify the housing
needs of persons served by the Center, promote opportunities for supportive living services
and support efforts to eliminate barriers to housing for persons with developmental disabilities.
Responsibility:           Community Development Department
Financing:                General Fund
Objective:                Adequate housing for persons with developmental disabilities.
Timing:                   Ongoing
Energy Conservation
Goal IIB7
Encourage energy conservation in new and existing housing stock.
Energy Conservation Policies
IIB5.1 Incorporate into City codes, when feasible, planning and building standards that
          contribute to minimizing the consumption of non-renewable resources for housing
          construction and rehabilitation.
Energy Conservation Implementation Programs
IIIB5.A Green Building Program
The City will continue to support the development of green building practices in housing and
sustainability programs by participating in the CVAG Green for Life Program and evaluate the
feasibility of implementing local policies and programs consistent with the CVAG Green Building
Program and the City’s Climate Action Plan.
Responsibility:           Community Development Department
Financing:                General Fund
Objective:                Promote energy conservation and green building.
Timing:                   Ongoing
The following is a summary of the City's quantified objectives for the new planning period
(2014-2021).
IIB-62                                                        City of Indian Wells General Plan

                                                                                         Housing Element
                       Table 30. Quantified Housing Objectives, 2014-2021
Income Level                    New Units                Rehabilitation                  Conservation
               1
Extremely Low                       20             No units in the City were     No housing units are at
Very Low                            40             determined to need major      risk of converting to
Low                                 27             rehabilitation during this    market rate.
Moderate                            31             planning period.
Above Moderate                      62
Total                              160
1.   The Extremely Low Income construction need is a subset of the Very Low Income need and is assumed to be
     50% of the Very Low Income need.
City of Indian Wells General Plan                                                                    IIB-63
Housing Element
APPENDIX A: COMMUNITY OUTREACH
The City held a public workshop to receive input into the preparation of the Draft Housing
Element on April 16, 2013. Following a brief presentation on the Housing Element update and
process, workshop participants were asked to identify housing challenges and opportunities in
Indian Wells. The following were challenges and opportunities identified during the discussion.
Challenges
    ·    Needs
    ·    Traffic & Congestion, Air Pollution
    ·    Noise: Tennis Gardens (elderly want quiet)
    ·    Keep the good quality of living
    ·    Noise complaints
    ·    Understand the Process Better
    ·    Cost of Land
    ·    Quality of Housing required by the City
    ·    Housing Element is a confusing document
Opportunities
    ·   Complete projects that have been started
    ·   Improved development review/approval process
    ·   Code Enforcement
    ·   Reduce unknown rules
IIB-64                                                      City of Indian Wells General Plan

 Community Development                                                          IIC. Circulation
Chapter II: Community Development
IIC. CIRCULATION
Introduction and Authority
The circulation system is the infrastructure and network of routes by which people
and commodities move within and through the General Plan Area. Since Indian
Wells is only one entity within the larger region of the Coachella Valley, the City's
circulation system must accommodate inter- and intra-city movement in a safe,
orderly, economical, and convenient manner.
The Circulation Element is a key section of the overall General Plan. Included in
the Circulation Element are standards for roadway classifications consisting of
cross-sections and capacities, alignments and classifications for future roadways
and non-vehicular modes of travel, and policies to implement the standards and
assure the orderly development of the circulation system. The Circulation Element
is closely related to the Land Use Element, as well as the Noise, Conservation and
Open Space, and Community Safety Elements.
California Government Code Section 65302(b) requires a general plan to include:
          "... a circulation element consisting of the general location and extent of
          existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals,
          and other public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the land use
          element of the plan."
The Circulation Element has been a State-mandated requirement since 1955. The
provisions of a circulation element affect a community's physical, social, and
economic environment and is, therefore, a critical aspect of a general plan
program.
The City of Indian Wells Circulation Plan was developed in response to issues
raised and objectives established by the community. It is intended to provide a
balanced circulation system that will provide adequate capacity to support the
travel demands of the land uses included in the Land Use Element while at the
same time maintaining an acceptable quality of life for the residents of Indian
Wells.
The circulation system is one of the most important of all urban systems in the
Study Area (City limits and adjacent areas, see Figure IIC-1). A well planned
circulation system is an important ingredient in a healthy economic environment.
Economic activities typically require the circulation of materials, products, and
employees. Circulation systems can be used to influence the nature and extent,
as well as the pace of urban development. The viability of each land use is
dependent upon a certain level of accessibility.
City of Indian Wells                          IIC-1                             General Plan
Community Development                                                           IIC. Circulation
Organization of the Element
The Circulation Element is divided into five sections: (1) Introduction and
Authority; (2) Summary of Existing Conditions; (3) Description of the Circulation
Plan; (4) Goals and Policies; and (5) Implementation. The plan is intended to be
responsive to the objectives of the City in planning for its future growth while at the
same time mitigating existing problems or concerns. The Circulation Element
states general policy which will serve to guide the development of future, more
detailed circulation system implementation programs.
Summary of Existing Conditions
This section describes the existing roadway features, and planning planned programs
which influence the City of Indian Wells. Information provided here is summarized from
the City of Indian Wells General Plan Traffic Study (Revised) dated April 1, 2008.
Residential communities in the City are primarily surrounded by walls. This allows for
few access points along arterial roadways, causing these large facilities to have fewer
interruptions in flow than is typically observed in southem California. Alternative travel
modes are encouraged, with widespread facilities for bikes, buses, golf carts and
pedestrians. These facilities typically stop at the City boundary.
Four different types of systems compose the entire circulation system, as follows:
Air System
The air system is comprised of general aviation from Bermuda Dunes Airport and
Jacqueline Cochran Regional Airport, and commercial flights from Palm Springs
International Airport. Bermuda Dunes Airport is located to the north of the City,
and Jacqueline Cochran Regional Airport is located southeast of the City.
Road System
The road system provides for nearly all passenger and commercial trips through
and within the Study Area. While the primary road user is the automobile,
bicycles, pedestrians, commercial trucks and buses also use the road system.
The Study Area is served by a network of roads, illustrated in Figure IIC-1.
City of Indian Wells                        IIC-2                               General Plan
Community Development                                                                                                /lC, Circulation
Figure IIC-1; Study Area
                                                                                                                    FIGURE IIC-1
                                                                                                                STUDY AREA
                                                                                      HDVLEY LANE EAST
                                                                                                             aI
                                                                                                             l-
                                                                                                             I
                                                     I
                                                     ':".1
                             ~            J.. " ..
                             I····              .,.
                                                               FAIRWAY DR.
                                      LEGEND:
                                           •         -INTERSECTION ANALYSIS LOCATION
                                     .. - ! - -  III -   CITY BOUNDARY
                             -
                             '-  __ 1 __ : __          . _ , __ . __ ,_.1 __ 1 __ - __ , __ , . . . ,_.;._1I
     Indian Wells Citywide Technical Circulation Study
     City of Indian Wells, CA (IN - 01425:100)
City of Indian Wells                                                           IIC-3                                   General Plan

Community Development                                                            IIC. Circulation
Public Transit System
Although public transit service is available in Indian Wells, public transit has not yet
played a significant role in Indian Wells' circulation system. The traveling public
prefers the flexibility and convenience of the automobile. Indian Wells, however,
should plan for the future, when ridership attitudes may change because of such
things as increased energy prices and increased street congestion.
Trail System
The trail system consists of bicycling paths and pedestrian trail corridors. These
systems provide recreational and other travel opportunities. Bicycle paths provide
access to shopping centers, employment areas, and public facilities, and include
both off-street and on-street paths. Pedestrian trails include hiking and walking
corridors. Hiking opportunities are provided by the Living Desert and walking
corridors consist of sidewalks along Highway 111 and portions of Fred Waring
Drive.
Existing Facilities
Figure IIC-2 illustrates the number of through lanes and intersection controls
currently in the City and adjacent area. Figure IIC-3 illustrates existing speed limits
in the City.
Table IIC-1 shows daily planning level capacities on roadway segments.
Highways
 Highway 111
 Highway 111 is a six (6) lane divided roadway from east of Deep Canyon Road to
the west end of the study area. From west of Cook Street to east of Mountain
Cove Drive, HWY-111 is a four (4) lane divided roadway. One additional
eastbound lane is then added (making the section five (5) lanes divided), then an
 additional westbound lane is added to make it a six lane divided section to the east
 end of the study area.
 City of Indian Wells                       IIC-4                                  General Plan
Community Development                                                   IIC. Circulation
Figure IIC-2; Existing Geometry & Intersection Controls
                                                                     FIGURE IIC-2
                                EXISTING GEOMETRY AND INTERSECTION CONTROLS
                  LEGEND:
                   . , - TRAFFIC SIGNAL
                  @    -ALLWAVSTOP
                    4  - NUMBER OF LANES
                    D  - DIVIDED
                    u - UNDIVIDED
                    T  • UNDIVIDED ROAD
                         WITH TURN POCKETS
                       - DEFACTO RIGHT TURN LANE
                 G-O • PRIVATE STREET ACCESS
      Indian Wells Citywide Technical Circulation Study
      City of Indian Wells, CA (IN - 01425:200)
City of Indian Wells                                    IIC-S             General Plan

Community Development                                                                             IIC, Circulation
Figure IIC-3; Existing Posted Speed Limits
                                                                                              FIGURE IIC-3
                                                                    EXISTING POSTED SPEED LIMITS
                           50                                           CUl8DR.
                                                   45          01
                                                               Q
                                                               0
                                                               ~
                           45                                  §
                         ...ci
                          Z                   ''""
                                              VI
                                               0
                          ~
                         .~.
                                              8
                                                   45    •
                                                         II
                          Q            45                I  50
            40
             35
                       LEGEND:
                           25            • SPEED UMIT
                      -     ... I . . . . . OTY BOUNDARY
                        ~                • SCHOOL ZONE
         INOIAN WELLS CITYWIDE TECHNICAL ORCULATION SnJDY,lndlan Wells, California .01425:111
City of Indian Wells                                              IIC-6                            General Plan

Community Development                                                                                                  IIC. Circulation
Table IIC-1; Daily Roadway Capacity Values
                                                                 TABLEIIC-1
                                              DAILY ROADWAY CAPACITY VALUES
                                                   NUMBER
                         FACILITY TYPE            OF LANES            MEDIAN TREATMENT                 CAPACITY
                     Freeway                            4                      Freeway                        86,000
                     Freeway                            6                      Freeway                       138,000
                     Freeway                            8                      Freeway                       190,000
                     Freeway                            10                     Freeway                       240,000
                     Major Arterial                     6             Divided or Turn Pockets                 59,000
                     Primary Arterial                   4             Divided or Turn Pockets                 38,000
                     Secondary Arterial                 4                     Undivided                       30,000
                     Collector (Divided)                2             Divided or Turn Pockets                 18,000
                     Collector (Undivided               2                     Undivided                       13,000
                     Source: City of Indian Wells General Plan Circulation Element Existing Conditions Technical
                     Report (RKJK, February 4, 1994) except Collector (Undivided): City of Irvine
                      1 These roadway capacities are approximate figures only, and are used at the General Plan
                        level. They are affected by such factors as intersections (numbers & configuration), degree of
                        access control, roadway grades, design geometries and level of pedestrian and bicycle traffic.
                        Average Daily Traffic (ADT) is used by the County as long range planning tool to assist in
                        determining arterial highway classification (number of through lanes) needed to meet traffic
                        demand. Actual level of service is determined through peak hour intersection analysis.
                     U :IUcJobsl_01100-01500\.0140010 14251Excel\[0 1425-18.xls)T2-1
City of Indian Wells                                                IIC-7                                                General Plan
Community Development                                                       IIC. Circulation
Roadways
Portola Avenue
Portola Avenue is a four (4) lane divided roadway from the north end of the study
area to south of HWY-111, and a three (3) lane divided roadway (two lanes
northbound, one lane southbound) from north of Fairway Drive to the south study
area boundary.
Deep Canyon Road
Deep Canyon Road is a two (2) lane undivided roadway south of HWY-111. Just
north of HWY-111, Deep Canyon Road is a three (3) lane divided roadway (two
northbound, one southbound). South of Fred Waring Drive, Deep Canyon Road is
a four (4) lane divided roadway. Deep Canyon Road is a two (2) lane divided road
north of Fred Waring Drive.
Cook Street
Cook Street is a four (4) land divided roadway from the north end of the study area
to south of HWY-111. From north of Fairway Drive to HWY-111, Cook Street has
three (3) lanes (two northbound and one southbound), and is divided. South of
Fairway Drive, Cook Street becomes a Private Collector known as Vintage Drive
and is a two (2) lane divided roadway.
Rancho Palmeras Drive
Rancho Palmeras Drive is a two (2) lane undivided roadway between its extents.
Eldorado Drive
Eldorado Drive is a four (4) lane divided roadway north of Hovley Lane East.
Eldorado Drive becomes a Private Collector, which is not available to through
traffic, between Hovley Lane East and Fred Waring Drive known as Via Toscana.
From Fred Waring Drive to south of HWY-111, Eldorado Drive is a four (4) lane
divided roadway. From south of HWY-111 to Fairway Drive, Eldorado Drive is a
two (2) lane undivided facility.
Indian Wells Lane
Indian Wells Lane is a four (4) lane divided roadway north of HWY-111 and a two
(2) lane divided roadway south of HWY-111 .
Club Drive
Club Drive is a two (2) lane undivided roadway with turn pockets available for left
turning vehicles.
Manitou Drive
Manitou Drive is a two (2) lane undivided road south of HWY-111 .
Warner Trail
Warner Trail is a two (2) lane undivided road throughout the study area.
 City of Indian Wells                      IIC-8                              General Plan
Community Development                                                         IIC. Circulation
Mountain Cove Drive
Mountain Cove Drive is a two (2) lane undivided road in the study area.
Washington Street
Washington Street in the study area is a six (6) lane divided roadway.
Hovley Lane East
Hovley Lane East is a four (4) lane divided roadway throughout the study area.
Fred Waring Drive
Fred Waring Drive is a six (6) lane divided roadway through out the study area.
East of Washington Street, it is a two (4) lane undivided road.
Miles Avenue
Miles Avenue is a four (4) lane divided roadway throughout the study area, from
Washington Street to its terminus at HWY-111.
Fairway Drive
Fairway Drive is a two (2) lane undivided road throughout the study area.
Exhibit IIC-4 shows available average daily traffic (ADT) count data in 2003.
Daily traffic volumes on the City of Indian Wells arterial system and immediate
vicinity range from very low volumes to daily traffic volumes that exceed 40,000
vehicles per day (VPD). Washington Street is the north-south arterial that carries
daily traffic volumes exceeding 40,000 VPD south of HWY-111. Similarly, HWY-
111 carries volumes greater than 40,000 VPD throughout the study area.
Daily traffic volumes have been compared to planning level capacities (seen on
Table IIC-1) on study area roadway segments. The daily capacity of a roadway
correlates to a number of widely varying factors, including traffic peaking
characteristics, traffic turning volumes, and the volume of traffic on crossing
streets. The daily capacities are therefore most appropriately used for long range
General Plan analysis, or as a screening tool to determine where more detailed
peak hour analYSis may identify problems. Where the daily volume is approaching
or exceeding daily planning level capacity (volume/capacity ratio [VIC] approaching
or exceeding 1.0), the intersections along the segment should be monitored to
determine when additional capacity is necessary.
Exhibit IIC-5 presents the existing daily volume to capacity (VIC) ratios within the
study area based upon existing lanes. The highest existing VIC ratio is observed
along Fred Waring Drive east of Washington Street, which is within the boundaries
of the City of La Quinta. Within the City of Indian Wells, HWY-111 is the only
facility where the daily volumes are approaching or exceeding the generalized daily
planning level capacities.
City of Indian Wells                        IIC-9                              General Plan
Community Development                                                                                                          IIC. Circulation
Figure IIC-4; Existing Average Daily Traffic (ADT)
                                                                                                                               FIGURE IIC-4
                                                                EXISTING AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT)
                                                                           ~  4.3
                                                                           ~
                                                                           §    HOVlEV LANE EAST
                                                                                                                       t;i
                                                                                                            I!!        z
                                               t;;                                                              5.3    ~ .50.4
                                               '" 31.5
                                               8
                                                                                                            i          z
                                                                                                                       r
                                                                                                            ~
                                                                                                                       ~
                                                                                                 28.3
                                          34.8                                                 FREOWMlNGDR.       30.0
                                                   17.7                       4.1
                                                                                 46.5
                                   47.2 ~              41.3
                                                                               SI\-111
                                                                ~~
                                                   6.1
                                                                ~  i 2.0
                                                      6.9              3.2
                                                          'AlI"NAY DR.
                           LEGEND:
                              10.0      = VOLUME /      CAPACITY RATIO
                           -,-,-, .. = CITY BOUNDARY
                             G-Q        - PRIVATE STREET ACCESS
     Indian Wells Citywide Technical Cirr;ulation Study
     City of Inriian Wells, CA (IN - 01425:303)
City of Indian Wells                                                         lie-to                                             General Plan

Community Development                                                         /lC. Circulation
Relevant Plans
The Regional Transportation Plan
The Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) is a component of the Regional
Comprehensive Plan and Guide prepared by the Southern California Association
of Governments (SCAG) to address regional issues, goals, objectives, and
policies for the Southern California region into the early part of the 21 st century.
The RTP, which SCAG periodically updates to address changing conditions in
the Southland, has been developed with active participation from local agencies
throughout the region, elected officials, the business community, community
groups, private institutions, and private citizens. The RTP sets broad goals for
the region and provides strategies to reduce problems related to congestion and
mobility.
Riverside County Integrated Project
The purpose of the RCIP is to integrate the processes of planning land use,
transportation improvements and preserving habitat for endangered species. A
primary objective of the RCIP is to accommodate projected population growth
within Riverside County by focusing development within areas that will be readily
accessible, will provide a good quality of life for future residents, and will
minimize environmental and community impacts, including impacts to sensitive
habitats and endangered species.
The most current RCIP network is included as Exhibit IIC-6. The City of Indian
Wells General Plan Traffic Study conforms to the latest RCIP network, which
Riverside County Staff has directed is to be used for all analysis in lieu of the
currently adopted Riverside County General Plan.
Congestion Management Program
The Riverside County Congestion Management Program (CMP) is updated
every five years in accordance with Proposition 111, passed in June 1990. The
CMP was established in the State of California to more directly link land use,
transportation and air quality and to prompt reasonable growth management
programs that would more effectively utilize new and existing transportation
funds, alleviate traffic congestion and related impacts, and improve air quality.
The Circulation Element describes how the future transportation system will
function. This is important for congestion management, since deficiencies along
the CMP system must be mitigated when they occur. The ability to address such
deficiencies now, instead of when they occur, is critical. Understanding the
reason for these deficiencies and identifying ways to reduce the impact of future
 City of Indian Wells                      /lC-11                              General Plan
Community Development                                                      IIC. Circulation
growth and development along a critical CMP corridor will conserve scarce
funding resources and help target those resources appropriately.
Only HWY-111 is included on the CMP roadway system in the City of Indian
Wells. For principal arterials, the CMP standard is LOS "E" or better. This study
identifies improvements that provide the CMP required level of service.
City of Indian Wells                     IIC-12                             General Plan
Community Development                                                                                                                 IIC. Circulation
Figure IIC-5; Existing Volume I Capacity (VIC) Ratio
                                                                                                                                      FIGURE IIC-5
                                                            EXISTING VOLUME I CAPACITY (VIC) RATIO
                                                                               ~
                                                                               ~   0.11
                                                                      0.41     ~     HOYLEY LANE EAST
                                                                                                                               t;;
                                                                                                                    e!         z
                                                                                                                               ~
                                                                                                                                   0.85
                                                   r;; 0.83                                                         15 0.40
                                                   §                                                                I          r
                                                                                                                               ~
                                                                                                      0.48
                                         0.92                                                       FRED WARING DR.      0.51'           1.32
                                                                     B 0.48
                                                       0.47                        0.11
                                                                                      1.22
                                                                                    SR-111
                                    1.24                   1.09
                                                                   g~
                                                                   ;: lEO.15      0.38
                                                       0.22
                                                                   ;!  ~
                                    0.42 ""' ... ,        0.53            0.24
                                                              FAIRWAY DR.
                          LEGEND:
                               0.88          - VOLUME I CAPACITY RATIO
                          .... ,-, .... , .. = CITY BOUNDARY
                               ....          = PRIVATE STREET ACCESS
     Indian Wells Citywide Technical Circulation Study
     City of Indian Wells, CA (IN· 01425:304)
City of Indian Wells                                                             IIC-13                                                 General Plan

Community Development                                                          IIC. Circulation
Existing Transit Service
Sun Line Transit Agency is a joint powers authority of the Valley cities and
Riverside County. Sun Line envisions a public transportation system that will
enhance the quality of life within the Coachella Valley, safeguard the environment,
and serve the transportation needs of all segments of the population.
The Sun Line Transit Agency provides Sun Bus Transit Service in or near the City of
Indian Wells with three lines: Route 50, Route 70, and Route 111. The current
routes are illustrated in Figure IIC-7e. The SunDial service provides low cost
public transportation for ADA certified riders. Bus service in the City provides
connections to adjacent to adjacent and regional public transportation facilities.
Existing Truck Routes
The truck routes preserve the residential character of the community by
designating certain arterial streets as truck routes and prohibiting trucks on
residential streets. The current truck routes in the City of Indian Wells are on
Cook Street, Fred Waring Drive and Miles Avenue all of which are limited to 9:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. HWY-111 and Washington Street are truck routes which are
available twenty-four hours. Current truck routes are shown on Exhibit IIC-B.
Existing Pedestrian Access
While pedestrian movements are prohibited for some study are intersections in
the Buildout condition, pedestrian access is still available throughout the City. At
intersections with limited pedestrian crossings, only one leg does not allo~
pedestrian crossing, therefore, pedestrians are still able to cross all streets. All
of the Arterial Roadway cross-sections include pedestrian sidewalks. In addition,
new development should be encouraged to include pedestrian facilities for
internal circulation and access to adjacent uses as part of their design.
Description of the Circulation Plan
Introduction
The Circulation Plan for Indian Wells is the result of analysis using the General
Plan traffic model during September and Ootober, 1994, which examined the
combinations of land use and circulation system elements proposed for the City.
The buildout (post-2025) average daily traffic volumes for the various circulation
system configurations were determined using a travel demand computer model
developed for this purpose. The model incorporates information on future roadway
alignments and general plan land use in the areas surrounding the City of Indian
Wells. The General Plan buildout Post 2015 Average Daily Traffic (ADT)
conditions forecast by the traffic model for the Land Use Plan and circulation
system are shown in Figure IIC-9+.
The highest future daily volumes in the study area occur on HWY-111 (up to
City of Indian Wells                      IIC-14                                General Plan
Community Development                                                          lie. Circulation
82,300 vehicles per day), Fred Waring Drive, and Washington Street (up to 72,300
vehicles per day). The anticipated increases in traffic are caused primarily by
ongoing development in areas outside the City of Indian Wells.
The Circulation Plan represents the City's preferred transportation system.
Implementation of the Circulation Plan and policies will provide adequate capacity
to accommodate the buildout travel demands of the Land Use Element as well as
to preserve the quality of life in Indian Wells. Figure· IIC-100 illustrates the
Circulation Plan.
Functional Classifications
The classification of a roadway is intended to establish its function, or role, in the
overall circulation system. It establishes the hierarchy of streets in terms of their
purpose in relation to movement of through traffic versus provision of access to
adjacent land uses.
The hierarchy of roadway classifications ranges from freeways with full control of
access, grade-separated interchanges, high speed-high volume traffic, emphasis
on longer-distance and intercity travel to local streets/cul-de-sacs with unlimited
access to fronting properties, low speed-low volume traffic, emphasis on multi-
purpose use of the paved street section for travel, parking, pedestrian, and bicycle
activity.
Figure IIC-119 illustrates General Plan roadway cross-sections which support the
classifications shown in Figure IIC-100. The following functional design guidelines
are recommended for roadway classifications depicted on the Circulation Plan.
City of Indian Wells                      IIC-15                                General Plan

 Community Development                                             IIC. Circulation
Figure IIC-6; Proposed RCIP Network
                                                                  FIGURE IIC-6
                                                    PROPOSED Rap NOWORJ(
              LEGEND:
               CLASSmCA nON
              -      EXPRESSINAY
              - - - URBAN ARTERIAL
                     ARTERIAL
              -      MAJOR
              -      SECONDAR Y
              -      COLLECTOR
              -      MQU"".AIN ARTERIAL
       ~
     •IndIen MWa CIyMde Technioel ~ Study
      CIy 0/.,.,. ..... CA (JH - 014211:303)
City of Indian Wells                         IIC-16                General Plan

 Community Development                                                                lie.  Circulation
 Figure IIC-7; SunBus System Map
                                                                                     FIGURE 1IC-7
                                                               SUNBUS SYSTEM MAP
                                                   HOVLEY LN E
                                           ( 50
                                                FRED WARING DR
                                                                   LEGEND:
                                                                    LINE NUMBER
                                                                   ...... LINE 111
                                                                   ......... LINE 70
                                                                    ...... LINE 50
                                                                  SOURCE: Sunline Transit Agency
      ......... ~TecIWaII~~
      QI)t til . . . . .... CA (M · O1f21J:10t0
City of Indian Wells                                   /lC-17                        General Plan

Community Development                                                                                   /lC. Circulation
Figure IIC-8; City of Indian Wells Truck Route Map
                                                                                                      FIGURE lIe-8
                                                                                      CITY OF INDIAN WELLS
                                                                                             TRUCK ROUTE MAP
                                                   •••
                                                     -
                                                                           ••
                                                                          ••
                                                                            -
                                                   •                                                 =
                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                 ~
                                                  ••
                                                   I
                                                                        •••   FIlID WAIlING Oil. i
                              ••
                               I
                                        :;•                            Ii
                              -      t;;
                              I
                                                                                  ..
                              ...•
                              -      R
                                            FAJrNtAYDIl.
                                                                                  a
                                                                                  ~
                .. -   ,.". • II
              •
          ••
            •                                                                             -
                                                                                         ••
            I        Ll!GI!NDI
            I
            •
            I
                    -   -  -
                               - TRUCK lOUR (ZA HOURS)
                   • • • • • • - TRUCK ROUTt (t:OO AM to t:OO PM)
                                - CITY IOUNDARY
                                                                                         I
            I
          •••
          -
         ••
         I
         I
     !!..... .. _..... _.,.. _. -- _..
     Indten WeIs ~ Technical CIrr:uIetJon Study
     ~alllIdIan Welt, CA (IN- 01425:107)
City of Indian Wells                                            /lC-18                                 General Plan

Community Development                                                                                                                                 IIC. Circulation
Figure IIC-9; General Plan Buildout Average Daily Traffic (ADT)
                                                                                                                                                     FIGURE IIC-g
                                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT
                                                                                           AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT)
                                                                    39.1
                                                                                             ,: 47.8
                                                                                                                                      12.9
                                                                                                        56.1
                                             46.2                       53.3                 :.~ ,,!~~~~~I,~q?, r;!' . _ .__~ , ,._ , -,. ,.-. , ~.7
                                                                    7.8                                                               15.6
                                                                                   10.8                82.9
                                                           71.2              64.5       82.3
                                                                                    SR· 111
                                           ~   63.7
                                                                     'o"
                                                       6.1            ~ 2.5       10. 7
                                                                      ~
                                                           11.7       ~      10.1
                                           ~"
                                    )
                   1 :1tIIII1 ~ , •• ~ I _ '
          , ,IhII '"                                  1.7
                                                             FAIRWAY DR.
        ~!
        5 ; 20.5
        2;
        ~~
        ~f
                                                                                                                 n' -'~'~ I
                         LEGEND:
                               10.0          - VEHICLES PER DAY (1000'S)
                          _._l_"aro .           CITY BOUNDARY
                               0-0           - PR IVATE STREET ACCESS
     Indian Wells Citywide Technical Circulation Study
     City of Indian Wells, CA (IN - 01425:gp-adt.dwg)
City of Indian Wells                                                                IIC-19                                                              General Plan

Community Development                                                                                                     IIC. Circulation
Figure IIC-10; Recommended City of Indian Wells General Plan Circulation
Element Arterial Roadway System
                                                                                                                        FIGURE IIC-10
                                                                    RECOMMENDED CITY OF INDIAN WELLS
                                                                     GENERAL PLAN CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                                                                   ARTERIAL ROADWAY SYSTEM
                                                                                HOV L£ Y LANE EAST
                                                I
                                                I    I                                      5
                                                I    I                                   1'"
                                             -i-                               ~,~      ~ " - - ---      - ,_• • • •
                                                                                                              M'LES AV.
                                                                                                            "'[-F             ·
                                                I                      .:
                                               LI                   ~I                            ~;
                         'f'~-!---'.r-                         FAI _AY  O~                             ~          ~
                                                                                                                  u        I
                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                  ~        i
                                                                                                                  !Z       I
                                                                                                                  S/
                      1                                                                               ,-_./
                          I                  LtatD~'                                               I
                                                                                                    I
                            1
                                            -..
                                             -     MAJOR ARTERIAL (6 LANES)
                                                   HIGHWAY 111 SPECIFIC PLAN (6 LANES)             ill
                           Ij
                                             . _ PRIMARY ARTERIAL (4 LANES)
                                            .... PRIVATE COlLECTOR (2 LANES)
                           '                 -     COLLECTOR (UNDIVIDED - 2 LANES)                 Ii
                                             -     OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS
                          ,II
                                             COol CITY BOUNDARY
                         I
                         ,
                                                                                                   II
                         I _ _ •__.___.___________.. __._.....
                         L                                                                          I
     Indian Wells Citywide TtlChnica/ Circulation Study
     City oflndlan WeNs, CA (IN. 01 .. 2~ :.xhlblt84_a . rmcd)
City of Indian Wells                                                       IIC-20                                         General Plan

Community Development                                                           IIC. Circulation
Major Arterial
Features include:
    •     A 6-lane cross-section with raised or painted median (used for left tum
          movements).
    •     Minimum spacing for principal street intersections along Major Arterial
          streets should be one-quarter mile. Where overriding circumstances will not
          allow the minimum spacing policy to be maintained, left tum restrictions
          should be considered at minor, unsignalized driveways.
    •     As a major traffic carrier, curbside parking should be prohibited within the
          striped shoulder, except for emergencies.
     •    Additional right-of-way/easement dedications should be considered at key
          intersections with Major and Primary Arterial streets to allow for full-width
          auxiliary turn lanes or dual-left turn lanes.
Primary Arterial
Features include:
     •    A 4-lane cross-section with raised or painted median (used for left tum
          movements) .
     •    Desirable minimum spacing for street intersections along a Primary Arterial
          is approximately one-quarter mile. Minor street and driveway access may
          be allowed at shorter intervals but consideration should be given to left turn
          restrictions at these locations.
     •    As a primary traffic carrier, curbside parking may not be considered
          appropriate along the more heavily traveled segments within the City.
     •    Additional right-of-way/easement dedications should be considered at key
           intersections with Major and other Primary Arterial streets for the
           accommodation of full-width auxiliary turn lanes.
Collector
Features include:
      •    A 2-lane cross-section without median.
      •    Minimum intersection spacing along Collector streets should be
           approximately 150 feet. Residential frontage should be avoided where
           possible.
      •    Curbside parking is appropriate unless on-street bike lanes are provided.
 City of Indian Wells                            IIC-21                           General Plan

Community Development                                                         IIC. Circulation
Private Collector
Features include:
     •    Active access control such as private entry gates.
     •    Emergency vehicle access as needed.
     •    Collector features, as summarized above.
Local
Features include:
     •    A 2-lane cross-section without median.
     •    Features determined by City staff.
Roadway and Intersection Lanes
General Plan Buildout number of lanes are shown on Exhibit IIC-12. The resulting
daily volume/capacity ratios are included on Exhibit IIC-13. Daily planning level
volume/capacity ratios indicate the need for peak hour analysis on HWY-111.
Intersection analysis reveals acceptable operations at almost all study area
intersections. Intersections requiring additional improvements beyond the typical
General Plan cross-section include:
     •    Cook Street (NS) at HWY-111 (EW)
     •    Washington Street (NS) at Fred Waring Drive (EW)
Recommendations
The circulation system features required to support the traffic demands of buildout
of the City of Indian Wells Land Use Plan are identified in Figure IIC-108. This
Figure presents recommendations for circulation system classifications and
alignments. General guidelines for street cross-sections are identified in Figure
IIC-119. Circulation system recommendations are summarized below.
     •    The General Plan Traffic Study, prepared by Urban Crossroads dated April
          1, 2008. requires a number of intersection improvements, that are listed in
          Table ES-2, that will be necessary by 2025 to achieve LOS D at buildout.
     •    Additional through lanes are necessary for eastbound and westbound on
          HWY-111 (3rd eastbound and 3rd westbound through lanes) consistent with
          the Highway 111 Beautification and Improvement Plan (Wildan 2007)
 City of Indian Wells                        IIC-22                             General Plan

Community Development                                                             IIC. Circulation
The definitions of level of service for uninterrupted flow (flow unrestrained by the
existence of traffic control devices) are:
     •    LOS "A" respresents free flow. Individual users are virtually unaffected by
         the presence of others in the traffic stream.
    •     LOS "8" is in the range of stable flow, but the presence of other users in the
          traffic stream begins to be noticeable. Freedom to select desired speeds is
          relatively unaffected, but there is a slight decline in the freedom to
          maneuver.
    •     LOS "C" is the range of stable flow, but marks the beginning of the range of
          flow in which the operation of individual users becomes significantely
          affected by the interactions with oterhs in the traffic stream.
    •     LOS "0" represents high-density but stable flow. Speed and freedom to
          maneuver are severely restricted, and the driver experiences a generally
          poor level of comfort and convenience.
    •     LOS "E" represents operating conditions at or near the capacity level. All
          speeds are reduced to a low, but relatively uniform value. Small increases
          in flow will cause breakdowns in traffic movement.
    •     LOS "F" is used to define foced or breakdown flow. This condition exists
         wheever the amount of traffic approaching a point exceeds the amount
          which can traverse the point. Queues form behind such locations.
Adequate intersection performance during peak traffic hours can be insured with
intersection geometrics which satisfy tuming movement and through traffic
capacity demands. In many instances, this may require dual left tum lanes, and
right tum deceleration lanes on intersection approaches.
By insuring that sufficient right-of-way is reserved at the critical intersections within
the roadway system, it will be possible to implement the approach lane geometrics
necessary to provide the required level of service.
As development within the City of Indian Wells occurs, the improvement of the
area-wide roadway system must occur concurrently in order to provide an
adequate level of service. To insure that funds from developers and/or area-wide
fee programs are appropriately targeted to ongoing circulation needs, it is
recommended that the City's development monitoring process be continued.
The development monitoring process requires that proposed development be
analyzed to identify project "Opening Year" and City buildout year traffic impacts,
service levels, and mitigation measures required to maintain adequate roadway
system performance. Traffic impact study reports may be required to accompany
plot plan and tentative tract map submittals to the City.
Internal Circulation
Adequate circulation and access within residential and commercial developments
in the City are also important to an efficiently operating circulation system. The
City of Indian Wells                           IIC-23                              General Plan

Community Development,                                                        IIC. Circulation
following guidelines have been developed as part of the Circulation Plan to govern
internal circulation:
Residential Development
     • Long, straight roadway stretches should be avoided to discourage
          excessive speeds and thereby reduce safety hazards;
     •    The use of T-intersections is encouraged on all collector and local streets
          with minimum offsets of 250-300 feet;
     •    Streets should intersect at as near to a right angle as possible and at not
          more than a 15 degree skew;
     •    Intersections should be located on the outside rather than the inside of a
          horizontal curve; and
     •    Streets should not intersect on the crest of a vertical curve.
     •    Encourage traffic calming designs within development.
 City of Indian Wells                         IIC-24                            General Plan

Community Development                                                                                         IIC. Circulation
Figure IIC-11; City of Indian Wells Recommended General Plan Roadway Cross-
Sections
                                                                                                         FIGURE IIC-11
                                                          CITY OF INDIAN WELLS RECOMMENDED
                                            GENERAL PLAN ROADWAY CROSS-SECTIONS
                                                                   IMAJOR ARTERIAL I
                                                                 I PRIMARY ARTERIAL I
                                      ~"f,"-r"T"---'-''"I=t''~
                                    -                                      U                         RNI
                                                               ISECONDARY ARTERIAL I
                                       r--~-12·-i-.• :~~~~-:-~:~~1t::~='~~~~~~-t-,.-12'=i--'
                                                                      ICOLLECTOR I
                                              RN_,:.:- _ _ _ _ _ 6O'RNI-----~RNI
                                                8br--~::--4~r_"-_-'j:j
                                                                        I LOCAL I
                                               NOTE: SPECIFIC LANE DIMENSIONS AND IMPROVEMENT
                                                        REQUIREMENTS WILL BE DETERMINED BY THE CITY.
     NOT TO SCALE
   Indian Wells Citywide Technical Circulation Study
   City of Indian Wells, CA (IN - 01425:28)
 City of Indian Wells                                                      IIC-25                               General Plan

Community Development                                                                                          IIC. Circulation
Figure IIC-12; General Plan Buildout Number of Through Lanes
                                                                                                            FIGURE IIC-12
                                                                                        GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT
                                                                                    NUMBER OF THROUGH LANES
                                              '"'5"'
                                               0     6D
                                               (,)
                                                                                         60
                                                                I 6D                  FRED WARING pR.    6D    4D
                                   6D
                                       I
                                       •
                                       I
                                                     4D
                                                           .6D
                                                                  a:
                                                                  CI
                                                                     .2U
                                                                         6D
                                                                            4D
                                                                                6D
                                                                                                      2U
                                       - 6D           6D                     SR-lll
                                      ••             40
                                                              o
                                                              :I:
                                                                  '"~
                                                                  w
                                                              (,) :::2U
                                                                                                                    6D
                                                              ~~
                    •. -
                                   2U.... '              2U              2U
                             "".Jo,.p.               2U   FAIRWAY DR.
                 . 4D
                           LEGEND:                                                              I
                               4         - NUMBER OF THROUGH LANES                              I
                               U         • UNDIVIDED
                                                                                                I
                               D         -DIVIDED
                          .•,•• i. -
                                                                                                II
                               T         - UNDIVIDED WITH LEFT TURN POCKETS
                                            CITY BOUNDARY
                                                                                               I
                              Q-(i)       ~ PRIVATE STREET ACCESS
                                                                                               I
                                                                                               •
        Indian Welfs Citywide Technical Circulation Study
        Cily oflndian Walls, CA (IN - 01425:103)
 City of Indian Wells                                                        IIC-26                              General Plan

Community Development,                                                                                                   IIC. Circulation
Figure IIC-13; General Plan Buildout Volume I Capacity (VIC) Ratio
                                                                                                                      FIGURE IIC-13
                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT
                                                                         VOLUME I CAPACITY (VIC) RATIO
                                                                                 i 1.26
                                                                                 I
                                                                                 I
                                                                                 i
                                                                                 i
                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                    0-
                                                                                                                  t;;
                                                                                                                  Z
                                                                                                                       .05
                                                                                                                  z~
                                                                                                         .00
                                                                                                    III
                                                                                                    ~             Z
                                                                                                    ~              ~
                                                                                                                  iI
                                                                                           0.95
                                   0.78                                             FRED WARING DR.          0.96             1.12
                                                            0.60                                        1.20
                                                                        0.29              1.41
                                                 1.21             1.09      1.39
                                 i   1.08                     ..
                                                              Q
                                                                          SR-lll
                                 I                       0 30.20
                                            0.18                       0.82
                                 j                       :z:
                             o.94~_,      -
                                                         u
                                                         z    ii
                                                 0.90    ~    ~  0.78
                                                    FAIRWAY DR•
                                             •13
          J
          i
          i
          i                                                                                      I
                   LEGEND:
          I                                                                                     i
          I
          i         _1_1_,_
                       0.88        s VOLUME I CAPACITY (VIC) RATIO
                                   -CITYBOUNDARV
                                                                                                i
                                                                                                i
                      .....        • PRIVATE STREET ACCESS
          I                                                                                     i
          I                                                                                     I
     Indian Wells Citywide Technical Circulation Study
     City of Indian Wells, CA (IN - 01425:gp-vc.dwg)
City of Indian Wells                                                      IIC-27                                           General Plan

Community Development                                                       IIC. Circulation
Commercial Development
    • For vehicles entering a driveway, there should be adequate storage
         between the street and the first parking stall or aisle juncture to store
         incoming cars and not cause cars to queue onto the street;
    •    Discrete pedestrian walkways should be provided to minimize pedestrian
         and auto conflicts;
    •    Circulation within the parking area should allow relatively free flow of
         vehicular traffic with no constrictions; and
    •    Aisles should be placed in such a way that it is easy to reach any
         destination within the center after entering any driveway.
Traffic Control Devices
The installation of all traffic control devices should be based upon established
warrants and professional analyses. Basic references include the California
Department of Transportation "Traffic Manual" and the "Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices" and 'Traffic Control Devices Handbook" published by the Federal
Highway Administration. The installation of traffic control devices in conformance
with standards provides a safer road system and reduces potential liability on the
part of the City.
These references provide guides or warrants for the installation of many traffic
controls such as" STOP" signs, traffic signals, and speed limits. In the case of
speed limits, the guidelines are required to follow the California Vehicle Code.
While these guides or warrants are not absolute, they will assist in providing
uniformity, which is a safety benefit.
 City of Indian Wells                           IIC-28                        General Plan

 Community Development                                                 IIC. Circulation
 Figure IIC-14; City of Indian Wells Golf Cart Route Map
                                                                    FIGURE IIC-14
                                                         em OF INDIAN WEUS
                                                       GOLF CART ROUTE MAP
City of Indian Wells                       IIC-29                    General Plan
 Community Development                                                  /lC. Circulation
Figure IIC-15; City of Indian Wells Proposed Bikeways System
                                                                     FIGURE 1IC-15
                                                       CITY OF INDIAN WEllS
                                                    PROPOSED BIKEWAY MAP
                                                    I,
                                                  ) 1,
                                                 1 , "          y-
                                                                 /
                                                             r     J
                                                               t
City of Indian Wells                      /lC-30                       General Plan
Community Development                                                                                                         IIC. Circulation
Figure IIC-16; Recommended Bikeway Sections
                                                                                                                       FIGURE IIC-16
                                                     RECOMMENDED BIKEWAY SECTIONS
                                                               CLASS I
                                                  TWO-WAY BIKE PATH
                                          ON SEPARATE RIGHT-Of-WAY
                                                                                                            SIGNS:
                                                                                                            BIKE TRAIL
                                                                                                            NO MOTOR VEHiClES
                                                                                                            OR MOTORIZED CYClES
                                                                                       2.1m(MIn.)
                                                              CLASS II
                                            TYPICAL CROSS-5ECTION
                             Of DEDICATED BIKEWAY ALONG HIGHWAY
                                                                                                      SIGNS!
                                                                                                      NO PARKING
                                                                                                      BIKE LANE
                                      HIGHWAY                       WHITE STRIPE
                                                                                        " - . . . RED CIJRI/
                                                                  ONE WAY BIKEWAY                 NO pARKING
                                                                     1.5M(MIN.)
                                                             CLASS III
                                           TYPICAL CROSS-SECTION
                                       OF BIKEWAY ALONG HIGHWAY
                                                                                                      SIGNS: BIKE ROUTE
                                      HIGHWAY
                                                                                        "-...CURB
                                          SHARED (BIKES/CARS)
                                            TRAVEL LANE                 PARKING
    SOURCE: CALTRANS HIGHWAY DESIGN MANUAL. 5 "'EDITION
                                                                                                           NOT TO SCALE
  INDIAN WELLS CITYWIDE TECHNICAL CIRCULAnON STUDY, Indian Wells, California· 01425:35
City of Indian Wells                                           IIC-31                                                          General Plan

Community Development                                                            IIC. Circulation
Golf Cart Plan
As part of the overall evaluation and planning of the City circulation system, the
General Plan identifies pathways along existing roadways connecting residential,
recreational, commercial and other community amenities. As with on-street bike
paths, cart path safety is of the utmost importance. Expanded golf cart usage
can provide an enjoyable, convenient, economical and safe alternative to
automobile use. State law requires that golf carts for street use be licensed, and
are limited to routes posted at 35 mph or slower. Approved golf cart routes are
to be shown on an adopted plan, which also provides minimum design criteria,
signage, and golf cart and operator requirements. Exhibit IIC-14 depicts the
potential Golf Cart Plan throughout the City of Indian Wells and also illustrates
connectivity with adjacent communities. Golf carts are prohibited on HWY-111,
Fred Waring Drive, and Washington Street. While not all other study area
roadways are currently designated as golf cart routes, most facilities on the
Circulation Plan are expected to (at some point) have golf cart access.
Bikeways
The proposed Bikeway system for the City of Indian Wells is included as Exhibit
IIC-15. Bike facilities are proposed to provide access for bicyclists throughout
the City. Consistent with the currently adopted General Plan Circulation
Element, it is recommended that bike facilities be provided on all study area
roadways, except on some high speed/capacity Arterial Streets where safety
would be an issue. Recommended Bikeway sections are depicted on Exhibit
IIC-16.
Goals and Policies
The most important circulation issue is the correlation of the Land Use Element
building intensities with Circulation Element capacity. It is the intent of the General
Plan to maintain a balance between the General Plan land use intensities and their
associated traffic demands with the capacity of the General Plan Circulation
Element's ultimate system. Tests of this balance must be conducted at the major
stages of the development review process.
It is a major goal of the General Plan that specific standards for level of service will
be achieved with development of the Land Use and Circulation Elements. If the
level of service standards cannot be met, development intensities must be
redefined, or mitigation measures must be provided, or other City objectives must
be identified as overriding.
The correlation of the Land Use and Circulation Elements are represented by: the
combination of level of service standards, successive levels of development
review, requirements for phasing development with circulation improvements, and
mechanisms to finance implementation of circulation improvements.
City of Indian Wells                       /lC-32                                 General Plan
Community Development                                                                 IIC. Circulation
Roadway Improvements
GoalllC1
Provide a safe and efficient street system that links all parts of the area for
movement of people and goods.
Improvement Policies
IIC1.1 Require new development and expansion of existing development to
provide necessary street improvements for which it generates demand. Street
improvements shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
     •    On-site transportation facilities: streets, curbs, traffic control devices;
     •    Necessary access improvements: street extensions, widening, turn lanes,
          signals, etc.;
     •    Street widening for streets fronting the development property as shown on
          the Circulation Plan map; and
     •    Right-of-way landscaping.
IIC1.2 Require all new development to be analyzed with respect to its potential
impacts on the circulation system.
IIC1.3 Coordinate with other government entities, including Caltrans, Coachella
Valley Assocation of Governments (CVAG), LAFCO, Southern California
Assocation of Governments (SCAG), Riverside County Transportation
Commission (RCTC), Riverside County and adjacent communities, in
implementation of the City's Circulation Plan and Coachella Valley-wide circulation
improvements.
IIC1.4 Provide special consideration of circulation issues related to the City's major
thoroughfare through implementation of the Highway 111 Speoifio PIaA
Beautification and Improvement Project design features.
Travel Modes
GoalllC2
 Provide Indian Wells' residents with a choice of travel modes.
Alternative Travel Modes Policies
 IIC2.1 Consider transit service issues in site plan review and in the design of the
 street system, and provide bus turnouts along arterials and collectors where
 appropriate.
 IIC2.2 Encourage construction of the bike path system by requiring new
 City of Indian Wells                           IIC-33                                  General Plan

 Community Development                                                         IIC. Circulation
 development to provide bike lanes on arterial streets.
 IIC2.3 Ensure the safety of the bike path system by utilizing the design criteria set
forth in the Califomia Department of Transportation Highway Design Manual, or
other City Council approved designs, in the development of bikeways.
 IIC2.4 Encourage new development to provide intemal bike paths and pedestrian
ways where feasible and where natural features make paths desirable. Require
that such paths link with the City-wide path system.
IIC2.S Work with neighboring jurisdictions to provide an interconnected system of
pedestrian ways, bikeways and golf paths.
IIC2.§6          Participate with regional agencies and cities to ensure that rail and
air service capacities continue to meet the needs of residents.
IIC2.e7          Encourage the establishment of a golf cart path system, consistent
with the provisions of the Califomia Vehicle Code.
Quality of Life
GoalllC3
Provide a street system that contributes to residents' quality of life and
minimizes impacts on the environment.
Quality of Life Policies
IIC3.1 Support traffic control measures which reduce noise and air quality impacts
and are consistent with traffic engineering guidelines. Such measures could
include traffic signal coordination, adding left-turn lanes at intersections, and
incorporating right-turn only access at selected locations.
IIC3.2 Provide and maintain a street system which maintains a minimum Level of
Service (LOS) "0" at roadway intersections.
IIC3.3 Encourage the development of a street system which allows the use of
alternative traffic routes to better distribute traffic and minimize congestion.
Through traffic in residential neighborhoods should, however, be discouraged by
use of cul-de-sacs and one way streets as appropriate.
IIC3.4 Encourage the use of alternative modes of transportation including public
transit, ride sharing, golf carts, and walking.
IIC3.S Improve pedestrian, golf cart and bicycle connections from residential
neighborhoods to retail centers, hotels, and schools.
IIC3.6 New development will be encouraged to provide safe pedestrian and other
City of Indian Wells                         IIC-34                            General Plan

Community Development                                                        IIC. Circulation
          non-motorized access.
IIC3.7 Encourage new development to provide safe pedestrian facilities for intemal
          circulation and access to adjacent uses as part of their design.
IIC3.8 Encourage major employers to use flexible or staggered work hours so that
travel demand is spread more evenly throughout the day.
IIC3.9 Encourage landscaping on both sides and in the median of arterial streets,
and on both sides of collector and local streets.
IIC3.10           Implement the arterial highway system in a manner consistent with
Federal, State, and local environmental quality standards and regulations.
Implementation of the Circulation Element
This section of the Circulation Element discusses a broad range of topics related
to transportation improvement implementation strategies and programs which
collectively work towards the realization of the Circulation Element goals and
policies.
Travel Demand Management Program
Transportation Demand Management (also referred to as Travel Demand
Management or TOM) strategies involve measures which are intended to reduce
vehicle trip generation or influence when vehicle trips are made. Transportation
System Management strategies involve relatively low cost facility improvements
which maximize the efficiency/traffic carrying capacity of the roadway system.
The City of Indian Wells TOM ordinance applies to new commercial, industrial, and
mixed use developments estimated to employ 100 or more persons. The TOM
ordinance requires the property owner(s) or designer(s) to implement applicable
measures which include various features oriented towards reducing the generation
of off-site vehicle trips. Also included are off-site mitigation measures such as
contributions to local Transportation System Management oriented facility
improvements as well as regional TOM facilities. The TOM ordinance also
includes provisions for implementation, monitoring, and enforcing the ordinance
requirements. In addition to the TOM ordinance, the City should take a leadership
role in the formation of a Valley-wide ridesharing program.
Development Impact Monitoring Program
The monitoring of traffic impacts associated with area development approvals is a
critical program which must be implemented to ensure that the City's transportation
goals are achieved.         A carefully designed Development Impact Monitoring
City of Indian Wells                         IIC-35                          General Plan
Community Development                                                          IIC. Circulation
Program will provide the information necessary to ensure equitable participation by
developers in the implementation of roadway improvements throughout the City.
The monitoring program should provide for updates to the City's short- and long-
range Roadway Implementation Phasing Program through annual updates to the
City's 5-year Capital Improvement Program and will act as a guide for future land
use/development decisions.
The City's Development Impact Monitoring Program should include the following
elements:
Traffic impact analysis requirements for individual development projects: These
requirements should be formulated to effectively determine the impact potential of
development projects on the circulation system, and define appropriate mitigation
measures which adequately address project impacts. This is particularly important
in the analysis of larger development projects which are likely. to impact the
regional CMP roadway system. The development of traffic impact analysis
requirements should at the same time, recognize and establish appropriate levels
of analysis for intermediate and smaller sized development projects.
The findings of traffic impact studies would be reviewed by City staff to determine:
•         Consistency with traffic impact analysis requirements;
•         Consistency with Circulation Element goals and policies; and
•         Staff recommendations regarding conditions of approval.
Maintenance of City's Buildout Traffic Model: Annual updates/refinements of land-
use inputs used in the City Traffic Model would allow the City to monitor the effect
of on-going development approvals on ultimate circulation system needs. As
specific Transportation Demand Management programs are implemented, the
anticipated trip reduction effects of these measures can be incorporated in the
model. Analysis of traffic forecast updates provide valuable information of the
adequacy of the City's Circulation Plan and the impact of land use/development
decisions.
Regional Coordination
As reflected in many of the Circulation Element components, regional coordination
is essential to the successful implementation of the Circulation Plan. Several of
the critical roadway system improvements which will be required to adequately
accommodate buildout traffic flows are currently outside the City's jurisdiction. The
solution to regional-related traffic problems will require close coordination of traffic
issues with CVAG, the City of Palm Desert, City of La Quinta, Riverside County,
Caltrans District 11, and other communities within the Coachella Valley of
Riverside County.
City of Indian Wells                         IIC-36                             General Plan

Community Development                                                  IIC. Circulation
The County of Riverside is currently pursuing the establishment of a Road and
Bridge Benefit District (RBBD) to finance both the County·s and cities·
reimbursement share of improvements to Interstate 10 Freeway interchanges.
The interchange improvements would occur at the existing Monterey Streetll-1 0
Freeway and Washington Streetll-1 0 Freeway interchanges.
 City of Indian Wells                   IIC-37                           General Plan

                             Chapter III: Resource Management
                            lilA. CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE
Introduction and Authority
Indian Wells has transformed through the years from an agricultural and open desert area
to an active residential community. Development of this scale often endangers sensitive
resources and open space lands. Because of the potential effect of development on the
natural environment, Indian Wells has made a concerted effort to conserve and protect
the area's resources. The Conservation and Open Space Element is the written
description of the City's commitment to maintaining a balance of preservation and
development. The City's purpose is to ensure future generations the same level of
enjoyment from the environment as is enjoyed by present residents.
The State of California requires a Conservation and an Open Space Element be part of a
community's general plan. Because of the interrelationships between the two issues, the
State gives the locality the discretion as to how each element is organized within the
general plan. The City of Indian Wells recognizes the close relationships between the
two issue topics and is presenting them in one, cohesive element.
California Government Code Section 65302(d) mandates the inclusion of the
Conservation Element. The Code states that the General plan shall include:
        "... a conservation element for the preservation, development, and utilization of
natural resources including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and other
waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources."
The Open Space Element is required by Government Code Section 65302(e).
Components of the Open Space Element are addressed in Government Code Section
65560. By definition, open space land is "any parcel or area of land or water which is
essentially unimproved and devoted to an open-space use." Open space lands that
typically meet this definition include lands for the preservation of natural resources, the
managed production of resources, outdoor recreation, and lands deemed undevelopable
to protect the public health and safety.
State law permits jurisdictions to add other general plan elements that focus on issues
that are of special importance to the City. Although not specifically required by State law,
this element also addresses considerations for parks and recreation and air quality.
                                              IIIA-1
  The Conservation and Open Space Element is a vital part of the General Plan for Indian
  Wells. The character and quality of the City of Indian Wells is shaped by the open space
  resources and amenities of the area. This element has a very close relationship to the
  Land Use, Housing, and Safety elements. The requirement for predominantly low density
  development patterns is a fundamental part of preserving the abundant open space
  character of the City. The image and character of Indian Wells is most often viewed from
  Highway 111, and is shaped by the attractive landscaping and recreational opportunities
. along the Highway. This element is closely related to the Public Safety Element by
  providing policies that regulate development within flood-prone areas and areas with
  geological constraints. The Element also provides pOlicies for the conservation of air
  quality and promotes Substainable Development policies.
  Organization of the Element
  The Conservation and Open Space Element is organized in the following manner:
     •    Summary of Existing Conditions: This section includes a description of the
          current conditions relative to the Open Space, Public Parks, Golf and Recreation,
          Natural Preserve, and Watercourse land use designations of the General Plan
          Land Use Element.
     •    Conservation of Natural Resources: This section addresses such resources as
          Cultural Resources, Paleontological Resources, Biological Resources, Water
          Hydrology, Water Supply, Water Quality, Earth Resources, and Mineral
          Resources.
     •    Air Quality Management: This section discusses the Air Quality Management
          Plan.
     •    Conservation and Open Space Plan: This section describes components of the
          City's open space system.
     •    Goals and Policies: This section identifies the goals and policies necessary to
          implement the Conservation and Open Space Element and includes goals and
          pOlicies for Substainable Development.
     •    Implementation of the Conservation and Open Space Element: This section
          identifies the various mechanisms used to implement the Goals and Polices of the
          Element.
                                              IIIA-2

 Summary of Existing Conditions
The following information is intended to provide an overview of the existing conditions
 relating to the Open Space, Public Park, Golf and Recreation Overlay, Natural Preserve,
 and Watercourse land use deSignations contained in the General Plan Land Use
 Element. The information is based upon an analysis of existing conditions, supplemented
by the most recent federal, state, regional, and local plans.
A comprehensive land use inventory of all land areas in Indian Wells was conducted
between June 2005 and October 2006 as part of the 2006 Land Use Element Update.
The inventory was completed utilizing City base maps, aerial photos and a visual
survey of the General Plan Area. The inventory was updated in August 2008 relative
to open space.
The Indian Wells General Plan Area (FigureIlIA-1) includes approximately 14 square
miles, with topography ranging from river valley to the peak of Eisenhower Mountain at
more than 2,000 feet above mean sea level. Large portions of the mountainous lands in
the General Plan Area are devoted to natural open space while the river valley and
surrounding level land are generally developed as residential and commercial properties,
or devoted to recreational uses.
Overall, developed land areas within the Indian Wells General Plan Area encompass
approximately 9,348 acres, accounting for 97 percent of the total Plan Area. The majority
of the undeveloped land is open space, which includes private open space in golf course
residential communities and the steep terrain of the Santa Rosa Mountains in the
southem part of the City. The largest areas of vacant, but potentially developable lands
are located at the intersection of Miles Avenue and Washington Street adjacent to the
Indian Wells Tennis Garden and the intersection of Miles Avenue and Highway 111.
Other non-developed lands include golf courses, The Living Desert, and drainage
channels. There is approximately 278.7 acres of vacant land within the City and
approximately 1/3 rd of that land (79 acres) has been approved for the Indian Wells Town
Center Specific P l a n . '
Open Space
Extensive tracts of land within the City boundaries fall under the Open Space land use
designation, and include Open Space, Public Park, Golf and Recreation Overlay, Natural
Preserve, and Watercourse.
Existing open spaces and recreational areas are shown in Figure IIIA-2. The figure
illustrates existing conditions only, and is not a regulatory map. Indian Wells residents are
provided with a variety of recreational opportunities. 'The City is located in an area of
outstanding open space amenities and climatic conditions to allow outdoor activities.
                                              IIIA-3
Figure IIIA-1 : General Plan Area
                                  o
                                                 INDIAN~ '~ W£LLS
                                                        CALI FORNIA
                                                                       N
                                           GENERAL PLAN
                                                                     A
                                                                    Figure
                                                                    III A-l
                                                                            ,
                                    IIIA-4

   Figure IIIA-2: Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Areas
                                                                                                                                                                             ,~  /
                                                                                                                                                                           I  ~-
                                                                                                                                          INDIAN ,)' WELLS
                                                                                                                                                                      CALI FORNIA
                                                                                                                                            Legend
                                                                                                                                            ~ PUBLIC PARK
                                                                                                                                            C                    NATURAL PRESERVE
                                                                                                                                            [~:~~:
                                                                                                                                            :~!:~:::.:::::~~~:.~ WATERCOURSE
                                                                                                                                                                 OPEN SPACE                N
                                                                                                                                                                 GOLF COURSE RECREATION
                                                                                                                                 EXISTING OPEN SPACES
                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure
                                                                                                                            AND RECREATIONAL AREAS                                      III A-2
L:\Barbara (arson\GP update\I ndian Wells Conservation Element 2008 WORKING CONSERVATION ELEMENT (REVISION2) 10-28-08 no-strike.doc
 Open Space
 Within the boundaries of the City, approximately, 4,465.7 acres of land is held in State
and Federal ownership. Very rugged and steep terrain in the southern part of the City
offers limited public recreational opportunities. These mountains are within the Santa
 Rosa mountain range and provide a scenic, open space backdrop for the City of Indian
Wells. The area is designated as Open Space in the General Plan. The southemmost
portion of this area is the Bighom Sheep State Reserve. There is an interest in the
community for hiking trails in the mountainous public lands. Hiking trips are planned
through various organizations, such as the Coachella Valley Hiking Club or the Living
Desert. The Living Desert is a wildlife preserve and educational center.
 Public Park
In analyzing a City such as Indian Wells, the parks and recreation needs are quite
different than a typical community. Because the types of parks and open spaces should
be consistent with the needs of the residents, there is a limited need for public parks that
include athletic fields, swimming pools, or other active recreational spaces in Indian
Wells. Most of the local Homeowners Associations (HOA) provide the recreational
facilities needed by the residents.
Publicly owned parkland which is dedicated or reserved for passive recreational use by
the public.
Indian Wells Municipal Code requires that subdivisions with over 50 parcels dedicate five
acres per thousand persons for park use. The ordinance specifies that three acres per
thousand persons be dedicated as public parks to be owned and maintained by the City.
Two acres may be private parks located in the immediate subdivisions to be owned and
maintained by a homeowners association. (The private parks must have a minimum area
of 0.33 acre.)
According to Figure IIA-3 of the Land Use Element, there is one area designated as
Public Park which is located at the northeast corner of Highway 111 and Cook Street.
Golf and Recreation Overlav
There are 1,520 acres of land designated as Golf Course Recreation Overlay
according to the Land Use Element. The Golf Course Recreation Overlay includes both
private and public golf courses.
The Golf Resort at Indian Wells is a 36-hole, publicly-owned golf course. This golf course
is located north of Highway 111, south of Fred Waring Drive, and East of Eldorado Drive.
City property owners and residents have preferred rates, well below those charged to
non-residents.
                                            IIIA-6
In addition, Indian Wells currently has six private golf clubs within the City, including:
        Indian Wells Country Club (27 holes);
        Desert Horizons Country Club (18 holes);
       Vintage Club (36 holes); and
        Eldorado Country Club (18 holes).
       Toscana Country Club (27 holes)
       The Reserve Club (18 holes)
Each club offers exceptional recreational opportunities to its members, including tennis
and swimming activities.
Natural Preserve
There are approximately 198 acres of privately owned land within the Natural Preserve
designation. Limited residential development is permitted (i.e. 1 du/40 acres) subject to
the restrictions of the Hillside Management Plan (HMP) and consistent with the
Coachella Valley Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (CVMSHCP).
Watercourses
There are approximately 316 acres of land within the Watercourse designation which
includes the Whitewater River and Deep Canyon flood control channels. Some
Watercourse areas, however, are used for golfing.
Open Space Inventory
The following table provides a summary of the City:
                                          Table 111-1
                 Description                                 Acres
   Golf Course Recreation Overlay             1,502.4
   Public Park                               6.0
   Open Space                                4,465.7
   Natural Preserve                           198.5
   Watercourse                               316.2
   Total                                     6,506.8
 Conservation of Natural Resources
Cultural Resources
Cultural resources are non-renewable and limited in number. Archaeological sites and
features of either the historic or prehistoric eras are protected under the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). In accordance with CEQA, a project will have a
                                             IIIA-7
significant impact on the environment if it disrupts or adversely affects a cultural resource
that has been found to be significant.
On May 16, 1992, the City adopted an Archaeological Resource Policy for the City of
Indian Wells. This document includes policy requirements identified in the CEQA
Guidelines and establishes a process for the early identification and preseNation of
cultural resources within the City.
The City of Indian Wells is located within the territory ethnographically associated with the
Cahuilla people. This language group is within the Cupan subgroup of the Takic family of
the Uto-Aztecan stock. The Takic family includes Cupeno, Gabrielino, and the Luiseno
people. Prehistorically, a large portion of Cahuilla territory was inundated by Lake
Cahuilla which provided the focus for settlement and resources.
As stated earlier, developed land areas within the Indian Wells General Plan Area
encompass approximately 9,348 acres, accounting for 97 percent of the total Plan Area.
Therefore, as part of the development review process under the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA) as noted above, any archaeological sites were appropriately dealt
with.
There is approximately 278.7 acres of vacant land within the City and approximately 1/3 rd
of that land (79 acres) has been approved for the Indian Wells Town Center Specific
Plan. This is the largest remaining area of vacant, but potentially developable land in the
City. The site is located at the intersection of Miles Avenue and Washington Street
adjacent to the Indian Wells Tennis Garden and the intersection of Miles Avenue and
Highway 111.
On March 27, 2007 as part of the Environmental Impact Report for the project, a
Cultural Resources Record Search was conducted by Department of Anthropology,
University of California Riverside Eastern Information Center. The report determined
that four cultuial resources studies were conducted within the boundaries of the project
area (EIC Report Numbers RI-1930, RI-1933, RI-1934, and RI-6722) and that three
cultural resources properties are recorded within the boundaries of the project area.
(CA-RIV-3005, CA-RIV-3008, and CA-RIV-5876)
Phase 2 Testing and Evaluation was conducted on these sites and concluded there
were no significant cultural resources on the property. Presently, there are no properties
within the General Plan Area which are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Paleontological Resources
Paleontological resources are the remains or traces of prehistoric plant and animal life
exclusive of man. Fossil remains are found in the geologic deposits within which they
were originally buried. Since there is a direct relationship between fossils and the types
of rock formations where they can be found, knowledge of the geology of an area can
help in predicting the likelihood of the existence of fossils. Paleontological resources are
limited and nonrenewable: Such resources are protected under the Califomia
                                             IIIA-8
 Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). In accordance with CEQA, a project will have a
 significant impact on the environment if it disrupts or adversely affects a paleontological
 site, except as a part of a scientific study.
 The West Coachella Valley has yielded a variety of fossils in the past, but are mainly
 found in the sedimentary formations typical of lower upland areas. The valley floors in
 the project area are underlain by deep alluvial, fluvian, and aeolian deposits, mainly
.sand, silt, and gravel, which in some areas are hundreds of feet thick. These deposits
 have a low potential for yielding fossils.
 Record searches from the University of California at Riverside (UCR) revealed no known
 fossil localities within the boundaries of the General Plan Area. However, this record also
 indicates that there is the potential that fossil materials may be located in older alluvium
 within Indian Wells.
 A search of records at the San Bemardino County Museum in 1996 revealed that there
 were no previous paleontologic assessments in the area, and consequently, no
 paleontologic resource localities were reported within the City. However, a recorded
 paleontological site (CA-RIV-5876) was found on the proposed Indian Wells Town
 Center Specific Plan site, located on the west side of Washington Street and both north
 and south of Miles Avenue. This site is required to be monitored during grading activies
 to address any resources found.
  In addition, there have been paleontologic resources recorded along Washington Street,
 north of the City. These resources include deltaic deposits associated with Pleistocene
 Lake Cahuilla or with near-shore sediments of the lake.
 Pleistocene-aged fossils are between 1.8 million and 150,000 years old. These deltaic
 fossils occur at an elevation of about 160 feet above sea level, but details of the record
 are insufficient to determine if these types of sediments occur within the sphere of
 infiuence of the City of Indian Wells. Therefore, based on the available records, the
 northeastem portion of the City, below an elevation of 200 feet, has an undetermined
 potential for containing paleontological resources. Project specific studies should be
 conducted to determine the existence of any such resources.
 Biological Resources
 The Coachella Valley Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (the 'Plan") aims to
 conserve over 240,000 acres of open space and protect 27 plant and animal species.
 By providing comprehensive compliance with federal and state endangered species
 laws, the Plan not only safeguards the desert's natural heritage for future generations,
 it allow for more timely construction of roads and other infrastructure that is essential to
 improving quality of life in the Coachella Valley.
 The Plan balances environmental protection and economic development objectives in
 the Plan area and simplifies compliance with endangered species related laws. The
                                               IIIA-9
Plan is intended to satisfy the legal requirements for the issuance of permits that will
allow the Take of species covered by the Plan in the course of otherwise lawful
activities. The Plan will, to the maximum extent practical, minimize and mitigate the
impacts of the Taking and provide for Conservation of the Covered Species.
The California Department of Fish and Game issued the Natural Community
Conservation Plan (NCCP) Permit for the Plan on September 9, 2008. The U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service issued the final permit for the Plan on October 1, 2008.
The CoaChella Valley Association of Governments (CVAG) is serving as the oversight
agency for the Plan. The City of Indian Wells approved the Plan on May 18, 2006 and
is a participant under the Plan. Other participants include Riverside County, the cities
of Cathedral City, Coachella, Indian Wells, Indio, La Quinta, Palm Desert, Palm
Springs, Rancho Mirage as well as Coachella Valley Water District and Imperial
Irrigation District. The City will collect of a habitat mitigation fee of based on per acre
of land from new development projects to support acquisition of Conservation Areas.
The Plan also incorporates protection for the Coachella Valley fringe-toed lizard and
replaces the "lizard fee. II
There are 21 Conservation Areas within the Plan area. A Conservation Area is a
system of lands that provides Core Habitat and Other Conserved Habitat for the
Covered Species, conserves natural communities, conserves Essential Ecological
Processes, and secures Biological Corridors and Linkages between major Habitat
areas.
The Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Conservation Area is partially located within the
southernmost portion of City within the Open Space land use designation There are no
privately owned lands within the City which are located within a Conservation Area.
 Water Resources
Hydrology, Water Quality, and Water Supply
Hydrology
The Coachella Valley Stormwater District was assimilated by the Coachella Valley
Water District (CVWD) in 1935. The district protects 590 square miles from flooding.
The backbone of the system is 25 miles of naturally-occurring Whitewater River
riverbed. Because the river spreads across the lower valley during flooding, it was
channelized. It is the Coachella Valley Stormwater Channel, downstream from Point
Happy in La Quinta near Highway 111 and Washington Avenue. The riverbed and 25
mile channel are fed by several smaller channels, dikes and levees designed and built
to collect rapidly moving floodwater as it pours from the adjacent mountains onto the
valley floor.
                                            IIIA-10
Within CVWD's boundaries there are 16 stormwater protection channels. These and
other facilities have a length of 133 miles. Many of these were built or improved in the
1970s in cooperation with cities and other agencies following severe floods.
Water Quality
The Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Porter-Cologne) is the principal law
governing water quality regulation in California. This statute established the State
Water Regional Control Board (SWRCB) and nine Regional Water Quality Control
Boards (RWQCB), which are charged with implementing its provisions. Porter-Cologne
establishes a comprehensive program for the protection of water quality and the
beneficial uses of water. It applies to surface waters, wetlands, and ground water and
to both point and nonpoint sources. Porter-Cologne is found in the California Water
Code beginning with Section 1300. In addition, Title 23 of the California Code of
Regulations (CCR) contains administrative and regulatory elements of water quality
and quantity management in California. The SWRCB was formed in 1967 when the
State Water Rights Board and the State Water Quality Control Board were merged by
the State Legislature, based on the realization that decisions affecting water quality
and water rights are inseparable. Under its dual legal authority, the SWRCB allocates
rights to the use of surface water and, together with the nine Regional Water Quality
Control Boards (RWQCBs), protects water quality in all waters of the State; The City of
Indian Wells is located within the Colorado River Basin Regional Water Quality Control
Board.
Operators of "municipal separate storm water sewer systems" (called MS4s) are
required to obtain a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES)
for municipal stormwater discharges involving medium (serving between 100,000 and
250,000 people) and large (serving 250,000 people) municipalities. Most of these
permits are issued to a group of co-permittees encompassing an entire metropolitan
area. These permits are reissued as the permits expire. The City of Indian Wells is a
member agency of the Riverside County Flood Control and Water Conservation
District's NPDES/Municipal Stormwater Management Program.
A MS4 is defined as a publicly owned conveyance or system of conveyances, including
roadways, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels and storm drains
which are designed or used for collecting and conveying stormwater. NPDES municipal
stormwater permits require MS4 operators (i, e, Indian Wells) to 1) effectively prohibit
non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 and 2) implement controls to reduce the
discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable.
Any development occurring within the City must comply with the requirements of the
NPDES program. Compliance requires development of a Water Quality Management
Plan, Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and Monitoring Program Plan to manage
construction and post-construction runoff.
                                           IIIA-11
Water Supply
Water is provided to the City by the Coachella Valley Water District (CVWD). The
primary sources of water are from wells and water imported via the State Water Project
and Colorado River aqueducts.
The Coachella Valley Water District has a replenishment program currently in effect for
the upper Whitewater River groundwater sub-basin, which includes Indian Wells. The
State Water Code authorizes the Coachella Valley Water District to levy and collect water
replenishment assessments for the purpose of replenishing groundwater supplies within
the District. The replenishment assessment charge is a monetary charge uniformly
applied to extractions of groundwater within certain specified geographic boundaries of
the District for payments of an imported water supply purchased to supplement naturally
existing water supplies. The water district's Water Management Plan outlines a long-
term plan for eliminating overdraft through water conservation, increased use of
recycled water, increasing the amount of imported water and helping non-potable water
users switch from groundwater to other sources.
The "Urban Water Management Plan" (UWMP), December 2005 for the Coachella
Valley Water District (CVWD), projected water usage for the CVWD service area for
the period 2005 to 2030. The total water demand for domestic water is expected to
increase from 123,500 acre-ftlyear in 2004 to 213,400 acre-ftlyear in 2030 (UWMP
Section 2.5.2). The water demand estimates were based on a planning model using
land use plans, local demographic changes, parcel data, and 2004 CVWD billing rates.
Local demographic changes were analyzed using land use data and Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG) projections of population, households,
and employment for each city and census tract combination. The planning model
included the City of Indian Wells General Plan Land Use Plan. The UWMP concluded
that the CVWD will be able to meet 100 percent of the projected water demand for the
period 2005 to 2030.
Earth Resources
This section describes the soil and mineral resources present within Indian Wells and
their characteristics and uses. Information on related topics such as seismic hazards and
blowsand hazards are discussed in the Public Safety section.
The soils throughout Riverside County are surveyed and classified by the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) in cooperation with the University of California's
Agricultural Experiment Station through the National Cooperative Soil Survey program.
The purpose of the soil survey is to provide information that "can be applied in managing
farms, selecting sites for roads, ponds, buildings and other structures, and in judging the
suitability of tracts of land for farming, industry, and recreation."
                                               IIIA-12
Figure IIIA~3 shows the soil classifications present within the City of Indian Wells, and
Figure IIIA-4 lists the characteristics of each soil type. The soils within the City
boundaries can be divided into three main groups: (a) the rock outcrops and rubble lands
of the mountainous areas, (b) the alluvial fans draining the mountains, and (c) the
floodplain and valley floor.
Rock Outcrops
The rock outcrops in the mountainous areas in the southern half of the City are comprised
of granite, gneiss, mica schist, and sandstone. There is scant vegetation, consisting
primarily of ceanothus, manzanita, desert agave, and ocotillo. The rubble lands are very
old alluvial fans cut by braided stream channels. Vegetation is sparse and consists of
brush and cactus. These soils have no farming value.
Alluvial Fans
A variety of different soil types are found in the alluvial fans. All have slight to moderate
soil blowing and erosion hazards. Native vegetation consists of creosote, mesquite, and
ironwood. Areas with greater moisture also have desert willow, smoketree, and palo
verde trees. The two soil types in the City which can be considered prime farmland are
found in alluvial fans: Gilman fine sandy loam (GbA) and Coachella fine sandy loam
(CsA). These two soil types are found in the central and eastern areas of the City. They
are rated with a Capability Class of II, which means that they have only moderate
limitations in regard to choice of cultivated plants and require only moderate conservation
practices.
                                             IIIA-13
     I DIA                     , W£L S
                       CALI FORNIA
       Legend
                MOUNTAINS
       D        SOIL-RUBBLE LAND
                SOIL-ROCK OUTCROP
       D        SOIL-RIVERWASH
                SOIL-MYOMA FINE SAND 5-15% SLOPES
       '-'----'
                SOIL-MYOMA FINE SAND 0-5% SLOPES
                SOIL-GILMAN FINE SANDY LOAM
       D        SOIL-FLUVENTS
                SOIL-COACHELLA FINE SANDY LOAM
                SOIL-CARSITAS GRAVELLY SAND          N
                                                   A
                SOIL-CARSITAS COBBLY SAND
                SOIL- COACHELLA FINE SAND
                SOIL -CARRIZO STONY SAND
                                                  Figure
SOILS CLASSIFICATION                              III A-3

                                 Soil Characteristics in Indian Wells
                                                Figure III A-4
Soil       Soil Name            Slope     Typical Location          Erosion       Soil          Capability
Type                                                                Hazard        Blowing       Class
Symbol                                                                            Hazard
CcC        Carrizo stony        0%-       Alluvial cones where      Slight        Slight        VIII
           sand                 9%        mountain drainage
                                          enters valley
CdC        Carsitas gravelly    0%-       Alluvial fans             Moderate      Slight        IV
           sand                 9%
ChC        Carsitas cobbly      2%-       Alluvial fans and         Moderate      Slight        VI
           sand                 9%        valley fill
CpA        Coachella fine       0%-       Alluvial fans and         Slight        High          III
           sand                 2%        floodplains
CsA        Coachella fi ne      0%-       Alluvial fans and         Slight        Moderate      II
           sand loam            2%        floodplains
MaD        Myoma fine sand      0%-       Dunes and alluvial        Slight        High          III
                                5%        fans
MaB        Myoma fine sand      5%-       Alluvial fans where       Slight        High          III
                                15%       they merge with
                                          floodplains
GbA        Gilman fine          0%-       Alluvium                  Slight        Moderate      II
           sandy loam           2%
Fe         Fluvents             0%-       Soils exposed by the      Slight        Slight        VIII
                                2%        Whitewater River
                                          channel
RA         Riverwash            --        In and adjacent to        High          None          VIII
                                          stream channels
RO         Rock outcrop         --        Mountainous areas         None          None          VIII
RU         Rubble land          --        Very old alluvial fans    None          None          VIII
SOURCE: USDA 1980.
Capability Classes: A classification system (I-VIII) which shows, in a general way, the suitability of soils
for most kinds of field crops. The classes are:
I       soils having few limitations that restrict their use.
II      soils having moderate limitations that reduce the choice of plants or require moderate
management.
III     soils having severe limitations that require special conservation practices.
IV      soils having very severe limitations that require very careful management.
V       soils having uses limited to pasture, range, woodland, or wildlife habitat.
VI      soils having severe limitations and generally unsuitable for cultivation.
VII     soils having very severe limitations, restricted to pasture, range, woodland, or wildlife habitat.
VIII    soils limited to use for recreations, wildlife habitat, water supply, or aesthetic purpose.
                                                      IIIA-15
Floodplain and Valley Floor
Floodplain and valley floor areas comprise the northern portions of the City. Native
vegetation consists of creosote and mesquite. The soils in these areas have high
blowsand hazard potential. These soils have a Capability Class of III, which means that
there are severe limitations that reduce the choice of plants and/or require special
conservation practices.
Mineral Resources
The California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (SMARA) was enacted to
"assure mineral resource conservation and adequate mined land reclamation." SMARA
mandates a two-phased mineral resource conservation process known as
"classification-designation." The Department of Conservation's California Geological
Survey is responsible, under SMARA, for the classification phase of the
classification-designation process. The State Mining and Geology Board does the
designation phase. During the designation phase, the board may "designate" certain
mineral resource deposits as being regionally significant to satisfy future needs. The
classification information is used by lead agencies to develop and adopt mineral resource
management policies. Policies are included in the General Plan to emphasize the
conservation and management of identified mineral deposits.
Under SMARA, the California Geological Survey has divided urbanizing areas into
production-consumption regions to minimize the loss of regionally significant mineral
deposits. Indian Wells is within the Palm Springs Production-Consumption region.
The classification process conducted by the California Geological Survey under SMARA
results in the establishment of mineral resource zones (MRZs). These zones are based
on a geologic appraisal of the aggregate resource potential of the land and are classified
as MRZ-1 through MRZ-4. As shown in Figure IIIA-5, there are two mineral resource
zones in Indian Wells, MRZ-1 and MRZ-3.
MRZ-2 zones contain known significant mineral deposits or are judged to have a
likelihood of containing significant deposits. MRZ-4 areas are those where available
information is inadequate for assignment to any other zone. There are no MRZ-4 areas
within the Palm Springs Production-Consumption region.
The northeastern portion of the City is in zone MRZ-1. This zone is an area where
adequate information indicates that there are no significant mineral deposits present or
where it is judged that there is little likelihood for their presence. The remaining areas of
the City are within zone MRZ-3. This zone is an area which contains mineral deposits,
but their significance cannot be determined based on available data.
Construction aggregate is the most important mineral commodity produced in
California. It forms the physical foundation of our societal infrastructure. It is effectively
irreplaceable, and cannot be economically imported and distributed. Produced in every
                                               IIIA-16
county with exception to San Francisco, and used in all, it is the cheapest commodity
produced per unit volume, while being the highest overall value commodity mined in
California. There are two types of construction aggregate which are largely
interchangeable: sand and gravel (natural aggregate) and crushed stone (rock).
For construction minerals to have value, they must be produced near their place of
use. This reflects their overall low unit value and high transportation costs due to their
bulk and weight. A haul distance of about 25 miles doubles the delivered price of
construction aggregate. There are six (6) nearby sites in the region that are currently
providing aggregate according to CGS maps for the Palm Springs Region. These sites
are located along Interstate 10 between Mecca and Palm Springs. Depending on the
site, each one is currently producing from half a million to 10 million tons of aggregate
per year.
                                           IIIA-17
              I         IA            Wf    s
                             CALI FORNIA
          Legend
          D   MRZ -1- MINERAL RESOURCE ZONE
              MRZ-3-MINERAL RESOURCE ZONE       N
MINERAL LAND CLASSIFICATION                  Figure
                                             III A-S
 Air Quality Management
 This portion of the Conservation and Open Space Element addresses air quality as it
 relates to the overall land use planning process. Air quality efforts are increasingly
 directed at the relationship between growth, land use, and development patterns. This
 section provides a summary of the regulatory background and existing air quality data
 used as the basis for the air quality related goals and policies in the General Plan.
 Jurisdictional Organization/Authority
 The Environmental Protection Agency
 The United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) regulates at the
 national level. The U.S. EPA handles global, international, national, and interstate air
 pollution issues and policies. The U.S. EPA sets national vehicle and stationary source
 emission standards, oversees approval of all State Implementation Plans (SIP),
 provides research and guidance in air pollution programs, and sets National Ambient
Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), also known as federal standards. There are NAAQS
 for six common air pollutants, called criteria air pollutants, which were identified
 resulting from provisions of the Clean Air Act of 1970. The six criteria pollutants are
ozone, particulate matter (PM1O and PM 2 .S), nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide (CO),
 lead, and sulfur dioxide. The NAAQS were set to protect the health of sensitive
individuals; thus, the standards continue to change as more medical research is
available regarding the health effects of the criteria pollutants.
 California Air Resources Board (CAR B)
The California Air Resources Board (CARB) regulates at the state level. CARB has
overall responsibility for statewide air quality maintenance and air pollution prevention.
The SIP for the State of California is administered by CARB. A SIP is a document
prepared by each state describing existing air quality conditions and measures that will
be followed to attain and maintain NAAQS. CARB also administers California ambient
air quaiity standards, or state standards, for the ten air poiiutants designated in the
California Clean Air Act. The ten state air pollutants are visibility reducing particulates,
hydrogen sulfide, sulfates, vinyl chloride, and the six criteria pollutants.
  South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)
The air pollution control agency for the Riverside County portion of the Salton Sea Air
Basin (basin) is the SCAQMD. SCAQMD is responsible for controlling emissions
primarily from stationary sources. SCAQMD maintains air quality monitoring stations
throughout the basin.        SCAQMD, in coordination with the Southern California
Association of Governments, is. also responsible for developing, updating, and
implementing the Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) for the basin. An AQMP is a
plan prepared by an air pollution control district for a county or region designated as a
non attainment area for bringing the area into compliance with the requirements of the
national and/or California ambient air quality standards. The term non-attainment area
is used to refer to an air basin where one or more ambient air quality standards are
exceeded.
                                              IIIA-19
Applicable Air Quality Plans (AQMP)
The current AQMP for SCAQMD is the 2007 AQMP. The purpose of the 2007 AQMP
is to set forth a comprehensive program that will lead the basin and those portions of
the Salton Sea Air Basin under SCAQMD jurisdiction into compliance with all federal
and state air quality planning requirements
The Final 2007 AQMP was adopted by the SCAQMD Governing Board on June 1,
2007. The new 2007 AQMP incorporates significant new emissions inventories,
ambient measurements, scientific data, control strategies, and air quality modeling.
The 2007 AQMP is designed to meet the state and federal Clean Air Act planning
requirements.
Regional Climate
The City is located in the Salton Sea Air Basin, a part of the Coachella Valley. The
basin receives approximately 3 inches of rainfall annually, although it can range from 1
to 5 inches depending on seasonal precipitation. Most of the precipitation comes in the
winter months and during occasional summer thunderstorms. The mean daily
minimum temperature in the winter is 28 degrees Fahrenheit (OF) with the mean daily
maximum temperature during summer can range to over 110°F. Temperatures can
vary widely, both during the day and seasonally, and daily temperatures can vary up to
10 degrees from mean values. The west Coachella Valley area experiences hot, dry
summers and cool winters, and is influenced by a Pacific Subtropical High cell off the
coast during the summer.
Prevailing winds in the City average 10 to 20 miles per hour from the west most of the
year. However, wind speed and directionality can change throughout the day. The
San Bernardino and San Jacinto Mountains to the west and northwest effectively block
cool, moisture laden air from the Pacific Ocean. The mountains also force onshore air
moving toward the desert upward, causing moisture to fall on the south-facing slopes.
ThiS "ra'ln shano'AI" eff°l"t caus0C' arin l""nnit'lons through""t
 I'       I  I U  VW     '"'''''\. V '-oJ IU \.IVIIUU.   I \,111 v ..... \. the c-turl\l
                                                                             II ~   \.Ay a"""a
                                                                                          10.
Regional pollutants are often transported into the desert areas from Los Angeles and
the Inland Empire through the Banning Pass. Regional air quality can also be affected
by inversion conditions that inhibit the normal vertical mixing of air. As the desert is
heated by the sun, a low pressure area is created, drawing cooler ocean air through
mountain passes into the desert, sometimes carrying pollutants with it.
Background Air Quality Information
Air pollutants are regulated at the national, state, and air basin level; each agency has
a different degree of control. The SCAQMD regulates at the air basin level.
The criteria pollutants and applicable CAAQS and NAAQS are displayed in Table 111- 3.
These standards establish the context for local air quality management plans. They
are set to protect the health of sensitive individuals.
                                                   IIIA-20

                                 Table 111-3. Ambient Air Quality Standards
     Ozone             1 Hour          0.09 ppm                          (a) Decrease of pulmonary function and localized lung edema
                 f------+------+------l                                  in humans and animals; (b) Risk to public health implied by
                      8 Hour          0.070 ppm           0.08 ppm       alterations in pulmonary morphology and host defense in
                                                                         animals; (c) Increased mortality risk; (d) Risk to public health
                                                                         implied by altered connective tissue metabolism and altered
                                                                         pulmonary morphology in animals after long-term exposures
                                                                         and pulmonary function decrements in chronically exposed
                                                                         humans; (e) Vegetation damage; (f) Property damage.
    Carbon             1 Hour           20 ppm             35 ppm        (a) Aggravation of angina pectoris (chest pain or discomfort)
Monoxide (CO) 1 - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - + - - - - - - - 1 and other aspects of coronary heart disease; (b) Decreased
                      8 Hour            9.0 ppm              9 ppm       exercise tolerance in persons with peripheral vascular disease
                                                                         and lung disease; (c) Impairment of central nervous system
                                                                         functions; (d) Possible increased risk to fetuses.
    Nitrogen          1 Hour          0.18 ppm"                          (a) Potential to aggravate chronic respiratory disease and
 Dioxide (N02 )  1------+------1-------1 respiratory symptoms in sensitive groups; (b) Risk to public
                       Mean          0.030 ppm"          0.053 ppm       health implied by pulmonary and extra-pulmonary biochemical
                                                                         and cellular changes and pulmonary structural changes;
                                                                         (c) Contribution to atmospheric discoloration.
 Sulfur Dioxide       1 Hour           0.25 ppm                          Bronchoconstriction accompanied by symptoms which may
     (S02)       f - - - - - - - j : . . . - - - - - - f - - - - - - j include wheezing, shortness of breath and chest tightness,
                     24 Hour           0.04 ppm           0.14 ppm       during exercise or physical activity in persons with asthma.
                       Mean                              0.030 ppm
   Particulate        24 hour          50 J.lg/m 3       150 J.lg/m 3    (a) Exacerbation of symptoms in sensitive patients with
 Matter (PM 10) j - - - - - - - j - - - - - - f - - - - - - j respiraiory or cardiovascular disease; (b) Deciines in
                                                 3
                       Mean            20 J.lg/m                         pulmonary function growth in children; (c) Increased risk of
                                                                         premature death from heart or lung diseases in the elderly.
                                                                    3
   Particulate       24 Hour                              35 J.lglm
 Matter (PM 2.s) f - - - - - - t - - - - - : : - - i - - - - - - j
                                                 3                  3
                       Mean            12 J.lg/m          15 J.lg/m
    Sulfates         24 Hour                                             (a) Decrease in ventilatory function; (b) Aggravation of
                                                                         asthmatic symptoms; (c) Aggravation of cardio-pulmonary
                                                                         disease; (d) Vegetation damage; (e) Degradation of visibility;
                                                                         (f) Property damage.
     Lead             30-day                                             (a) Learning disabilities; (b) Impairment of blood formation
                 1 - - - - - - - - ' 1 - - - - - - + - - - - - - - 1 nerve conduction.
                     Quarter
Abbreviations:
ppm =parts per million (concentration)
                                                           3
                                                    J.lg/m = micrograms per cubic meter
       =
Mean Annual Arithmetic Mean                         30-day = 30-day average                      Quarter  =Calendar quarter
"The nitrogen dioxide ambient air quality standard was amended on February 22, 2007. These changes become effective after
  regulatory changes are submitted and approved by the Office of Administrative Law, expected in 2007.                .
 Source: South Coast Air Quality Management District, 2007c. California Air Resources Board, Ambient Air Quality Standards,
                                                                  IIIA-21
A brief description of the criteria pollutants and additional pollutants of concern are
contained below.
     Carbon monoxide (CO): A colorless, odorless toxic gas produced by incomplete
      combustion of carbon-containing fuels (e.g., gasoline or diesel fuel). CO levels
    . tend to be highest during the winter months, when the meteorological conditions
      favor the accumulation of the pollutants.
     Ozone: A photochemical oxidant that is formed when reactive organic gases and
      oxides of nitrogen (both byproducts of internal combustion engines) react in the
      presence of ultraviolet sunlight. Ozone is an energetic combination of three
      oxygen atoms that, when it comes into contact with a surface, releases its force
      as chemical energy.              When this happens to biological systems (i.e., the
      respiratory tract and plants), this energy can cause damage to sensitive tissues.
     Oxides of nitrogen (NOx): NOx is a mixture of nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide in
      the atmosphere. Nitric oxide is formed as a byproduct of fuel combustion and
      quickly reacts with oxygen to form nitrogen dioxide. NOx emissions contribute to
      the formation of ozone and particulate matter. Nitrogen dioxide is the only form of
      NOx that exists at a level sufficient to cause public health concerns. The main
      human health concerns of nitrogen dioxide include lung damage, increased
      incidence of chronic bronchitis, eye, and mucus membrane damage, negative
      effects on the respiratory system, pulmonary dysfunction, and premature death.
      Small particles can penetrate deeply into the sensitive tissue of the lungs and can
      cause or worsen respiratory disease such as emphysema, asthma, and
      bronchitis, and can also aggravate existing heart disease (EPA 2005).
     Sulfur dioxide and sulfates: In California, sulfur is emitted during the combustion
      of petroleum-derived fuels (Le., gasoline and diesel fuel) that contain sulfur.
      During combustion, sulfur is oxidized to sulfur dioxide (a colorless pungent gas).
      T h~ culf"r d'loxirie ic th~n r'f"\n"erte rl to s"lfato cf"\mpounrls in the atmosphe"e
        •• _ _ '1,""    "._ • ..., L ,.,. '-'VI V   \oA L UII LV VI I 11\.04" , .. , ... I I I •
      Symptoms include wheezing, shortness of breath and chest tightness, which are
      apparent especially during exercise and in people with asthma (EPA 2004).
     Lead: Lead is a heavy metal that can accumulate in bone, soft tissue, and blood;
      can damage the kidneys, liver, and nervous system; and can result in learning
      disabilities, seizures, and death. Lead concentrations once exceeded the state
      and national air quality standards by a wide margin, but have not exceeded state
      or national air quality standards in the area for at least 10 years. Lead is no
      longer an additive in gasoline, which is the main reason the concentration of lead
      in the air is low.
     Suspended particulate matter (PM lO and PM 2 .5 ): Particulate matter is a mixture of
      small particles that consists of dry solid fragments, droplets of water, or solid
     cores with liquid coatings. The particles vary in shape, size, and composition.
      PMlO refers to particulate matter that is 10 microns or less in diameter (1 micron
      is one-millionth of a meter). PM 2.5 refers to particulate matter that is 2.5 microns
                                                  IIIA-22

 or less in diameter. Sources include road dust, diesel soot, erosion of soil,
 combustion particles (ashes and soot), and tire and brake abrasion. Breathing
 particulate matter can cause or aggravate problems associated with asthma, can
 increase coughing and cause breathing to be difficult or painful (EPA 2007).
 Breathing particulate matter has been associated with chronic bronchitis and
 decreases lung function (EPA 2007).
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs): VOCs are organic compounds that readily
 evaporate.     Reactive organic gases (ROGs) consist of non-methane and
 oxygenated hydrocarbons. Although all VOCs are not necessarily ROGs, the
 terms are often interchanged. There are no state or national ambient air quality
 standards for VOCs; however, they are regulated because they are involved in
 chemical reactions that contribute to the formation of ozone. In addition, some
 hydrocarbon components classified as VOCs (Le., benzene) are thought or
 known to be hazardous. Sources of VOCs include adhesives, solvents, paints,
 cooking, fuel, and combustion. VOCs can interfere with oxygen uptake and can
 cause coughing, sneezing, headaches, weakness, laryngitis, and bronchitis.
Diesel particulate matter (DPM): Diesel exhaust is a mixture of many particles and
gases that is produced when an engine burns diesel fuel. Many compounds
found in diesel exhaust are carCinogenic. DPM includes the particles in diesel
exhaust. Some of the health effects of DPM include eye, nose, and throat
irritation as well as cough, nausea, and phlegm.
Visibility reducing particles are suspended particulate matter. Visibility is the
 distance through the air that can be seen without the use of instrumental
 assistance. The 8-hour state standard is the extinction coefficient of 0.23
 kilometers - visibility of ten miles or more due to particles when relative humidity
 is less than 70 percent. Visibility reducing particles are not assessed in this
 report; however, particulate matter is assessed.
Vinyl chloride is a chlorinated hydrocarbon and a colorless gas with a mild, sweet
 odor. Most vinyl chloride is used to make polyvinyl chloride (PVC) piastic and
vinyl products. Vinyl chloride is a known carcinogen. The 24-hour state standard
for vinyl chloride is 0.01 ppm. The proposed project is not expected to generate
 or be exposed to vinyl chloride because proposed project uses do not utilize the
chemical processes that create this pollutant. Therefore, it is not assessed in this
 report.
Hydrogen sulfide is a flammable, colorless, poisonous gas that smells like rotten
 eggs. It can irritate the eyes and respiratory tract and cause symptoms like
headache, nausea, vomiting, and cough. The 1-hour state standard for hydrogen
sulfide is 0.03 ppm. Sources include the combustion of sulfur containing fuels (oil
and coal) and organic matter that undergoes putrefaction. It is used in the
production of heavy water for nuclear reactors, the manufacture of chemicals, in
metallurgy, and as an analytical reagent. The proposed project is not expected to
cause exposure to hydrogen sulfide because it will not generate hydrogen sulfide
in any substantial quantity. Therefore, hydrogen sulfide is not assessed in this
report.
                                       IIIA-23
         Greenhouse gases help to regulate the climate by absorbing infrared radiation in
        the atmosphere and allowing incoming solar radiation to pass through the
         atmosphere. Greenhouse gases include water vapor, methane, carbon dioxide,
         nitrous oxide, ozone, halogenated fluorocarbons, perfluorinated carbons, and
        hydrofluorocarbons. Increased production of greenhouse gases can contribute
        to global warming. Global climate change is an average rise in the earth's
        temperature, which can cause changes in climate.
 Existing Air Quality
The primary sources of emissions in the City are from motor vehicles and dust. However,
 given its location in the desert portion of Riverside County in the Salton Sea Air Basin
 which exceeds the federal ozone standard and is classified as a "serious" ozone
 nonattainment area. The federal Clean Air Act requires that the Coachella Valley to:
        • identify specific emission reduction goals;
        • demonstrate reasonable further progress in VOC emission reductions;
        • demonstrate attainment of the federal ozone standard by June 15, 2013; and
        • provide contingency measures or actions in the event of a failure to attain or to
          meet interim milestones.
The 2007 AQMP addresses these requirements and satisfies the State Implementation
 Plan requirements under Title I of the Clean Air Act (CAA).
On April 18,2003, U.S. EPA approved the Coachella Valley State Implementation Plan
 (CVSIP), which addressed future year attainment of the PM10 standards and
 incorporated the latest mobile source emissions model results and planning
 assumptions. Over the past five years, annuai average Piv110 concentrations have met
the levels of the revoked federal standard (50 jJg/m3) and peak 24-hour average PM 10
concentrations have not exceeded the current federal standard (150 jJg/m3) and is
currently eligible for re-designation as attainment.
The CAA also requires that "serious" ozone nonattainment areas, such as the
Coachella Valley, demonstrate attainment of the federal ozone air quality standard by
June15, 2013 using the most current modeling techniques. It is clear from available
data that federal ozone standard exceedances in the Coachella Valley largely result
from pollutant transport from the upwind South Coast Air Basin. Air Quality modeling
for the Final 2007 AQMP, using the U.S. EPA guidelines show that attainment of the
ozone standard is possible with the proposed control strategy described in the 2007
AQMP for the South Coast Air Basin, and control of locally generated emissions via
state and federal regulations. This 2007 AQMP Plan carries forward the 1997 AQMP,
 1999 AQMP Amendment and 2003 AQMP control approach for the Coachella Valley.
                                            IIIA-24

In addition, To help the valley regain its vital PM10 (particulate matter) pollution
attainment status, the City of Indian Wells adopted a resolution to become a model city
for "Smart Scalping," The resolution calls for utilizing re-seeding methodologies
outlined in the CVAG brochure "Promoting Healthier Grass Re-seeding" (or similar
clean re-seeding methodologies) for landscaping and maintaining all public areas, and
for the encouragement and promotion of clean re-seeding methodologies throughout
the community.
The scalping, done to prepare for the planting of winter rye grass, causes an enormous
amount of dust. The dust becomes a component of PM10, negatively impacting air
quality and quality of life.
Climate Change
Climate change refers to any significant change in measures of climate, such as
average temperature, precipitation, or wind patterns over a period of time. Climate
change may result from natural factors, natural processes, and human activities that
change the composition of the atmosphere and alter the surface and features of the
land. Significant changes in global climate patterns have recently been associated with
global warming, an average increase in the temperature of the atmosphere near the
Earth's surface, attributed to accumulation of Greenhouse Gas emissions in the
atmosphere.
As part of the 2006 Update to the General Plan Land Use Element, the City adopted
the following policy in order to encourage practices that will result in less energy use
and reduce Greenhouse Gas emissions:
Land Use Element Policy IIA 1.18
(1). The City will encourage green building design which could include conserving non-
      renewable energy and materials, promoting water efficient landscaping and other
      methods to support environmental conservation and to assist in the concerns of
      global warming.
(2)   The City will provide public information on Sustainable Development Practices
      which will assist in acceptable levels of global resource depletion and
      environmental pollution.
This Conservation and Open Space Element builds upon this policy by adding a
"Substainable Development" section which sets forth specific policies to reduce
Greenhouse Gas emissions (See Page IIIA-31).
                                          IIIA-25
Conservation and Open Space Plan
The Open Space and Recreation Plan diagram is illustrated as Figure IIIA-6, and shows
the open space and recreational opportunities currently and potentially available to the
residents of Indian Wells. The Plan includes conservation measures that protect the
scenic and natural resources of the area in accordance with the Goals and Policies of this
Element.
The open space resources in the City of Indian Wells play an important part in the lives of
the residents. Indian Wells has a unique scenic environmental character because of the
location of the City near the Santa Rosa Mountains.
The City has outstanding access to the natural resources, trail systems and the open
space and extensive landscape buffer areas adjacent to Highway 111. Additionally, the
open spaces created by the country clubs and golf courses create an attractive, quality
 image and character for the City.
 Components of the Open Space System
 The open space system for Indian Wells is organized into the following components.
 1       Natural Open Space Resources;
 2.      Golf Course and Recreational Open Spaces;
 3.      Parks and Recreation Areas; and
 4.      Open Space Corridors.
 Natural Open Space Resources
  Much of the unique environmental character of Indian Wells is shaped by the natural
  open space resources adjacent to the community. The Santa Rosa Mountains, Big Horn
  Sheep Preserve, and The Living Desert are integral to the value and uniqueness of the
  City.
  The primary goal of this plan is to preserve and protect these unique natural resources.
  Hiking trails may be permitted, but only if there are minimal intrusions to the natural
  character of the area. The City should continue its active support and leadership role in
  the Coachella Valley Mountain Conservancy.
  Besides the local mountains, the natural open space resources include the watercourses
  and drainage ways extending through the City including the Whitewater River flood
  control channel and the Deep Canyon flood control channel.
  Golf Course and other Recreational Open Spaces
  The Golf Course Recreation Overlay designation includes the public and private golf
  courses of the community. Presently, The Indian Wells Golf Resort is the only public golf
  course in the City. The other golf courses are restricted to members and their guests.
                                             IIIA-26
The City will implement procedures and requirements to assure proper parking and
access and other planning considerations if private facilities are proposed to be opened
for use by the general public. Other recreational areas include swimming pools, tennis
courts, and similar facilities.
Parks and Recreation
There is presently a minimal need for active parks and recreational areas. However, if
this would change in the future, new development. is required to dedicate land for parks
and recreational areas (three acres per thousand residents or five acres per thousand
residents including private open space). The Plan provides an opportunity for the City to
provide additional public park areas if needed by residents in the future.
Open Space Corridors
Open Space Corridors are linear areas of open space along lands such as streets,
easements, floodplains, and hillside areas. These linkages form trails and open space
systems that connect parkland or are adjacent to natural open space areas. These areas
provide attractive visual character to the community as well as physical connections
between the various portions of the City. The right-of-way adjacent to Highway 111 is an
excellent example of a unifying open space linkage. Other examples may include golf
cart paths and easements along the natural drainage courses.
                                            IIIA-27
                                      I                           I
                                                                         CALI FORNIA
                                                                                        s
                                  Legend
                                 ••••••••• BIKEPATH
                                 - - BIGHORN SHEEP PRESERVE BOUNDARY
                                 _                            GOLF COURSE
                                 - - HILLSIDE MANAGEMENT AREA
                                                              PUBLIC/PRIVATE OPEN SPACE
                                 - - THE LIVING DESERT TRAIL SYSTEM
                                 [:i:,:': :'::'::?i::::,\?:}l WATER COURSE
                                                                                           N
Big Horn Preserve
                  OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION PLAN                                        Figure
                                                                                        III A-6

Bicycle Paths
Bicycle paths provide for active recreational opportunities and serve as transportation
corridors. The existing and proposed bicycle paths are shown in Figure IIIA-6. The
primary bicycle path in the City runs parallel to Highway 111, within the landscape
setback area. Other paths are located adjacent to the identified roadways. Bicycle paths
are further addressed in the Circulation Element.
Goals and Polices
As the City of Indian Wells continues to grow, new development pressures may result in
the loss of open space lands and could endanger sensitive natural resources. The City
intends to maintain a balance between development and preservation of the natural
environment.
The following goals and policies reflect the City's commitment to the conservation of open
space, and the management of the City's natural and cultural resources.
Open Space Resources
GoallllA1
Conservation of open space areas for a balance of recreation, scenic enjoyment,
and protection of natural resources and features.
Open Space Resource Policies
 lilA 1.1 Designate and preserve the City's open space resources, including hillside open
space, watercourse open space, golf courses, and public parks.
 iliA 1.2 Maintain the Hillside Management Ordinance to ensure the environmental integrity
 of the hillsides. The hillside area subject to the Hillside Management Ordinance is
 identified in Figure 111- 6 as "PublicI Private Open Space"
 lilA 1.3 Encourage the use of indigenous palm trees in development projects and preserve
 existing trees where feasible to do so.
 iliA1.4 Encourage timely completion of the City's bike path system. Encourage projects
 to incorporate internal path systems which would be linked to the City-wide system.
 IIIA1.5 Coordinate with The Living Desert to provide Indian Wells residents with improved
 access to the reserve's nature walks and hiking trails.
 lilA 1.6 Locate and site development to preserve public and private views of hillside areas,
 the Santa Rosa Mountains, and other scenic vistas.
 IIIA1.7 Preserve the landscaped open space corridor along Highway 111.
                                                IIIA-29
IliA 1.8 Establish and maintain greenbelts and open space amenities which enhance the
open space character of the City, and selVe the needs of residents.
Parks and Recreation
GoallllA2
Provision of parks and recreation areas that meet the varying recreational needs of·
the City's residents.
Parks and Recreation Policies
IIIA2.1 Require developers to dedicate land based upon the park acreage standard of up
to five acres per one thousand population or, at the City Council's discretion, the payment
of fees in-lieu of the dedication of land in accordance with the Municipal Code.
IIIA2.2 Consider public safety and compatibility with adjacent uses in park design and
development including the location of buildings, activity areas, lighting, and parking. .
IIIA2.3 Consider linkages of open spaces and recreational areas to                   adjacent
developments or publicly owned open space areas where appropriate.
IIIA2.4 Promote recreational opportunities for the residents by providing needed facilities
within the City or through cooperation with adjoining jurisdictions.
Cultural and Pafeontological Resources
GoallllA3
Preservation of significant historical, cultural, and paleontological resources.
Cultural and Paleontological Resource Policies
IIIA3.1 Review all public and private development projects in areas of high potential for
archaeological/paleontological resources and require strict adherence to CEQA
guidelines for environmental documentation and mitigation measures.
IIIA3.2 Require sites proposed for future development to be evaluated for archaeological
and paleontological resources either through a literature search or sUlVey by a certified
archaeologist or paleontologist in accordance with the Califomia Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA).
Biological Resources
GoallllA4
Conservation of important biological habitats and protection of significant plant
and animal species.
                                              IIIA-30

Biological Resources Policies
IIIA4.1 Direct development away from areas of sensitive biological habitat, unless
effective mitigation measures can be implemented. Prior to the approval of any
development proposed in areas of "high ecological sensitivity, II require the applicant to
prepare a biological study for the area.
IIIA4.2 Require development proposals to identify significant biological resources and
provide mitigation including the use of adequate buffering, selective preservation, the
provision of replacement habitats, the use of sensitive site planning techniques and other
appropriate measures.
IIIA4.3 Encourage the preservation of areas of riparian vegetation and wildlife habitat
along the Whitewater River and Deep Canyon storm channels. Notify the State
Department of Fish and Game of any proposed alteration to the floodway or riparian
habitat.
IIIA4.4 Continue to be a participant in the Coachella Valley Multiple Species Habitat
Conservation Plan.
Sustainable Development
Assembly Bill 32 (Nunez) requires Califomia to set a statewide cap on greenhouse gas
emissions, reduce these emissions from major stationary sources, and develop a
mandatory reporting system for these emissions. Sustainable development will.assist the
City in meeting these requirements imposed by State legislature. Because the General
Plan is the City's guide to development, it is important to set forth sustainable guiding
principles.
The City of Indian Wells supports the goals and objectives of environmental sustainability,
and directs staff, all commissions, and all committees to consider environmental
sustainability in all of its official acts. Furthermore, the City of Indian Wells intends to
support County and State legislation regarding water conservation, provided that such
legislation is consistent with sound sustain ability practices and prevailing scientific
evidence.
Sustainable development is defined as:
"A balance between economic growth and environmental protection. Sustainable
development meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs".
A sustainable city is a community of residents, neighbors, workers and visitors who strive
together to balance ecological, economic and social needs to ensure a clean, healthy and
safe environment for all members of society for generations to come.
                                              IIIA-31
Sustainable development encompasses established principles of good planning and
advocates a proactive approach to future development. The comprehensive, integrated
and long-term nature of the general plan makes it an ideal vehicle for implementing local
sustainable development goals.
The City believes that the protection of urban and natural environments is a social
responsibility and a fundamental obligation of this City. To ensure a viable future, the City
will address the impacts placed on the environment and will pursue the development of
green buildings and sustainability programs wherever possible. Green building is the
practice of creating structures and using processes that are environmentally responsible
and resource-efficient. The following Goals and Policies are to implement the City's
commitment to sustainable development.
Water Conservation
GoallliAS
To protect and maintain safe and adequate water supply to ensure that the City's
growing demand for water can be met in a sustainable manner.
Policies
IIIA5.1 Adopt a Water Efficient landscape Ordinance by January 1, 2010 as required by
State Law to optimize conservation and comply with State Assembly Bill 325.
IIIAS.2 Encourage water-intensive land uses, such as golf courses, to utilize treated
effluent for landscaping and irrigation needs.
IIIA5.5 Actively participate in regional activities to assure (a) the effective management of
water resources, and (b) the development of water policies at the County, State and
Federal level that are favorable to the Coachella Valley".
IIIA.S.6 Recommend the establishment of incentives/funding and/or rebate programs for
projects or residences that implement water conservation measures.
IIIA.S.7 Coordinate with Coachella Valley Water District to monitor citywide water usage
on an annual basis and make recommendations to modify or expand water conservation
measures to ensure their effectiveness.
IIIA.S.8 Strengthen education programs related to water protection and conservation.
Cooperate with CVWD in the development of education materials and programs that
encourage and facilitate water conservation throughout the community.
IIIA.S.9 Inform the public about water conservation techniques and available water
conservation programs they can utilize via the city's newsletter, website and Channel 17.
                                             IIIA-32
IIIA5.10 Work with CVWD to establish an historical record of Indian Wells water
utilization for existing average home, City consumption, gated communities common area
and existing individual businesses.
IIA5.12 The City shall encourage the use of water conserving appliances and fixtures in
all new developments, as required by state law.
Energy Conservation
Goal III A7
The City will work with the community to foster a greater interest and awareness in
green building and sustainable practices.
Policies
IIIA7.1 Incent energy-efficient retrofitting of existing buildings throughout the City by
providing and establishing an education program to improve public dissemination of
information for possible energy conservation solutions.
IIIA7.2 Encourage energy conservation by incorporating into City codes, when feasible,
planning and building standards which minimize consumption of non-renewable
resources, such as natural gas and fossil fuels.
IIIA7.3 Encourage Green Building program that awards incentives for projects that install
energy conservation measures.
IIIA7.4 Develop a public outreach campaign that will make conservation technology
information available to residents, businesses and the building industry.
IIIA7.5 Implement the Home Energy Assistance Link (HEAL) program, a monetary
incentive program, that assists Indian Wells residents purchase energy and water efficient
appliances, as directed by City Council.
IIIA7.6 Develop a green building resource guide that will encourage the following:
•    Reduction or elimination of toxic and harmful substances within buildings and their
     surrounding environments.
•    Selection of materials and products based on their life-cycle environmental impacts
     and use of materials and products with recycled content.
IIIA7.7 In cooperation with local utilities provide energy information at the Planning and
Building counters about rebate and efficiency programs that reduce the costs of installing
energy saving measures.
                                             IIIA-33

IIIA?8 The City shall promote and coordinate with Coachella Valley Association of
Govemments (CVAG) in the holding of workshops on the use of altemative energy and
the local development associated industries in the Coachella Valley.
IIIA?9 Encourage the use of site planning techniques, building orientation and building
designs that reduce energy use.
GoallllA8
Exercise leadership by setting an example for other agencies and the public
through the energy efficient operations of the City services and facilities. The City
will audit their existing facilities and operations to identify energy efficiency
improvements.
Policies
IIIA8.1 Investigate incorporating sustainable materials and construction elements into the
next budget cycle for the Capital Improvement Program.
III A8.2 Encourage a program that will recycle the green waste from City maintained
landscape areas including the Golf Course into mulch. The mulch would be re-used on
City landscaped areas and would be distributed free to residents.
IIIA8.3 Incorporate water-wise native landscaping or alternative water saving materials
(i.e. artificial turf) whenever feasible within the City including planting and in recently
constructed medians.
IIIA8A Retrofit City Hall with motion and light sensors.
IIIA8.5 Replace all non-florescent fixtures with energy saving fixtures to reduce the
demand on electrical power.
IIIA8.6 Schedule regular maintenance for the City fleet vehicles to reduce fuel
consumption resulting in less air pollution and decrease fuel purchases.
 IIIA8.? replace irrigation controllers with weather based irrigation controllers in landscape
areas maintained by the City, A water saving audit will be conducted after one year of the
completing of the replacement units.
 IIIA8.8 Pursue Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification for
the remodel for 90 units at Indian Wells Villas as a model of sustainable building remodel.
 IIIA8.9 Pursue LEED certification for the construction of 56 affordable units at Mountain
View Villas Phase II as a model of sustainable building.
                                              IIIA-34
IIIAS.10 Promote training seminars and continuing education programs for planners,
developers, contractors in sustainable design and building technologies and coordinate
with other cities for training.
GoallllA9
Encourage the implementation of sustainable building design for new building
construction in both the public and private sectors.
IIIA9.1 Encourage energy-efficient retrofitting of existing buildings throughout the City.
IIIA9.2 The City shall encourage energy efficient land development by requiring all new
development projects obt~ining discretionary action by the City to comply with energy
related conditions of approval.
Recycling Conservation
Goal III A 10
Reduce the impacts of solid waste disposal on existing landfills to extend their life
and limit the need for new landfills.
IliA 10.1 Continue to enforce and monitor required diversion rates pursuant to the
requirements contained in Chapter 16.75. of the Municipal Code.
IliA 10.2 Encourage substituting safer products, reducing the use of and responsible
disposing of hazardous pesticides, fungicides and herbicides, paints, toxic household
substances and medical sharps. Discourage household storage of hazardous materials.
IliA 10.3 Encourage the salvage and reuse of building materials and recycled products in
new construction and remodel projects.
lilA10.4 Continue the procurement of recycled products and materials utilized in City
owned buildings, including building/decorative materials and fumishings, food and
beverage service items and office materials.
IliA 10.5 Continue to reduce per capita waste generation.
IliA 10.6 Continue to expand the local recycling program.
IIIA10.7 Maintain and improve the City of Indian Wells waste diversion rate as mandated
by the State of Califomia.
IliA1O.S The City will continue to foster a sense of personal responsibility among
residents for solid waste management particularly in accomplishing waste reduction and
recycling goals.
                                             IIIA-35
IIIA10.8 Continue and investigate expanding recycling information program to residents,
commercial businesses and developers.
iliA 10.9 Encourage the recycling/composting of all City's organic materials including
landscape and food waste materials.
Alternative Energy
GoallllA.12
The City continues to explore the use of alternative energy sources and has made
significant changes in several operational areas.
IIIA11.1 Actively encourage and promote the development of renewable energy.
IliA 11.2 Encou rage the use of active or passive solar design whenever feasible. Permit
the use of solar panels to maximize energy efficiency provided the panels are in
accordance with the City's/State's design guidelines contained in the Zoning Code.
iliA 11.3 Provide incentives through educational programs to promote greater public
understanding of renewable energy.
IliA 11.4: Explore cooperative efforts with other jurisdictions and entities related to
renewable energy and distributed generation systems.
IliA 11.5 Continue to protect solar access in accordance with the Solar Rights Act.
IliA 11.6 Develop alternative transportation and destination connectivity routes for golf
carts.
lilA 11.7 Consider program to waive permit fees for solar installation.
IliA 11.8 Encourage use of solar collectors on public buildings or City projects.
IliA 11.9 City shall continue its efforts to reduce dependency of fossil fuels in all municipal
buildings and vehicles
Air Quality
GoallllA6
Preservation and improvement of air quality through proper land use and
transportation planning.
Air Quality Policies
IIIA6.1 Encourage local efforts to improve air quality, including consideration of a
comprehensive ridesharing program, and dust control measures, and coordinate with the
                                               IIIA-36
South Coast Air Basin in implementing strategies proposed in the Air Quality
Management Plan to improve regional air quality.
IIIA6.2 Participate in air quality improvement efforts in the Riverside County area.
IIIA6.3 Encourage the use of non-motorized transportation in the City by maintaining a
system of bicycle routes and pedestrian walkways.
IIIA6.4 Maintain an orderly flow of traffic and improve mobility through the use of
effective transportation systems management techniques.
Implementation of the Conservation and Open Space Element
The Conservation and Open Space Element is a policy document that requires the
ongoing effort of numerous agencies and the community to implement. The most critical
action the City should take is to continue to monitor and review development proposals to
assure thatthe potential impacts on the natural environment are minimized.
Regional Coordination: The City should provide regional leadership and coordination of
efforts by County, Federal, and State agencies with respect to:
        •      Water Resources;
        •      Air Quality;
        •      Regional Trail Systems; and
        •      The Coachella Valley Mountains Conservancy.
Continued Community Involvement: The preparation of the General Plan has included
extensive involvement from the residents of Indian Wells. Citizen involvement should not
end upon the adoption of the Plan. While the elected officials have the primary
responsibility to implement the General Plan, the residents are the City's most important
General Plan resource.
Benefit Assessment Districts: Benefit assessment districts are typically utilized for special
improvements that benefit the City and affected property owners (see definition in
Chapter V).
Land Acquisition: The City, using the General Fund or Redevelopment funds, could
consider the direct purchase of property for the implementation of the open space
systems. These areas could be acquired in addition to those areas which are acquired
through setback easements and land dedication as a part of the development process.
Land Dedication Ordinance: The City's land dedication requirements provide for new
developments to dedicate three (3) acres of land per thousand residents for public open
space and parks and recreation areas, and two (2) acres of land per thousand residents
for private park uses. The City can effectively use this requirement to obtain land or cash
in lieu of land to optimize its open space system. The City should not accept unusable
                                            IIIA-3?

land remnants or land that is inappropriately located.
Density Transfers: The Density Transfer concept involves the clustering of dwelling units
within a development project area at higher densities thereby leaving portions of the
property as common open space. Through this process of concentrating development at
higher densities, larger areas of open space can be preserved. In addition, a variety of
housing types can be accommodated without increasing the overall density of the
development.
Indian Wells derives its unique character from the open spaces that exist within the City
and the surrounding mountain region. The Conservation and Open Space Element of the
General Plan sets forth the direction, commitment and the policies to assure that the
natural resources of the community will be preserved for future generations.
                                           IIIA-38
                                 Chapter IV: Public Safety
                     IVA.         COMMUNITY SAFETY
Introduction and Authority
                      In 1975, the State Legislature adopted SB 271, making the safety element
                      a mandatory part of the general plan. When the requirement was enacted
                      in 1976, cities had to adopt general plan policies relating to fIre, safety,
                      flooding, and geologic hazards. In 1985, the Legislature expanded the list
                      to include seismic safety. By doing this, the seismic safety element was
                      deleted from the list of mandatory elements.
                      The Community Safety Element aims at reducing death, injuries, property
                      damage, and the economic and social dislocation resulting from natural
                      and man-induced hazards. While it focuses on fIre, flooding, geologic,
                      and seismic hazards, it also addresses other locally relevant safety issues
                      such as blowsand and waste management.
                      California Government-Code Section 65302(g) contains the codified safety
                      element requirements. The section states a safety element shall include
                      policies directed toward:
                               " ... the protection of the community from any umeasonable
                              risks associated with the effects of seismically induced
                              surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami,
                              seiche, and dam failure; slope instability leading to
                              mudslides and landslides; subsidence and other geologic
                              hazards known to the legislative body; flooding; and
                              wildland and urban frres. "
                      The Community Safety Element is the primary vehicle for relating local
                      safety planning to Indian Wells' land use decisions. Because of this,
                      consistency among the Land Use, Housing, and Circulation Elements is
                      vitally important.
City of Indian Wells                          NA-J                                    General Plan
    IV. Public Safety                                                          IVA. Community Safety
    Organization of the Element
                         A summary of existing conditions is provided, including regulatory
                         requirements for each topic addressed in the Element. The topics include
                         fIre, seismic, blowsand, and flood hazards, along with hazardous materials
                         and emergency preparedness.         The City goals and policies for the
                         attainment of a safe community are followed by the means of
                         implementation.
    Summary of Existing Conditions
                         Indian Wells is a relatively safe community. Dam failures, tsunamis, and
                         seiches are not an issue in Indian Wells. The City is, however, affected
                         by other significant safety concerns, such as earthquakes and flooding, as
                         well as the more locally focused issues of blowsand and hazardous waste.
                         This section discusses the existing safety issues in Indian Wells. The
                         information is summarized from the General Plan Existing Conditions
                         Technical Report, dated April, 1994.
                         Fire   Hazards
                         The City of Indian Wells is located within a desert environment with
                         sparse vegetation. The mountainous areas in the southern part of the City
                         consist primarily of rock outcroppings, with very little vegetative fuel to
                         feed a wildfire. The County of Riverside publishes a "hazardous high fIre
                         areas map," which is periodically updated. This map delineates areas
                         susceptible to wildland fires. Riverside County's hazardous high fIre area
                         map (1987) does not identify any areas within Indian Wells subject to
                         wildland fires.
                         Urban fIres are more of a concern in Indian Wells. All construction is
                         regulated by the Uniform Building Code (UBC) and zoning requirements
                         that specify materials, occupancy levels, and setbacks for new buildings.
                         The Cove Communities Services Commission provides fire protection
                         services to Indian Wells. Station No. 55 is located in the Civic Center
                         Complex and has a city-wide response time of 2 to 4 minutes, which is
                         well below the national standard of 5 minutes. Fire flow (water pressure
                         and volume available at hydrants) is also adequate, as determined by the
                         Riverside County Fire Department (RCFD). The RCFD requires 3,000
                         gallons per minute (gpm) for commercial and 1,500 gpm for residential
                         peak water flows.
                         The Coachella Valley Association of Governments' Public Safety
                         Committee commissioned a study in 1991 that reviewed the potential
.~.                      consolidation of fIre services within the Coachella Valley. The objective
                         of the analysis was to examine ways in which the fIre departments in the
    City of Indian Wells                      IVA-2                                     General Plan
  IV. Public Safety                                                            IVA. Community Safety
                       valley might coordinate their actIVIties in order to meet increasing
                       demands for service, improve operational effectiveness, and control
                       service costs. The review indicated that the departments are well managed
                       and are providing a high level of fIre and emergency medical care.
                       Seismic Hazards
                       Earthquakes are vibrations of the earth produced by the rapid release of
                       energy. Movements during earthquakes are frequently associated with
                       large fractures in the earth called faults. Movements along faults can be
                       horizontal and/or vertical. Horizontally moving faults, such as the San
                       Andreas, are called strike-slip faults. The assessment of the hazard from
                       an active or potentially active fault depends on the activity of the fault and
                       its capability of generating a damaging earthquake. The severity of an
                       earthquake is commonly expressed by the Richter magnitude scale. Each
                       whole number step up the Richter scale represents an increase of 10 times.
                       Thus, the amplitude of an 8.0 magnitude earthquake is 10,000 times as
                       powerful as the amplitude of a 4.0 earthquake. Regional faults are shown
                       in Figure IVA-I. Several State and local regulations exist to defme areas
                       of seismic hazards. These regulations are described below.
                       The County of Riverside has developed a "seismic-geologic map" which
                       identifies earthquake faults, Earthquake Fault Zoning Act special study
                       zones, ground shaking zones (Zones J-V), areas of liquefaction potential,
                       and areas of potential subsidence. This map is periodically reviewed and
                       updated by the County.
                       Earthquake Fault Zoning Act
                       The Earthquake Fault Zoning Act requires the State Geologist to establish
                       special study zones to encompass all potentially and recently active traces
                       of the San Andreas, Calaveras, Hayward, and San Jacinto faults. Active
                       faults are faults which have had surface displacement within the last
                       11,000 years and potentially active faults are faults which show evidence
                       of surface displacement during the last 1.6 million years. There are no
                       special study zones within the boundaries of Indian Wells, nor the sphere
                       of influence.
                       Groundshaking Zones
                       Seismic response zones are defmed based on the motion that can be
                       anticipated as a result of earthquakes on the principal fault systems in a
                       region. Seismic response zones I-V, shown, on Figure IVA-2, are derived
                       based on distance from the source of an earthquake. Zone V is the zone
                       most susceptible to groundshaking.
)
  City of Indian Wells                      IVA-3                                         General Plan
                                                                             GENERAL PLAN
                        •  '0  •
                     . . ','::'::;'::.
                                 '0 ',:;': •
                                    .'. '.: ':':~~:'"
                                       . . :':\~.:.
                                                 .':::,::
                                                      "':'"
                                                            ..
   N. T. S.
                                                                                              ---~
                                                                                                        - --
                                                                      --  --~
-o:ur:Ce~:~CI~lrr:Or:nia~D:e~::"m:e:m~~~M~iM:S~a:nd~G~~~IO~9:~~1~~ ________________________________________~ IVA-1
                                                                                                              FIGURE
flECON
                                                               REGIONAL FAULTS
                                                                           IVA-4

                                                     GENERAL
  N, 1. S.
                                                                           L£GEND
  -                                                            IV
   .................
  '.)
                                                              •••   Seismic Response Zone Boundary
      ,•..
        I                                                           IU'Id DesilNition (bued on
                                                                III
        -.
        Ii
                                                                    distance from fault. iv is closest to
                                                                    fault)
     .
         .: ,
           ,--_:":
                   :
                   ,
                                                              B
                                                               C    SeIsmic Response Zone Boundary
                                                                    IU'Id DesilNition (billed on rock
        ..;        l)                                               IU'Id soil type)
              ,:.
       •                                                        A   Bedrock
       I                                                        B   Alluvium of Intermediate Thickness
                                                                     (20().2oo0 ft. depth)
                                                                C   Thick Alluvium and Soft
                                                                    Sediments (2000.1<1.000 ft.
       iii
                                                                    depth)
      1·~r.F·~;·~~~~~~~~~~~!!~ii~~~~~~..~                        D  Thin Pleistocene Alluvium
                                                                     (0-200 ft. depth)
,?urce: County of Riverside. 1974. 1988                                                               FIGURE
                                                                                                     IVA-2
9.ECON                                  SEISMIC RESPONSE ZONES
                                                   IVA-S

IV. Public Safety                                                            IVA. Community Safety
                     The County also classifies seismic response zones based on the geographic
                     conditions of an area. These zones are identified as Zones A-E. Zone E
                     contains recent alluvium, which reacts strongly to groundshaking.
                     Groundshaking due to activity on the San Andreas and San Jacinto fault
                     zones is the principal seismic hazard within Indian Wells. The San
                     Andreas fault zone, which includes the Mission Creek and Banning faults,
                     is located approximately four miles north of the City. Movement along
                     the San Andreas fault is estimated to be about six centimeters per year.
                     The maximum probable earthquake for this fault is 7.5-8.0 on the Richter
                     scale. The San Jacinto fault zone is located about eight miles southwest
                     of the City. Most of the recent earthquakes (since 1912) of moderate to
                     large magnitude have occurred along the San Jacinto fault zone. The San
                     Jacinto fault zone is estimated to be able to generate a maximum probable
                     earthquake With a magnitude of 7.0-7.5 on the Richter scale. There are
                     no major faults located within the City boundaries. However, the City is
                     within Seismic Response Zones ill and IV based on distance from active
                     faults, and Seismic Response Zones A, B, C, and D based on soils and
                     rock type.
                     The State of California has established stringent seismic standards for
                     buildings. These standards are contained in the State's Building Code.
                     Indian Wells requires compliance with the State's Building Code for all
                     development projects.
                     Liquefaction Potential
                     Liquefaction involves a sudden loss of strength in a saturated, cohesionless
                     soil (typically sand) which is the result of shock or strain, such as in an
                     earthquake. This shock causes the soil to behave like a liquid. If the
                     liquefied soils are near the surface, buildings may substantially sink or tilt.
                     Lightweight structures may float upwards to the ground surface and
                     foundations may displace laterally, causing structural failures. If the
                     liquefied soils are located in the subsurface, this may provide a sliding
                     surface for material above the liquefied layer. Liquefaction is most likely
                     to occur where groundwater is less than 30 feet from the surface.
                     The Riverside County seismic-geologic map identifies no areas of potential
                     liquefaction in the City of Indian Wells. The nearest areas of potential
                     liquefaction encompass the eastern portions of La Quinta and Indio to the
                     east of the City.
                     Subsidence Potential
                     Subsidence of the ground surface is generally caused by the withdrawal, If
                     groundwater from an area, which may occur due to ground movements
                     generated by an earthquake. The Riverside County· seismic-geologic map
City of Indian Wells                      IVA-6                                        General Plan

IV. Public Safety                                                           IVA. Community Safety
                     identifies no areas of potential subsidence in the City of Indian Wells.
                     The nearest area of potential subsidence is located east of La Quinta.
                     Landslides
                     Another hazard associated with earthquakes is landslides. A strong
                     earthquake could trigger landslides on steep slopes. Landslides are not
                     likely to occur in Indian Wells since the areas of steep slopes. located in
                     the southern part of the City, are primarily composed of strong bedrock.
                     However. rockfall hazards can occur in the mountains and foothills during
                     a strong earthquake.
                     Slowsand Hazards
                     The combination of high winds and sandy. sparsely vegetated so'its
                     characteristic of desert areas can create blowsand hazards. Disturbance
                     of soil crust through human activities such as grading and alteration of
                     drainage patterns can contribute to an increase in blowsand hazards.
                     Blowsand hazards impact human health by creating high levels of airborne
                     particulate matter. Blowsand also reduces visibility and can increase the
                     incidence of vehicular accidents. Property damage occurs when blowsand
                     erodes painted surfaces and glass.
                     According to the County of Riverside's seismic-geologic map (1988). the
                     areas of highest hazard are located in the extreme northern portions of the
                     City. primarily consisting of the vacant property north of Fred Waring
                     Drive and the sphere of influence. However. all areas of Indian Wells
                     could be affected by blowsand. Blowsand hazards can be reduced through
                     construction of walls and fences, planting of vegetation, and use of soil
                     stabilizers and watering techniques during soil-disturbing activities.
                     The City's Municipal Code (Chapter 8.20) Ordinance Number 313
                     requires that an applicant for a grading or demolition permit must frrst
                     obtain an approved Fugitive Dust Mitigation Plan. This plan must include
                     all reasonably available control measures such that fugitive dust emissions
                     are in compliance with South Coast Air Quality Management District Rule
                     403. Control measures at a construction or demolition site can include use
                     of soil stabilizers or watering. erection of wind fences, covering soil
                     stockpiles, and revegetation of disturbed surfaces.
                     Flood Hazards
                     The desert region around Indian Wells is subject to intense storms which
                     result in substantial runoff and flash flooding. As shown in Figure IV A-3,
                     two major flood control channels exist in Indian Wells which confme and
                     direct stormwater runoff. The Whitewater River flood control channel
City of Indian Wells                       IVA-7                                     General Plan
IV. Public Safety                                                            IVA. Community Safety
                      runs west to east through the City, north of Highway 111. This channel
                      carries stormwater runoff which originates in western Coachella Valley.
                      The Deep Canyon flood control channel runs west to east, just south of
                      Fairway Drive and Iroquois Drive. This channel collects runoff from the
                      mountains in the southern part of the City. There are no dams that, if
                      they failed, would cause damage to Indian Wells.
                      The City of Indian Wells is a member of the Federal Emergency
                      Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Program and property
                      owners within the City are eligible to purchase flood insurance from
                      FEMA. Figure IVA-3 also shows the loo-year and SOO-year floodplains
                      depicted on the flood insurance rate maps published by FEMA (last
                      revised January 19, 1982). As shown in the figure, the loo-year flood
                      zone is generally restricted to the Whitewater River flood control channel
                      and the Deep Canyon flood control channel. The only developments
                    . within the l00-year floodplain zone are golf courses in the flood control
                      channels. There are residential areas located within the SOO-year
                      floodplain zones.
                      The City's Floodplain Management Ordinance specifies construction
                      standards for all areas of special flood hazard. All new construction and
                      improvements are required to be constructed using methods and practices
                      that minimize flood damage and provide adequate drainage. City
                      development permits are required for all new construction and
                      improvements within areas of special flood hazard.
                      Hazardous Materials and Waste
                      Hazardous wastes are discarded materials which, because of their quantity ,
                      concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: (1)
                      cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or illness, or
                      (2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
                      environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed.
                      Hazardous materials, which are not wastes, are defmed as those substances
                      designated as hazardous or toxic under the Comprehensive Environmental
                      Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), the Resource
                      Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), the Toxic Substances Control
                      Act (TSCA), the Clean Air Act, and the State Hazardous Waste Control
                      statute. There are numerous Federal, State, and local regulations
                      governing the use, storage, transportation, and disposal of hazardous
                      substances and wastes.
City of Indian Wel~                        IVA-8                                        General Plan
                                      \\'..\D\AN WELLS GENERAL
 N, 1. S,
                                                                         LfGEND
                                                               nliiiJ#mn  100.year Flood Zone
                                                               emmmt SOO-year Flood Zone
~ource: Federel Emergency Menegement Agency, 1982                                              PluURE
                                                                                              IVA-3
RECON                                             Fl.OOD ZONES
                                                        IVA-9
IV. Public Safety                                                         IVA. Community Safety
                     In Califonria, the Department of Toxic Substance Control and the
                     Califonria Environmental Protection Agency administer many of the State
                     and Federal laws.         The Riverside County Hazardous Materia)')
                     Management Division administers the State and Federal laws at a local
                     level in Riverside County. Some of the major laws and regulations
                     pertaining to hazardous materials and wastes are discussed below.
                     Hazardous Materials
                     Toxic Substances Control Act. ITSCA)
                     TSCA, adopted in 1976, is commonly referred to as the consumer
                     protection law. The law requires that manufacturers evaluate whether or
                     not a chemical presents an unreasonable risk to human health, animals, or
                     the environment prior to its transport or sale in the market. The
                     Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) oversees implementation of
                     TSCA and has the authority to prohibit or limit the manufacture, import,
                     processing, distribution in commerce, use or disposal of a chemical
                     determined to be a hazardous substance under TSCA. There are almost
                     60,000 chemicals currently listed as hazardous substances under TSCA.
                     Underground/Aboveground Storage Tanks
                     Underground storage tanks (USTs) which hold hazardous substances, such
                     as gasoline, are regulated by Federal, State, and local laws. All gas
                     stations dispense fuel through underground storage tank systems. Thele
                     are no gas stations in Indian Wells. All underground storage tanks require
                     permits from the Riverside County Hazardous Materials Management
                     Division. All USTs must have a written routine monitoring procedure
                     which establishes a program to check for leaks and spills from the tank
                     system. Operators of underground storage tank systems must also prepare
                     a business plan which details emergency response procedures for
                     unauthorized releases. The City of Indian Wells has established an on-
                     going inspection program for UST's. Public concern of potential
                     groundwater contamination, coupled with the high cost of placing a tank
                     underground, essentially preclude new underground storage tanks from
                     being established in the City.
                     The City of Indian Wells also regulates aboveground storage tanks through
                     the Municipal Code (Ordinance No. 279), the Uniform Fire Code (Article
                     79), and the Building Division. This Ordinance establishes minimum
                     installation, maintenance, and emergency standards for the aboveground
                     storage of flammable/combustible liquids and gases.
                     Hazardous Waste
                     Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. (RCRA)
                     RCRA was created in 1976 to control the management of hazardous waste
                     from its generation to its ultimate disposal (from "cradle to grave"). In
                     1984, the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments to RCRA were signed
City of Indian Wells                      IVA-lO                                    General Plan
  IV. Public Safety                                                          IVA. Community Safety
                       into law. These amendments brought generators of small quantities of
                       hazardous waste (100-1,000 kilograms per month) into the hazardous
                       waste regulatory system. The corresponding State regulations are found
                       in the Hazardous Waste Control Law (HWCL).
                       RCRA currently lists over 400 types of hazardous wastes. RCRA and
                       HWCL regulate how hazardous wastes can be stored on a property, how
                       much can be stored on a property, and the length of time that they can be
                       stored. RCRA and HWCL also provide regulations on tr~ating and
                       disposing of hazardous wastes on-site as well as requirements for
                       transporting hazardous wastes. Hazardous wastes can be transported only
                       by Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)-registered haulers and can be
                       disposed of only in licensed facilities. Stringent record keeping and
                       manifest tracking is required.
                       Comprehensive Environmental Response. Compensation. and liability Act
                       (CERCLA)
                       CERCLA, commonly referred to as the Superfund Law, was enacted in
                       1980 to provide Federal funding and enforcement authority for responding
                       to hazardous substance spills and for cleaning up hazardous waste sites
                       where wastes have been improperly stored. A hazardous waste site can
                       be remediated under CERCLA if it is on the National Priorities List (list
                       of Superfund sites). Waste sites in California can also be remediated
                       under the Hazardous Substance Account Act, which is also known as the
                       California Superfund. Sites needing clean up are discovered through
                       investigations by the California Department of Health Services, referrals
                       from other agencies, or reports from responsible parties or the public.
                       Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA)
                       SARA Title ill is also known as th~ Emergency Planning and Community
                       Right-to-Know Act. The corresponding State law is Chapter 6.95 of the
                       California Health and Safety Code. These laws require that all facilities
                       which handle more than a certain quantity of hazardous materials mu~t
                       report information on these materials to the government in the form of a
                       business plan. This information is then used to support emergency
                       planning for response to chemical spills and other hazardous incidents and
                       to provide local government and the public with infonnation about possible
                       chemical hazards in their community.
                       Hazardous Materials in Indian Wells
                       Industrial uses and agriculture are typically the largest generators of
                       hazardous waste. These types of land uses are not present within the City
                       of Indian Wells at any significant scale. However, there are other types
                       of land uses within the City which handle hazardous materials and wastes.
                       The Riverside County Hazardous Materials Management Division
/                      (HMMD) maintains lists of registered users of hazardous materials,
  City of Indian Wells                     IVA-ll                                     General PlJn
IV. Public Safety                                                             IVA. Community Safety
                     operators of underground storage tanks, and generators of hazardous
                     wastes. Within Indian Wells, registered users of hazardous materials
                     include golf course operators and dry cleaners. Generators of hazardous
                     wastes include golf course operators, dry cleaners, and photograph
                     developers. These users and generators must comply with all applicable
                     State and Federal regulations, which are enforced locally by the Riverside'
                     County HMMD.
                     Underground storage tanks are located at the Coachella Valley Water
                     District lift station, the Indian Wells fire station, and some of the country
                     clubs within the City. As of January 4, 1994, inspections indicated that
                     there were no leaking underground storage tanks within the City of Indian'
                     Wells.
                     The Riverside County HMMD also responds to emergencies involving or
                     potentially involving hazardous materials and/or wastes. The HMMD
                     responded to one call within Indian Wells in 1993 and to a total of nine
                     calls over the past five years, primarily for incidents occurring along
                     Highway 111.
                     E.mergency Preparedness
                     The California Emergency Services Act provides the basic authority for
                     conducting emergency operations following the proclamations of
                     emergencies by the Governor and/or appropriate local authority. The
                     California Emergency Plan, which is published in accordance with the
                     California Emergency Services Act, describes the functions and operations
                     of government at all levels during emergencies. Local emergency plans
                     are extensions of the State-wide plan. The plans detail the responses to
                     emergency situations associated with major natural or human-caused
                     disasters, technological incidents, and nuclear defense operations.
                     The City of Indian Wells has published a local multifunction hazard plan
                     to detail the City's planned response to extraordinary emergency situations
                     associated with natural or human-caused disasters. Specific hazards
                     addressed in the plan include earthquakes, hazardous materials incidents,
                     flooding, major fIre/wildfIre, nuclear incidents, transportation incidents,
                     and national security emergencies.
                     The Multifunction Hazard Plan is organized in three parts: Part 1 is the
                     basic plan, Part 2 describes the emergency response organization, and Part
                     3 contains operations data such as listing of resources, key personnel, and
                     essential facilities. The basic plan "identifies components of the local
                     emergency management organization and describes the responsibilities of
                     the organization for protecting life and property and assuring the overall
                     well-being of the population." The plan also identifies the sources of
City of Indian Wells                       IVA-I2                                       General Plan
IV. Public Safety                                                           IVA. Community Safety
                     outside support which might be provided through mutual aid and specific
                     statutory authorities. Riverside County is within Mutual Aid Region VI,
                     which includes the counties of San Diego, Imperial, Riverside, San
                     Bernardino, Inyo, and Mono.
                     Peacetime emergencies are categorized in three levels: Level I is a local
                     emergency which the City's resources can handle, Level II is a moderate
                     to severe emergency requiring mutual aid from sources outside the City,
                     and Level III is a major disaster. For a Level I emergency, coordination
                     and direction would be decentralized and similar to normal day-to-day
                     operations. For a Level II emergency, a centralized Emergency Operating
                     Center (EOC) would be staffed by key management personnel from all
                     involved emergency functions and all information would be coordinated
                     from this centralized office. For a Level m major disaster, the EOC
                     would be fully activated and all activities would be accomplished through
                     the EOC.
                     The Multifunction Hazard Plan also provides guidance on law
                     enforcement, traffic control operations, and movement and rescue
                     operations during an emergency. Because disasters can be unpredictable,
                     definite evacuation routes cannot be determined until damage to the
                     existing streets are assessed. However, if evacuation of the City becomes
                     necessary, the general evacuation routes are Highway 111, Washington
                     Street, Fred Waring Drive, and Cook Street as shown in Figure IVA-4.
Goals and Policies
                     The City of Indian Wells is geographically located in a region which can
                     be periodically subject to environmental hazards. The following goals and
                     policies reflect the City's commitment to providing a safe environment for
                     its citizens in the event natural or man-induced hazards occur.
                     Fire, Air, Flood, and Hazardous Materials
                     Goal IVAI
                     Prevent damage to life and property from natural hazards to the
                     greatest extent possible.
                     Fire. Air. Flood. and Hazardous Materials Policies
                     IVAl.1 Require new development to conform with the City's PM lO
                                Ordinance as a condition of issuance of grading permits.
                                Evaluate the need for permanent control devices in particularly
                                windy areas to be installed prior to project grading.
City of Indian Wells                      lVA-I3                                      General Plan
                                      \NO\AN WELLS GENERAL PLAN
                                                                INDIAN W£l~S ell.,. LIMflS
    1 12M I L E
                                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                           _ _ _     Evacuation Routes
                                       INDIAN WELLS CITV LlMlls
  !rce: City of Indian Wells, 1996
                                                                                                                        FIGURE
iECON                                                                                                                  IVA-4
                                   EMERGENCY EVACUATION ROUT£S
                                                                             IVA-14

IV. Public Safety                                                           IVA. Community Safety
                     IVAI.2 Require construction sites, and trucks hauling dirt to and from
                              the sites, to comply with the City's PM lO standards.
                     IVA 1. 3 Encourage and cooperate with the Coachella Valley Water
                              District to maintain adequate flood flow capacity in the
                              Whitewater and Deep Canyon flood control channels to prevent
                              area flooding from anticipated maximum flood flows.
                     IVAI.4 Enforce the City's Floodplain Management Ordinance which
                              cites specific standards applicable to development located within
                              the loo-year floodplain and in flashflood areas to mitigate flood
                              hazards.
                     IVAI.5 Develop a comprehensive fire plan which forecasts future
                              personnel and equipment needs and require new development to
                              pay its pro-rata share of costs for fire services.
                     IVAI.6 Restrict, after appropriate public hearings, the use of fire-prone
                              building materials in areas defmed by the Fire Department as
                              presenting high-conflagration risk, and require sprinklers to be
                              installed in all new non-single-family residential construction per
                              the Municipal Fire Code.
                     IVAI.7 Enforce existing Federal, State, and local ordinances regulating
                              the use, manufacture, sale,. transport, storage, and disposal of
                              hazardous substances, and continue to implement the Riverside
                              County Hazardous Waste Management Plan.
                     Seismic
                     GoallVA2
                     Prevent damage to life and property resulting from seismic and
                     seismic-induced hazards to the greatest extent possible.
                     Seismic Policies
                     IVA2.I Adopt and maintain high standards for seismic performance of
                              buildings through prompt adoption and careful enforcement of
                              the most current seismic standards of the Uniform Building
                              Code.
                     IVA2.2 Develop a structural hazards reduction program (per Section
                              8875 of the Government Code) for the upgrading of seismically
                              hazardous buildings.
Ciry of Indian Wells                     NA-15                                        General Plan
IV. Public Safety                                                          IVA. Community Safety
                     IV A2.3 Require geological and soils engineering studies for developments
                               in or adjacent to hillsides to assure safety from potential
                               landslides and/or rockfalls.
                     IVA2.4 Require development adjacent to hillside areas to minimize the
                               potential hazard of falling rocks through project deSign.
                     Emergency Response and Preparedness
                     GoallVA3
                     Provide effective emergency response in a disaster, for life saving and
                     the reduction of property damage, and enhance emergency
                     preparedness through community education and self-help programs.
                     Emergency Response and Preparedness Policies
                     IVA3.1 Encourage emergency preparedness to be the combined
                               responsibility of the City, in conjunction with the County,
                               CVAG, and the State as well as City residents and the business
                               community.
                     IVA3.2 Cooperate with the County of Riverside and with CVAG in
                               updating the areawide emergency operations checklist.
                     IVA3.3 Encourage emergency response planning for interested citizens
                               in existing and future development as well as the business
                               community through the programs established by the Indian Wells
                               In Neighborhoods (I WIN) Commission.
                     IVA3.4 Cooperate with CVAG and other communities in the Valley to
                               distribute periodic safety publications to inform citizens of
                               available protective services.
                     IVA3.5 Maintain at least two east-west and two north-south primary (or
                               major) arterials to ensure adequate emergency evacuation routes
                               in the General Plan Area (see Figure IVA-4).
Implementation of the Community Safety Element
                     The Community Safety Element sets forth policies which will require
                     ongoing efforts by the City of Indian Wells and coordination with local
                     and State agencies to implement. Policies relating to blowsand, fugitive
                     dust, fire protection, development within floodplains, and seismic safety
                     will be implemented through the development review process of the City
                     and its zoning and other ordinances. Policies relating to flood protection
                     will require ongoing coordination with the Coachella Valley Water
                     District. Hazardous materials, wastes, and underground storage tanks will
City of Indian Wells                      IVA-I6                                     General Plan
IV. Public Safety                                                        IVA. Community Safety
                       be monitored in cooperation with the County HMMD and State
                       Department of Health Services. Emergency preparation and response will
                       be coordinated with the County, Coachella Valley Association of
                       Governments, the State, FEMA, and active cooperation with the
                       community.
  City of Indian Wells                    IVA-17                                    General Plan
                               Chapter IV: Public Safety
                                    IVB.      NOISE
 Introduction and Authority
                     The purpose of the Noise Element is to outline methods to reduce and
                     control noise, in order to maintain and enhance Indian Wells as a quiet
                     residential .community.        Although the primary emphasis is on
                     transportation noise, the Element also considers noise generated from non-
                     transportation sources.
                     Unlike other hazards faced by Indian Wells residents, such as earthquakes
                     or floods, noise is generated primarily by man's own activities. With
                     increases in human activity, urban residents experience escalations in
                     outdoor noise levels. The Noise Element is necessary for proper
                     management of noise impact on Indian Wells residents.
                     State Government Code Section 65302(f) states that general plans must
                     include:
                             " ... a noise element which shall identify and appraise noise
                             problems in the community. . . . The noise element shall
                             include implementation measures and possible solutions that
                             address existing and foreseeable noise problems, if any. "
                     Noise impacts are highly related to the development of the City. Because
                     of this, the Noise Element is closely associated with the Land Use,
                     Housing, and Circulation Elements.
Organization of the Element
                     The Noise Element is organized so it can be readily applied to future
                     development within the City. A summary of the existing conditions is
                     provided below to establish baseline noise conditions in the City. This is
                     followed by a discussion of the future noise environment based on the
                     proposed Land Use Plan. The goals and policies are then described. The
                     Implementation section provides general direction on how to fulfill the
                     established goals and policies.
City of Indian Wells                        IVB-]                                     General Plan
 IV. Public Safety                                                                      B.  Noi~t
 Summary of Existing Conditions
                     This section provides general information regarding noise characteristics
                     and effects, regulations and standards, and the existing Indian Wells' noise
                     conditions .
                     Terminology
                     Community noise levels vary with time and location, and are usually
                     evaluated in terms of hourly or daily averages. Commonly used measures
                     of average noise level include the equivalent continuous noise level (Leq),
                     day-night level (Ldn), and the Community Noise Equivalent Level
                     (CNEL). These and other noise descriptors are further defmed below.
                     Ambient Noise Level: The composite of all sounds at a given location and
                     time, usually composed of sounds from many surrounding sources, near
                     and far.
                     A-weighted Sound Level: The sound level, in units of decibels (dB),
                     obtained when the sound pressure is A-weighted (dBA). The A-weighting
                     filter, or circuit, attenuates high and low frequency sound pressures to
                     approximate the frequency response of the human hearing system and to
                     correlate measured sound levels with subjective judgment of loudness of
                     sounds at low to moderate noise levels.
                     Attenuation: The reduction in noise levels due to distance, or to a solid
                     barrier in the propagation path, between a receiver and a noise source.
                     Noise levels decrease by 3 decibels with every doubling of distance from
                     a line of highway traffic and by 6 decibels with every doubling of distance
                     from a stationary point source.
                     Community Noise Equivalent Level:         .A 24-hour average A-weighted
                     sound level obtained after the addition of 5 dB to sound levels occurring
                     between 7:00 -p.m. and 10:00 p.m. and 10 dB to sound levels occurring
                     between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The addition of 5 dB and 10 dB to the
                     evening and nighttime hours, respectively, "weights" the average sound
                     level to account for the increased adverse response to noise during these
                     time periods.
                     Day-Night Average Noise Level: A 24-hour average A-weighted sound
                     level obtained after addition of 10 dB to sound levels occurring between
                     10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
                     Equivalent Continuow Sound Level: The Leq is the level of a constant
                     sound pressure which has the same sound energy as the actual time-
                     varying sound pressure for a specific time interval.
City of Indian Wells                      JVB-2                                       General Plan
 IV. Public Safety                                                                       B. Noise
                     Maximwn Noise Level (Lmax): The greatest sound level measured on a
                     sound level meter, during a designated time interval or event, using fast
                     time-averaging and A-weighting.
                     Noise: Any disagreeable or undesired sound.
                     Noise Contour: Lines drawn around a noise source indicating constant
                     levels of noise exposure. Noise contours are subject to significant
                     uncertainty and are usually intended to show the general spatial extent of
                     different levels of noise exposure.
                     Sound Frequency: The rate of repetitions of the sound pressure amplitude
                     cycle, usually in terms of cycles per second, or Hertz (Hz). As an
                     example, the noise from a diesel truck is dominated by low frequency
                     sound pressures, whereas the sounds of a piccolo are composed of higher
                     frequency sound pressures.
                     Sound Pressure Level: The sound pressure level is defined as 20 times the
                     logarithm of the sound pressure ratio (measured sound pressure/reference
                     sound pressure). The reference sound pressure is usually the threshold of
                     hearing. Consider an example where a very loud sound, such as a jet
                     aircraft taking off, has a sound pressure one million times greater than the
                     reference sound pressure (the threshold of hearing). The ratio of the
                     sound pressure to the reference sound pressure is one million, or 10 to the
                     sixth power (106). For this example, the level of the sound pressure is
                     defmed as 20 x log(106). Therefore, the sound pressure level is simply 20
                     x 6, or 120, with the units for the magnitude of the level defmed as
                     decibels. Thus, the sound pressure level of the very loud noise in the
                     example is 120 dB.
                     effects of Environmental Noise
                     The effects of noise on humans can be divided into five general categories:
                     hearing loss, other physiological effects, sleep interference, speech
                     interference, and annoyance.
                     Hearing Loss
                     Hearing loss is typically an occupational concern and is generally not a
                     community noise problem.           The Occupational Safety and Health
                     Administration (OSHA) establishes workplace noise level limits and
                     regulations to protect workers from hearing loss. Permanent hearing loss
                     can occur from acoustic trauma, such as an explosion, or can be induced
                     through the cumulative effect of repeated noise exposures over many
                     years. Temporary, reversible loss of hearing, or shifts in hearing
                     thresholds, can also occur after exposure to high noise levels after events
City of Indian Wells                      JVB-3                                       General Plan
 IV. Public Safety                                                                          B. Noise
                     such as rallies or rock concerts. The magnitude of the temporary hearing
                     loss is dependent upon the noise levels and the duration of exposure.
                     Other Physiological Effects
                     Sudden and unexpected noise can increase blood pressure, heart rate, and
                     muscular contractions. These changes subside as a person becomes
                     accustomed to the noise.
                     Sleep Interference
                     Noise can awaken people, disturb their sleep, or prevent them from going
                     to sleep. It has been shown that, on average, light sleepers will awaken
                     at 40 dBA and heavy sleepers will awaken at 60 dBA.
                     Speech Interference
                     Speech interference is an important concern relating to environmental
                     noise. Steady noise levels above 60-65 dBA can interfere with normal
                     conversations .
                     Annoyance
                     Whether a noise is judged annoying or not varies considerably from
                     person to person and is also dependent upon the amount and nature of the
                     noise, the amount of background noise, and the activities the person is
                     engaged in when the noise is heard. Also, an individual may judge a
                     particular noise annoying at one time but not at another. If a new noise
                     has distinctive characteristics that make it readily identifiable or if the new
                     noise generates levels considerably higher than the ambient noise levels
                     which existed before the new noise source occurred, than the new noise
                     source might be considered objectionable or annoying.
                     New noise sources would not be as noticeable in a commercial area as
                     they would be in a suburban neighborhood since ambient noise levels tend
                     to be higher and activities occurring in commercial areas are not as noise
                     sensitive. Also, people are more sensitive to noise when they are trying
                     to sleep or concentrate. Someone who is studying may be more easily
                     annoyed by environmental noise than someone who is engaged in an
                     activity which generates its own noise, such as washing dishes or fixh,g
                     a car.
                     Noise Element Guidelines
                     State law requires general plans to include a Noise Element which
                     identifies and appraises noise problems in the community. The Noise
                     Element recognizes the guidelines adopted by the Office of Noise Control
                     in the State Department of Health Services and quantifies, to the extent
                     possible, current and projected noise levels from roads, railroads, airports,
                     and stationary sources.
City of Indian Wells                      IVB-4                                          General Plan
 IV. Public Safety                                                                      B. Noise
                     Figure IVB.,.I presents the State's land use compatibility guidelines for
                     community noise environments. As shown in the guidelines, different
                     types of land uses are compatible with varying levels of noise. Single-
                     family residential areas are the most noise-sensitive, with "normally
                     acceptable" levels at 60 dB CNEL or less. Single-family residences are
                     "conditionally acceptable" in noise environments up to 70 dB CNEL,
                     provided that new construction is undertaken only after a detailed analysis
                     of noise reduction requirements is made and needed noise insulation
                     features included in the design.
                     Noise Insulation Standards
                     The State's Noise Insulation Standards, which relate to interior noise level
                     limits, are found in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. This
                     regulation establishes minimum noise insulation performance standards to
                     "protect persons within new hotels, motels, apartment houses, and
                     dwellings other than detached single-family dwellings from the effects of
                     excessive noise, including but not limited to hearing loss or impairment
                     and interference with speech and sleep. "
                     In accordance with the Noise Insulation Standards, "interior community
                     noise equivalent levels (CNEL) with windows closed, attributable to
                     exterior sources shall not exceed an annual CNEL of 45 dB in any
                     habitable room." Also, residential structures to be located within an
                     annual CNEL contour of 60 dB from aircraft or vehicular traffic shall
                     require an acoustical analysis showing that the proposed building has been
                     designed to limit intruding noise to 45 dB CNEL or less.
                     Existing City of Indian Wells Standards
                     State and Federal noise policies are implemented locally through the City's
                     Noise Element and the Noise Abatement and Control Ordinance
                     (Municipal Code Chapter 9.06).
                     The City of Indian Wells currently uses the noiselland use compatibility
                     figure recommended by the State (see Figure IYB-I). Single-family
                     residential areas are normally acceptable within a noise environment of 60
                     dB CNEL or less. In accordance with the City'S noise ordinance,
                     stationary sources must not generate more than 55 dBA from 7:00 a.m. to
                     10:00 p.m. and 50 dBA from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in residential areas.
                     The City'S Noise Ordinance also regulates construction activities. These
                     activities are usually temporary, but standards have been established in the
                     Ordinance. When occurring between September 15 and May 31,'
                     construction activities are limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.
                     Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturday.
City of Indian Wells                      JVB-5                                       General Plan
                                     \ND\AN WELLS GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                  INTERPRETATtON
                                      COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
                                      L". OR CNEL, dB
       LAND USE CATEGORY
   _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _...j,..,.,.,.,..,.:;5:,;:,5..,.,.,..,6:;;:O:...-..:6:,::5_.:...;70:...-_7:,.:5:....-.::,80~·_ NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE                         IDIIIlJJI
    RESIDENTIAL - LOW
    DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY,                                                                                        Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the
    DUPLEX MOBILE HOMES                                                                                           assumption that any buildings involved are of
                                                                                                                  normal conventional construction, without any
    RESIDENTIAL - MULTI-
    FAMILY                                                                                                        special noise insulation requirements.
    TRANSIENT LODGING -                                                                                           CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE
    MOTELS, HOTELS
                                                                                                                  New construction or development should be
                                                                                                                  undertaken only after a detailed analysis of the
    SCHOOLS. LIBRAAIES,
    CHURCHES, HOSPITALS,                                                                                          noise reduction requirements is made and needed
    NURSING HOMES                                                                                                 noises insulation features included in the design.
                                                                                                                  Conventional construction, b~t with closed
"-- .UDITORIUMS. CONCERT                                                                                          windows and fresh air supply systems or air
    HALLS, AMPHITHEATRES                                                                                          conditioning will normally suffice.
    SPORTS ARENA,
    OUTDOOR SPECTATOR                                                                                             NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE
    SPORTS
   -:::-::::::-~::-::::::-----~:;:;:;j;:;:;:;:~;:;:;:r;:;;t;:;;:;:::*-+-+-1 New                                            construction or development should
    PLAYGROUNDS,                                                                                                  generally be discouraged. If new construction or
    NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS                                                                                            development does proceed, a detailed analysis of
  -==-::-::=-==-=:-::-:=--t;;;::;:;:::;~~~:;:;:;t;:;::;:;~:;::;;::;:;:t--+-~                                      the noise reduction requirements must be made
    GOLF COURSES, RIDING                                                                                          and needed noise insulation features included in
    STABLES, WATER RECRE-                                                                                         the design.
    ATION, CEMETERIES
    OFFICE BUILDINGS,
    BUSINESS COMMERCIAL
                                                                                                                  CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE                        .un
    AND PROFESSIONAL
  ~::::-:::::::~-----~;::;:;;~~~~;:;:;;~;:;::;::;:;;t~~~~                                                         New construction or development              should
  INDUSTRIAL,                                                                                                     generally not be undertaken.
    MANUFACTURING
    UTILITIES, AGRICULTURE
     ce: State of Californie. 1990
                                                                                                                                                               FIGURE
                                                                                                                                                             IVB-1
                                   LAND USE COMPATIBILITY FOR
                                 COMMUNITY NOISE ENVIRONMENTS
                                                                                IVB-6

       IV. Public Safety                                                                       B. Noise
                           From June 1 to September 14, construction activities can commence at
                           6:00 a.m. and continue until 7:00 p.m. during the week. Construction is
                           not allowed on Sundays or national holidays at any time of the year.
                           Other activities such as yard and street maintenance, waste disposal
                           vehicles, off-road vehicles, residential pumps, and fans are also regulated
                           by the City's Noise Ordinance.
                           Existing Noise-Sensitive Receivers
                           Low-density residential areas comprise the largest developed portion of the
                           City. Other existing land uses in the City and its sphere of influence
                           include an elementary school at the comer of Fred Waring Drive and
                           Warner Trail, resort hotels, golf courses, open space, and
                           commercial/office uses. Noise levels considered compatible with these
                           uses are shown in Figure IVB-1.
                           Existing Locol Noise Sources
                           Vehicular traffic is the primary source of environmental noise within the
                           City of Indian Wells. State Highway 111, which runs east/west through
                           the center portion of the City, carries the most traffic through Indian
                           Wells. Fred Waring Drive runs east/west in the northern part of the City
                           and carries approximately two-thirds the traffic volume of Highway 111 .
."-..
                           Figures IVB-2 and IVB-3 shows the existing noise levels and contours for
                           the major roadways within Indian Wells. The noise levels were
                           determined through noise monitoring conducted in the preliminary stages
                           of the General Plan development as well as utilizing existing relevant noise
                           studies. The Existing Conditions Technical Report includes additional
                           detail regarding existing noise levels. Soft site conditions were assumed
                           throughout the City. Any noise reduction which may occur due to existing
                           walls, berms, or structures was not taken into account in the estimates of
                           existing noise levels. As shown in these figures, traffic on Highway 111
                           generates the highest noise levels.
                           At 2S feet from the curb of Highway 111, average noise levels are about
                           75 dB CNEL when there is a clear line of sight in both directions. Noise
                           levels 25 feet from the curbs of the other major roadways range from 60
                           dB CNEL to 71 dB CNEL. Residential developments exist along portions
                           of Highway 111, Fred Waring Drive, Portola Avenue, and Cook Street.
                           Interstate 10 (1-10) and the nearest railroad are directly adjacent to each
                           other and are approximately one and three-quarters miles north of Indian
                           Wells. Due to the distance to 1-10 and the railroad, these noise sources
                           do not contribute to the noise environment within the City.
      City of Indian Wells                     JVB-7                                        General Plan
                                                               (                                                    (
             (
         "1
         (')   ..
         ~     ::tI
               m
               0
               0
               ~
               I
                                                    Estimated
                                                   Noise Level
  II»
       0
                     Roadway/Segment
                                                      25 feet
                                                    from Curb
                                                     (CNEL)      75CNEL
                                                                        Di~tiln~~ {ft.llQ NQi~ CQIUQur frQID Curb
                                                                               70CNEL             65CNEL
                                                                                                                         r=.Z
  :;:or                                                                                                           60CNEL
  0°
  ~C
  [11»
       r       Highway III
                    west of Cook Street                 75         25              85.              205             475
                                                                                                                            ~\
                                                                                                                             ~
  )(-i              Cook St. to Miles Ave.              75         25              85               205             475       m
  -111              east of Miles Ave.                  74          -              65               175             425       r-
  000                                                                                                                         r-
                                                                                                                              en
~ :!z          Fred Waring Drive                                                                                          ~
  20                west of Cook Street                 70          -              25                85             205       G)
  Gl-               Cook Street to Eldorado Dr.         71          -              35               100             245       m
                                                                    -                                                         Z
  ».
  -t(l)             Eldorado Dr. to Warner Trail .      70                         25                85             205
  :;:0111           east of Warner Trail                69          -               -                65             175      ,.,
                                                                                                                              m
  "TI111
  "TI<
  -111
  Or
               Portola A venue
                    adjacent to city
               Cook Street
                                                        64          -               -                -                65    ;/
                                                                                                                            ~
                                                                    -               -                -
                                                                                                                         ~
       00           south of Highway 111                60                                                            25
                    north of Highway 111                69          -               -                65             175
               Washington Street                        70          -              25                85             205
                    Highway 111 to Fred Waring Dr.
           -;1
            N

               \NO\AN WELLS GENERAL PLAN
1 12M I l E
                                                   LEGEND
                                                      70+ dB CNEL
                                         !S"SSJ       65·70 dBCNEL
                                         1::,':::::1  60-65 dB CNEL
   RECON.1994
                                                                     FIGURE
                                                                    IVES-3
              EXISTING NOISE CONTOURS--
                          IVB-9

 IV. Public Safety                                                                        B. Noise
                      Nearby airports include the Palm Springs Regional Airport, the Bermuda
                      Dunes Airport, and the Thermal Airport. Indian Wells is a substantial
                      distance from these airports and is not significantly affected by aircraft
                      overflights .
                      Construction activities are a source of noise within Indian Wells. These
                      activities are usually temporary, but can disturb nearby residents over the
                      time which they occur. Construction equipment does not opera~e at its
                      maximum level constantly over long periods of time. Consequently, the
                      noise levels generated by the equipment will change over time, depending
                      on whether the equipment is working at its peak or is idling. Other
                      activities, such as yard maintenance (leaf blowers, lawn mowers, etc.), car
                      engine repair, or music playing, can also be sources of noise in a
                      community. These types of activities are regulated through standard~
                      established in the noise ordinance.
 Description of the Future Noise Environment
                      Based.upon noise modeling procedures, it is determined that the major
                      source of noise within the City of Indian Wells in the future will continue
                      to be noise from vehicular traffic. As indicated in the Circulation
                      Element, the average daily traffic volumes for the year 2015 and beyond
                      will increase for all the Circulation Element roads within the City and the
                      sphere of influence area. Development along these roadways (i.e.,
                      Highway 111, Fred Waring Drive, Portola Avenue, Eldorado Drive, Miles
                      Avenue, Washington Street, and Cook Street) will experience the most
                      significant traffic-generated noise impacts. Figures IVB-4 and IVB-5
                      present the results of the noise modeling process for future noise
                      conditions based on the projected future traffic volumes. As shown in the
                      figures, traffic on Highway 111 will generate the highest noise levels. A
                      discussion of the noise modeling procedure is included in the General Plan
                      Technical Report, dated April, 1994.
                      The goals and policies presented below will require that adverse noise
                      impacts (exterior and interior) will be mitigated, thereby ensuring that the
                      City's future noise environment will be compatible with the anticipated
                      General Plan land uses.
Goals and Policies
                      The projected future traffic volumes have the potential to increase noise
                      to unacceptable levels in residential and other noise-sensitive areas of the
                      City. Increases in commercial land uses and other noise-generating
                      activities can result in noise spillover into sensitive areas. The following
                      goals and policies have been prepared to ensure noise-compatible land use
                      planning.
Cit)' of Indian Wells                      IVB-IO                                      General Plan
                           \ND\AN WELLS GENERAL
   1 12M I L E
                                                                           LEGEND
                                                     1111111111111111111111111111111   Area of potential
                                                                                       nOise exposure
   ____________________________________________________                                           ~        EOIDm
   urce: RECON. 1994
'---t?ECON             AREA POTENTIALLY EXPOSED TO NOISE                                                   IVB-4
                           IN EXCESS OF   60   DBA CNEL
                                      IVB-ll
                        \NO\AN WELLS GENERAL PLAN
                                                  INDIAN WilLS CIIY liMits
                                                                                                                           . .11l1/li
                                                                                                                                      _ _ _- I
                                                                                                                                              \,
  I 12M I L E
                                                                                                              LEGEND
                                                                                     111111111111111111111111111111111 Area of potential
                                                                                                                       nOise exposure
                           tNDIAN WELLS elf" liMitS
,ouree: RECON. 1996                                                                                                                         FIGURE
                                                                                                                                           IVB-S
RECDN               AREA POTENTIALLY EXPOSED TO NOISE
                        IN EXCESS OF                                       70 DBA CNEL
                                                                      IVB-12
 IV. Public Safety                                                                      B. Noise
                     Traffic Generated Noise
                     Goal !VB!
                     Minimize the impact of tramc-generated noise on residential and other
                     noise sensitive land uses.
                     Traffic-Generated Noise Policies
                     IVB 1.1 All new or expansion of existing residential development or other
                              noise-sensitive land uses in areas exceeding 65 dB CNEL shall
                              require that mitigation measures be incorporated which reduce
                              noise levels to 65 dB CNEL or less in outdoor activity areas and
                              45 dB CNEL or less in interior living spaces. An acoustical
                              study shall be required as part of residential development and
                              transportation corridor projects which sets forth mitigating
                              measures to attain these standards.
                     IVB1.2 Implement provisions of the Highway 111 Specific Plan which
                              establishes special noise attenuation standards to maintain the
                              corridor's quiet residential character. A minimum 50-f00t
                              landscaped parkway in residential areas shall be required along
                              both sides of the corridor, which will be augmented by walls,
                              berms, and other structures which will attenuate ambient not:::.
                              levels.
                     IVB1.3 Truck traffic shall be limited to specific routes and designated
                              hours of travel, as defmed by the City Planning and Engineering
                              Departments.
                     IVB1.4 The City shall coordinate with Caltrans to reduce the speed limit
                              on State Highway Ill, in concert with synchronized
                              intersections, to reduce noise levels along the corridor.
                     IVB 1.5 Discourage through traffic in residential neighborhoods by use of
                              cul-de-sacs.
                     IVB1.6 Encourage employers to participate in vanpools and other
                              transportation demand management programs to reduce traffic
                              and noise impacts in the City.
                     IVB1.7 Encourage the development of alternative travel options including
                              bus transit, and bicycle, golf can, and pedestrian paths to
                              minimize single-occupancy vehicle trips.
City of Indian Wells                     lVB-13                                     General Plan
 IV. Public Safety                                                                          B. Noise
                     Other Noise Generating Activities
                     GoallVB2
                     Minimize the impacts of noise from commercial development and other
                     noise-generating activities.
                     Other Noise-Generating Activities Policies
                     IVB2.1 Require mitigation at the property line if new or an expansion of
                               existing noise-generating land uses results in noise levels that
                               exceed 65 dB(A) CNEL in areas containing residential or other
                               noise-sensitive land uses.
                     !VB 1.2 Require that automobile and truck access to commercial
                               properties located adjacent to residential parcels be located at the
                               maximum practical distance from the. residential parcel.
                     !VB2.3 Enforce the City'S noise ordinance which specifies restrictions on
                               construction noise and other short-tenn noise events (ie. concerts,
                               sporting events) and mitigation measures for development in
                               noise-sensitive areas.
 Implementation of the Noise Element
                     The Noise Element is a policy document that requires the ongoing effort
                     of the City and community to implement. Careful coordination of land
                     uses is the primary tool for minimizing the impacts of urban noises on the
                     community. Toward this end, the City will continue to require that all
                     development and transportation corridor projects be reviewed to ensure
                     that potential adverse noise impacts are avoided.
                     The City'S development review/California Environmental Quality Act
                     (CEQA) process will continue to ensure that potential noise impacts
                     associated with new development are addressed. The City will continue
                     to review new development proposals for transportation noise impacts as
                     well as for potential noise impacts to adjacent noise-sensitive land uses.
                     Through the development review process the following implementation
                     procedures will pennit successful achievement of General Plan goals:
                           •   All residential or commercial projects within City-defmed noise
                               zones, generally described in Figure IVB-6, shall have an
                               acoustical review to detennine potential noise impact and specific
                               mitigation measures;
                           •   Any project which proposes to place a noise generator (e.g.,
                               transportation facility, recreational facility) in a setting sensitive
City Of Indian Wells                     IVB-14                                           General Plan

IV. Public Safety                                                                 B. Noise
                        to noise shall. as determined by the City, complete an acoustic
                        study demonstrating the absence of significant noise impacts;
                      • All projects and activities shall conform to the City's Noise
                        Ordinance; and
                      • All residential construction shall conform to Title 24 of the State
                        Building Codes.
 City of Indian Wells              /VB-I5                                       General Plan

                             I \ND\AN        WELLS.,.GENERAL PLAN             I
                             -                                               -
                                                        Residential Projects Commercial Projects
                                                         within X Feet of      within X Feet of
                             Road                            Segment •            Segment •
                 Highway 111
                    West of Cook Street                           659              140
                    Cook Street to Eldorado Drive                 663              143
                    Eldorado Drive to Miles Avenue                659              140
                    East of Miles Avenue                          699              178
                 Fred Waring Drive
                    West of Cook Street                           404                87
                    Cook Street to Eldorado Drive                 365                79
                    Eldorado Drive to Washington Street           377                81
                 Portola Avenue
                    South of EI Paseo                             212
                 Cook Street
                    Highway 111 to Fred Waring Drive              294                63
                 Eldorado Drive
                     South of Highway 111                           92
                     Highway 111 to Fred Waring Drive             112
                     North of Fred Waring Drive                     82
                 Washington Street
                     Highway 111 to Miles Avenue                  465               100
                     Miles Avenue to Fred Waring Drive            462                93
                 Miles Avenue
                     West of Washington Street                     173
                      • Distances in feet from centerline of roadway.
 r.e: RECON.1994
                                                                                                  FIGURE
                                                                                                 IVB-6
ECON
           GENERAL AREAS REQUIRING NOISE ANALYSIS
                                                     IVB-16

                                 Chapter  v.- Glossary and Index
                     VA. GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND INDEX
Introduction
                          This chapter is provided to clarify tenns used throughout the General Plan.
                          The first section of this chapter identifies technical tenns and words used
                          in this document that may not be commonly understood by most people.
                          The second part of this chapter is a brief index, intended to assist the
                          reader in fmding information on particular subjects. Because there are no
                          standardized lists of necessary defmitions or index subjects, this chaptf'r
                          is not exhaustive.
Glossary of Terms
                          The defmitions given are by no means the only acceptable or complete
                          ones available. Most defmitions found in this chapter were extracted from
                          The California General Plan Glossary, published by the California
                          Planning Roundtable, 1990, and other resources. Most defmitions
                          identified in this section are found in the Indian Wells General Plan.
                          Some defmitions, however, are included due to their obvious relevance to
                          planning in general.
                          ADT:          Average Daily Traffic
                          AQMP:         Air Quality Management Plan
                          CARB:         California Air Resources Board, sometimes abbreviated as
                                        ARB
                          CDBG:         Community Development Block Grant
                          CEQA:         California Environmental Quality Act
                          CFD:          A Mello-Roos Community Facilities District
                          CFR:          Code of Federal Regulations
                          CIP:          Capital Improvements Program
                          CMP:          Congestion Management Plan
                          CNEL:         Community Noise Equivalent Level
                          CVAG:         Coachella Valley Association of Governments
                          CVWD:         Coachella Valley Water District
                          DEIR:         Draft Environmental Impact Report
                          DSUSD:        Desert Sands Unified School District
                          EIR:          Environmental Impact Report
City of Indian Wells                            VA-J                                       General Plan
v.  Glossary and Index                                              VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                       FAR:         Floor Area Ratio (Figure VA-I)
                       FEIR:        Final Environmental Impact Report
                       FEMA:        Federal Emergency Management Agency
                       HCD:         Housing and Community Development Department of the
                                    State of California
                       LAFCO:       Local Agency Formation Commission
                       LOS:         Level of Service
                       NOP:         Notice of Preparation
                       NPPA:        Native Plant Protection Act
                       NSR:         New Source Review
                       SCAG:        Southern California Association of Governments
                       SCAQMD: South Coast Air Quality Management District
                       SIP:         State Implementation Plan
                       S02:         Sulfur Dioxide
                       SOx:         Sulfur Oxides
                       TDM:         Transportation Demand Management
                       TDS:         Total Dissolved Solids
                       TSM:         Transportation Systems Management
                       TSP:         Total Suspended Particulates
                       UBC:         Uniform Building Code
                       USFWS:       United States Fish and Wildlife Service
                       VIC:         Volume to Capacity Ratio
                       VMT:         Vehicle Miles Traveled
                       A-Weighting
                       A weighting scheme applied to sound level measurements; corresponding
                       approximately to human hearing sensitivity. Expressed as decibels A-
                       weighted (dBA).
                       Acres, Gross
                       The entire acreage of a site, including easements.
                       Acres, Net
                       The portion of a site that can actually be built upon.
                       Active Fault
                       Evidence of Holocene surface faulting that has occurred within the past
                       200 years.
                       Adverse Impact
                       A negative consequence for the physical, social, or economic environment
                       resulting from an action or project.
City of Indian Wells                        VA-2                                       General Plan
                                        \ND\A.N WELLS GENERAL PLAN
                               The examples below illustrate a Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 0.5.
            1 Story
                                                             2 Story
                      To calculate the maximum permitted gross building floor area ratio for a given
                      site, multiply the FAR by the gross lot area (in square feet):
                      FAR x Gross Lot Area = Maximum permitted gross building floor area
                      If the site above is a one acre lot, then:
                      the FAR = 0.5 x 43,560 s.f. (one acre) = 21,780 s.f. gross building floor area
fe: The L.ightfoot Planning Group, 1996
                                                                                                     PIGURB
                                                                                                     VA-1
                                            FLOOR AREA RATIO
                                                             VA-3
V. Glossary and Index                                                VA. Glossary o/Terms and Index
                      Affordable Housing
                      Housing capable of being purchased or rented by a household with a very
                      low-, low-, or moderate-income, based on a household's ability to make
                      monthly payments necessary to obtain housing. Housing is generally
                      considered affordable when a household pays less than 30 percent of its
                      gross monthly income (GMI) for housing, including utilities.
                      Air Pollution
                      Concentrations of substances found in the atmosphere that exceed naturally
                      occurring quantities and are undesirable or harmful in some way.
                      Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP)
                      Outlines rules and regulations for improving and maintaining the quality
                      of air in the region.
                      Ambient
                      Surrounding on all sides; used to describe measurements of existing
                      conditions with respect to traffic, noise, air, and other environments.
                      Ambient Noise
                      A mix of all the existing sound within a given location, room, etc.;
                      background noise.
                      Annex
                      To incorporate a land area into an existing district or municipality, with
                      a resulting change in the boundaries of the jurisdiction.
                      Architectw-al Control, Architectw-al Review
                      Regulations and procedures requiring the exterior design of structures to
                      be suitable, harmonious, and in keeping with the general appearance,
                      historic character, and/or style of surrounding areas. A process used to
                      exercise control over the design of buildings and their settings. (See
                      "Design Review. ")
                      Arterial
                      Medium-speed (30-40 mph), medium-capacity (10,000-35,000 average
                      daily trips) roadway that provides intra-community travel and access to the
                      county-wide highway system. Access to community arterials should be
                      provided at collector roads and local streets, but direct access from parcels
                      to existing arterials is common.
                      Assessment District
                      See "Benefit Assessment District."
City of Indian Wells                        VA-4                                         General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                               VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                      Aquifer
                      A body of rock that is sufficiently permeable to conduct ground water and
                      to yield economically significant quantities of water to wells and springs.
                      Bedrock
                      The rock that underlies gravel, soil, or other superficial material.
                      Benefit Assessment District
                      An area within a public agency's boundaries that receives a special benefit
                      from the construction of one or more public facilities. A Benefit
                      Assessment District has no legal life of its own and cannot act by itself.
                      It is strictly a financing mechanism for providing public infrastructure as
                      allowed under the Streets .and Highway Code. Bonds may be issued to
                      fmance the improvements, subject to repayment by assessments charged
                      against th~ benefitting properties. Creation of a Benefit Assessment
                      District enables property owners in a specific area to cause the
                      construction of public facilities or to maintain them (for example, a
                      downtown, or the grounds and landscaping of a specific area) by
                      contributing their fair share of the construction and/or installation and
                      operating costs.
                      Bicycle Lane (Class II facility)
                      A corridor expressly reserved for bicycles, existing on a street or roadway
                      in addition to any lanes for use by motorized vehicles.
                      Blowsand
                      Desert sand movement similar to a sandstorm.
                      British Thermal Unit (BTU)
                      A measure of energy. The quantity of heat required to raise the
                      temperature of one pound of water one degree Fahrenheit at a specified
                      temperature.
                      BzifJerZone
                      An area of land separating two distinct land uses that acts to soften or
                      mitigate the effects of one land use on the other.
                      Buildout; Build-out
                      Development of land to its full potential or theoretical capacity as
                      permitted under current or proposed planing or zoning designations.
                      California Envirorunental Quality Act (CEQA)
                      A State law requiring State and local agencies to regulate activities with
                      consideration for environmental protection. If a proposed activity has the
                      potential for a significant adverse environmental impact, an Environmental
                      Impact Report (EIR) must be prepared and certified as to its adequacy
City of Indian Wells                         VA-.5                                      General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                                VA. Glossary of Tenns and Index
                      before taking action on the proposed project. General Plans require the
                      preparation of a "program EIR."
                       Caltrans
                      California Department of Transportation
                       Capital Improvements Program (CIP)
                      A program, administered by a city or county government and reviewed by
                      its planning commission, which schedules permanent improvements,
                      usually for a minimum of five years in the future, to fit the projected fiscal
                      capability of the local jurisdiction. The program generally is reviewed
                      annually for conformance to, and consistency with, the general plan.
                      Clustered Development
                      Development in which a number of dwelling units are placed in closer
                      proximity than usual, or are attached, with the purpose of retaining an
                      open space area.
                      Collector
                      Relatively-low-speed (25-30 mph), relatively-low-volume (5,000-20,000
                      average daily trips) street that provides circulation within and between
                      neighborhoods. Collectors usually serve short trips and are intended for
                      collecting trips from local streets and distributing them to the arterial
                      network.
                      Commercial
                      A land use classification that permits facilities for the buying and   selli~g
                      of commodities and services.
                      Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
                      A grant program administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and
                      Urban Development (HUD) on a formula basis for entitlement
                      communities, and by the State Department of Housing and Community
                      Development (HCD) for non-entitled jurisdictions. This grant allots
                      money to cities and counties for housing rehabilitation and community
                      development, including public facilities and economic development.
                      Community Facilities District
                      Under the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982 (Government
                      Code Section 53311 et seq.), a legislative body may create within its
                      jurisdiction a special district that can issue tax-exempt bonds for the
                      planning, design, acquisition, construction, and/or operation of public
                      facilities, as well as provide public services to district residents. Special
                      tax assessments levied by the district are used to repay the bonds.
City of Indian Wells                        VA-6                                        General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                                VA. Glossary of Terms and Indt'x
                      Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL)
                      A 24-hour energy equivalent level derived from a variety of single-noise
                      events, with weighting factors of 5 and 10 dBA applied to the evening (7
                      PM to 10 PM) and nighttime (10 PM to 7 AM) periods, respectively, to
                      allow for the greater sensitivity to noise during these hours.
                      Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA)
                      A local agency created under California Redevelopment Law. or a local
                      legislative body that has elected to exercise the powers granted to such an
                      agency, for the purpose of planning, developing, re-planning, redesigning,
                      clearing, reconstructing, and/or rehabilitating all or part of a specified area
                      with residential, commercial, industrial. and/or public (including
                      recreational) structures and facilities. The redevelopment agency's plans
                      must be compatible with adopted community general plans.
                      Compatible
                      Capable of existing together without conflict or ill effects.
                      Condominium
                      A strUcture of two or more units, the interior spaces of which are
                      individually owned; the balance of the property (both land and building)
                      is owned in common by the owners of the individual units.
                      Congestion Management Plan (CMP)
                      A mechanism employing growth management techniques, including traffic
                      level of service requirements, standards for public transit, trip reduction
                      programs involving transportation systems management and jobs/housing
                      balance strategies, and capital improvement programming, for the purpose
                      of controlling and/or reducing the cumulative regional traffic impacts of
                      development. AB 1791, effective August 1, 1990, requires all cities and
                      counties that include urbanized areas to adopt by December 1, 1991, and
                      annually update a Congestion Management Plan.
                      Conservation
                      The management of natural resources to prevent waste, destruction,or
                      neglect. The State mandates that a Conservation Element be included in
                      the general plan.
                      Consistent
                      Free from variation or contradiction. Programs in the general plan are to
                      be consistent, not contradictory or preferential. State law requires
                      consistency measures such as the zoning ordinance.
                      Cultural Resource
                      Places or objects important for scientific, historical, and religious reasons
                      to cultures, communities, and individuals.
City of Indian Wells                        VA-7                                          General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                                VA.  Glossary of Terms and Index
                      Cwnulative Impacts
                      Two or more individual effects Which, when considered together, are
                      considerable or which compound or increase other environmental impacts.
                      The individual effects may be changes resulting from a single project or
                      a number of s~parate projects.
                      dB
                      Decibel; a unit used to express the relative intensity of a sound as it is
                      heard by the human ear.
                      dBA
                      The "A-weighted" scale for measuring sound decibels; weights or reduces
                      the effects of low and high frequencies in order to simulate human
                      hearing. Every increase of 10 elBA doubles the perceived loudness though
                      the noise is actually 10 times more intense.
                      Demity, Residential
                      The number of permanent residential dwelling units per area of land.
                      Densities specified in the General Plan are expressed in units per gross
                      acre.
                      DensityBo~
                      The allocation of development rights that allow a parcel to accommodate
                      additional square footage or additional residential units beyond the
                      maximum for which the parcel is zoned, usually in exchange for the
                      provision or preservation of an amenity at the same site or at another
                      location. Under California law, a housing development that provides 20
                      percent of its units for lower income households, or ten percent of its units
                      for very low-income households, or 50 percent of its units for seniors, is
                      entitled to a density bonus.
                      Design Review, Design Control
                      The comprehensive evaluation of a development and its impact on
                      neighboring properties and the community as a whole, from the standpoint
                      of site and landscape design, architecture, materials, colors, lighting, and
                      signs, in accordance with a set of adopted criteria and standards. "Design
                      Control" requires that certain specific things be done and that other things
                      not be done. Design Control language is most often found within a zoning
                      ordinance.
                      "Design Review" usually refers to a system set up outside of the zoning
                      ordinance, whereby projects are reviewed against certain standards and
                      criteria by a specially established design review board or committee.
City of Indian Wells                        VA-8                                         General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                                  VA. Glossary o/Terms and Index
                      Development
                      The physical extension and/or construction of urban land uses.
                      Development activities include: subdivision of land; construction or
                      alteration of structures, roads, utilities, and other facilities; installation of
                      septic systems; grading; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials; and
                      clearing of natural vegetative cover (with the exception of agricultural
                      activities). Routine repair and maintenance activities are exempted.
                      Dwelling Unit
                      A room or group of rooms (including sleeping, eating, cooking, and
                      sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen), that constitutes an
                      independent housekeeping unit, occupied or intended for occupancy by one
                      household on a long-term basis.
                      Emergency Shelter
                      A facility that provides immediate and short-term housing and
                      supplemental services for the homeless.           Supplemental services may
                      include food, counseling, and access to other social programs.
                      Eminent Domain
                      The right of a public entity to acquire private property for public use by
                      condemnation, and the payment of just compensation.
                      Emission Standard
                      The maximum amount of pollutant legally permitted to be discharged from
                      a single source, either mobile or stationary.
                      Encourage
                      To stimulate or foster a particular condition through direct or indirect
                      action by the private sector or government agencies.
                      Endangered Animal Species
                      Any animal species in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant
                      portion of its range. This definition excludes species of insects that the
                      Secretary of the Interior determines to be pests and whose protection undec
                      the Endangered Species Act of 1973 would present an overwhelming and
                      overriding risk to man.
                      Endangered Plant Species
                      Species of plants in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant
                      portion of their ranges. Existence may be endangered because of the
                      destruction, drastic change, or severe curtailment of habitat, or because of
                      over-exploitation, disease, predation, oc unknown reasons. Plant taxa
                      from very limited areas, e.g., the type localities only, or from restricted
                      fragile habitats are usually' considered endangered.
City of Indian Wells                         VA-9                                          General Pilm
         V. Glossary and Index                                               VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                               Enhance
                               To improve existing conditions by increasing the quantity of beneficial
                               uses.
                               Environment
                               CEQA defmes environment as "the physical conditions which exist within
                               the area which will be affected by a proposed project, including land, air,
                               water, mineral, flora, fauna, noise, and objects of historic or aesthetic
                               significance. "
                               Environmental Impact Report (ElR)
                               A report required of general plans by the California Environmental Quality
                               Act and which assesses all the environmental characteristics of an area and
                               describes what effects or impacts will result if the area is altered or
                               disturbed by a proposed action.
                               Erosion
                               The loosening and transportation of rock and soil debris by wind, rain, or
                               running water. The gradual wearing away of the upper layers of earth.
                               Family
                               Two or more persons related by birth, marriage, or adoption (U.S. Bureau
                               of the Census). An individual or a group of persons living together who
---- ..                        constitute a bona fide single-family housekeeping, sorority, club, or other
                               group of perso:QS occupying a hotel, lodging house, or institution of allY
                               kind (California).
                               Fault
                               A fracture in the earth s crust forming a boundary between rock masses
                                                        I
                               that have shifted.
                               Final Environmental Impact Report (FE/R)
                               The Final EIR includes all comments made to the Draft EIR as well as the
                               responses of the project proponent to those comments and is submitted to
                               the State government for public review of the proposed project.
                               Fiscal Impact Analysis
                               A projection of the direct public costs and revenues resulting from
                               population or employment change to the local jurisdiction(s) in which the
                               change is taking place. Enables local governments to evaluate relative
                               fiscal merits of general plans, specific plans, or projects.
                               Fiscal Impact Report (FIR)
                               A report projecting the public costs and revenues that will result from     cl
                               proposed program or development. (See "Fiscal Impact Analysis. ")
        City of Indian Wells                        VA-IO                                       General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                               VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                      Flood Plain
                      The relatively level land area on either side of the banks of a stream
                      regularly subject to flooding. That part of the flood plain subject to a one
                      percent chance of flooding in any given year is designated as an·" area of
                      special flood hazard" by the Federal Insurance Administration.
                      Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
                      The gross area permitted on a site divided by the total net area of the site,
                      expressed in decimals to one or two places. For example, on a site with
                      10,000 net sq. ft. of land area, a Floor Area Ratio of 1.0 will allow a
                      maximum of 10,000 gross sq. ft. of building floor area to be built. On the
                      same site, a FAR of 1.5 would allow 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area; a FAR
                      of 2.0 would allow 20,000 sq. ft.; and a FAR of 0.5 would allow only
                      5,000 sq. ft. Commonly used in zoning. (See Figure VA-I.)
                      Fossiliferous
                      Containing fossils.
                      Freeway
                      A high-speed, high-capacity, limited-access transportation facility serving
                      regional and county-wide travel. Such roads are free of tolls, as
                      contrasted with "turn-pikes or other "toll roads" now being introduced
                                                   It
                      into Southern California. Freeways generally are used for long trips
                      between major land use generators. At Level of Service "E," they carry
                      approximately 1,875 vehicles per lane per hour, in both directions. Major
                      streets cross at a different grade level.
                      gpd
                      Gallons per day. A measure of flow rate.
                      gpm
                      Gallons per minute. A measure of flow rate.
                      General Plan
                      A compendium of city or county policies regarding long-term
                      development, in the form of maps and accompanying text. The General
                      Plan is a legal document required of each local agency by the State of
                      California Government Code Section 65301 and adopted by the City
                      Council or Board of Supervisors. In California, the General Plan has
                      seven (7) mandatory elements (Circulation, Conservation, Housing, Land
                      Use, Noise, Open Space, and Safety) and may include any number of
                      optional elements (such as Air Quality, Economic Development,
                      Hazardous Waste, and Parks and Recreation). The General Plan may also
                      be called a "City Plan," "Comprehensive Plan," or "Master Plan."
City of Indian Wells                       VA-II                                        General Plan

V. Glossary and Index                                                  VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                      Goal
                      A general, overall, and ultimate purpose, aim, or end toward which the
                      city or county will direct effort.
                      Golf Course
                      Land utilized for playing golf that typically includes trees, greens,
                      fairways, and hazards (water and sand).
                      Growuiwater
                      Water under the earth's surface, often confined to aquifers capable of
                      supplying wells and springs.
                      Growuiwater Basin
                      Underground formation with sides and bottom of relatively impervious
                      material in. which groundwater is held or retained. Aquifer or system of
                      aquifers with well defmed boundaries.
                      Growuiwater Recharge
                      The natural process of infiltration and percolation of rainwater from land
                      areas or streams through permeable soils into water-holding rocks that
                      provide underground storage ("aquifers").
                      Growth Management
                      The use by a community of a wide range of techniques in combination to
                      determine the amount, type, and rate of development desired by the
                      community and to channel that growth into designated areas. Growth
                      management policies can be implemented through growth rates, zoning,
                      capital improvement programs, public facilities ordinances, urban limit
                      lines, standard for levels of service, and other programs.
                      Habitat
                      The place where an animal or plant normally lives, often characterized by
                      a dominant plant and codominant form, such as pinyon-juniper habitat.
                      Hazardous Material
                      Any substance that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or
                      chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to
                      human health and safety or to the environment if released into the work
                      place or the environment. The term includes, but is not limited to,
                      hazardous substances and hazardous wastes.
                      Historic; Historical
                      An historic building or site is one that is noteworthy for its significance in
                      local, state, or national history or culture, its architecture or design, or its
                      works of art, memorabilia, or artifacts.
City of Indian Wells                        VA-12                                         General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                                  VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                      Historic Preservation
                      The preservation of historically significant structures and neighborhood
                      until such time as, and in order to facilitate, restoration, and rehabilitation
                      of the building(s) to a former condition.
                      Homeless
                      Persons and families' who lack a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime
                      residence. Includes those staying in temporary or emergency shelters or
                      who are accommodated with friends or others with the understanding that
                      shelter is being provided as a last resort. California Housing Element law,
                      §65583(c)(1) requires all cities and counties to address the housing needs
                      of the homeless.
                      Household
                      All those persons - related or unrelated - who occupy a single housing
                      unit. (See "Family".)
                      Housing and Community Development Department of the State of
                      California (BCD)
                      The State agency that has principal responsibility for assessing, planning
                      for, and assisting communities to meet the needs of low- and moderate-
                      income households.
                      Housing Element
                      Article 10.6 of the California Government Code requires each city and
                      county to prepare and maintain a current housing element as part of the
                      community's general plan in order to attain a Statewide goal of providing
                      "decent housing and a suitable living environment for every California
                      family." Under State law, housing elements must be updated every five
                      years.
                      Housing and Urban Development, Us. Department of (BUD)
                      A cabinet-level department of the Federal government that administer\)
                      housing and community development programs.
                      Impact
                      The effect of any direct man-made actions or indirect repercussions of
                      man-made actions on existing physical, social, or economic conditions.
                      Impact Fee
                      A fee, also called a development fee, levied on the developer of a project
                      by a city, county, or other public agency as compensation for otherwise
                      unmitigated impacts the project will produce. California Government
                      Code Section 66000, et seq., specifies that development fees shall not
                      exceed the estimated reasonable cost of providing the service for which the
                      fee is charged. To lawfully impose a development fee, the public agency
City of Indian Wells                       VA-13                                          General Plan

V. Glossary and Index                                                VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                      must verify its method of calculation and document proper restrictions on
                      use of the fund.
                      Implementation
                      Actions, procedures, programs, or techniques that carry out policies.
                      Improvement
                      The addition of one or more structures or utilities on a parcel of land.
                      Industrial
                      The manufacture, production, and processing of consumer goods.
                      Industrial is often divided into "heavy industrial" uses, such as
                      construction yards, quarrying, and factories; and "light industrial" uses,
                      such as research and development and less intensive warehousing and
                      manufacturing.
                      Irrfill Development
                      Development of vacant land (usually individual lots or left-over properties)
                      wi~      an area that is already largely developed.
                      Irrfrastructwe
                      Public services and facilities, such as sewage disposal systems, water
                      supply systems, other utility systems, and roads.
                      Inversion
                      A layer of air in the atmosphere in which the temperature increases with
                      altitude at a rate greater than normal. Pollutants tend to be trapped below
                      the inversion.
                      Issues
                      Important unsettled community matters or problems that are identified in
                      a community's general plan and dealt with by the plan's goals, policies,
                      plan proposals, and implementation programs.
                      JobS/Howing Balance; JobS/Howing Ratio
                      The availability of affordable housing for employees. The jobs/housing
                      ratio divides the number of jobs in an area by the number of employed
                      residents. A ratio greater than 1.0 indicates a net in-commute, less than
                      1.0 indicates a net out-commute.
                      Ldn
                      The day/night average sound level, defmed as the 24-hour period Leq with
                      10 dBA added to the nighttime average level, Ln.
City of Indian Wells                        VA-J4                                        General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                                VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                      Land Use
                      The occupation or utilization of land or water area for any human activity
                      or any purpose defined in the general plan.
                      Land Use Classification
                      A system for clarifying and designating the appropriate use of properties.
                      Land Use Element
                      A required element of the general plan that uses text and maps to
                      designate the future use or reuse of land within a given jurisdiction's
                      planning area. The Land Use Element serves as a guide to the structuring
                      of zoning and subdivision controls, urban renewal, and capital
                      improvements programs, and to official decisions regarding the distribution
                      and intensity of development and the location of public facilities and open
                      space. (See "Mandatory Element.")
                      Land Use Regulation
                      A term encompassing the regulation of land in general and often used to
                      mean those regulations incorporated in the General Plan, as distinct from
                      zoning regulations (which are more specific).
                      Level of Service (LOS)
                      A scale that measures the amount of traffic a roadway may be capable of
                      handling on a roadway or at the intersection of roadways. Levels range
                      from A to F, with A representing the highest level of service, as follows:
                              Level ofService A Indicates a relatively free flow of traffic, with
                              little or no limitation on vehicle movement or speed.
                              Level of Service B Describes a steady flow of traffic, with only
                              slight delays in vehicle movement and speed. All queues clear in
                              single signal cycle.
                              Level ofService C Denotes a reasonably steady, high-volume flow
                              of traffic, with some limitations on movement and speed, and
                              occasional backups on critical approaches.
                              Level of Service D Denotes the level where traffic nears an
                              unstable flow. Intersections still function, but short queues develop
                              and cars may have to wait through one cycle during short peaks.
                              Level of Service E Describes traffic characterized by slow
                              movement and frequent (although momentary) stoppages. This
                              type of congestion is considered severe, but is not uncommon at
                              peak traffic hours, with frequent stopping, long-standing queues,
                              and blocked intersections.
City of Indian Wells                        VA-IS                                        General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                               VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                              Level of Se11lice F Describes unsatisfactory stop-and-go traffic
                              characterized by "traffic jams" and stoppages of long duration.
                              Vehicles at signalized intersections usually have to wait through
                              one or more signal changes, and "upstream" intersections may be
                              blocked by the long queues.
                      Low-Income Household
                      A household with an annual income usually no greater than 80 percent of
                      the area median family income adjusted by household size, as determined
                      by a survey on incomes conducted by a city or a county, or in the absence
                      of such a survey, based on the latest available eligibility limits established
                      by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for
                      the Section 8 housing program.
                      Mandatory Element
                      A component of the general plan mandated by State law. California law
                      requires that a general plan include elements dealing with seven subjects-
                      circulation, conservation, housing, land use, noise, open space, and safety
                      -and specifies to various degrees the information to be incorporated in
                      each element.
                      May
                      That which is permissible.
                      Midden
                      A refuse stock pile associated with a prehistoric cultural resource site.
                      Minimize
                      To reduce or lessen, but not necessarily to eliminate.
                      Mitigate
                      To ameliorate, alleviate, or avoid to the extent reasonably feasible.
                      Mitigation Measure
                      Method or procedure undertaken for the purpose of avoiding or reducing
                      potential impact(s) of an action.
                      Mixed-Use
                      Properties on which various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional,
                      and residential, are combined in a single building or on a single site in an
                      integrated development project with significant functional interrelationships
                      and a coherent physical design. A" single site" may include contiguous
                      properties.
                      Alust
                      That which is mandatory.
City of Indian Wells                       VA-J6                                         General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                              VA. Glossary of Tenns and Index
                      National Register of Historic Places
                      A list of significant historic and prehistoric sites and districts which
                      provides procedural protection of these properties.
                      Natural State
                      The condition existing prior to development.
                      Necessary
                      Essential or required.
                      Nitric Oxide (NO)
                      A molecule of one nitrogen and one oxygen atom. Results usually from
                      combustion of organic substances containing nitrogen and from
                      recombination of nitrogen decomposed in air during high temperature
                      combustion.
                      Nitrogen Dioxide (N02)
                      A molecule of one nitrogen and two oxygen atoms. Results usually from
                      further oxidation of nitric oxide (NO) in the atmosphere. Ozone
                      accelerates the conversion.
                      Nitrogen Oxides (NO)
                      Poisonous and highly reactive gases produced when fuel is burned at high
                      temperatures, causing nitrogen in ,the air to combine with oxygen.
                      Notice ofPreparation (Nap)
                      A notice prepared and mailed to all responsible agencies and interested
                      parties informing the agencies of the proposed project and inviting
                      comments regarding the scope of issues to be addressed in the EIR.
                      Required by the California Enviro.nmental Quality Act.
                      Noise
                      Any sound that is undesirable because it interferes with speech and
                      hearing, or is intense enough to damage hearing, or is otherwise annoying.
                      Noise simply is "unwanted sound."
                      Objective
                      A specific statement of desired future condition toward which a city or
                      county will expend effort in the context of striving to achieve a broader
                      goal.
                       One-HW1lired-Year-Flood
                      This is the flood which has a one (1) percent probability of occurrence in
                      a given year.
City of Indian Wells                       VA-/7                                       General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                              VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                      Ordinance
                      A law or regulation set forth and adopted by a governmental authority,
                      usually a city or county.
                      Overlay
                      A land use designation on the Land Use Map, or a zoning designation on
                      a zoning map, that modifies the basic underlying designation in some
                      specific manner.
                      Ozone (03)
                      A colorless gas formed by a complex series of chemical and
                      photochemical reaction of reactive organic gases, prinCipally
                      hydrocarbons, with the oxides of nitrogen, which is harmful to the public
                      health, the biota and some materials.
                      P~o               .
                      Particulate matter less than 10 microns in size, which is small enough to
                      be inhaled deeply into the lungs and can cause disease.
                      Parcel
                      A lot, or contiguous group of lots, in single ownership or under single
                      control, usually considered a unit for purposes of development.
                      Peak Hour/Peak Period
                      For any given roadway, a daily period during which traffic volume is
                      highest, usually occurring in the morning and evening commute periods.
                      Where "F" Levels of Service are encountered, the "peak hour" may
                      stretch into a "peak period" of several hours duration.
                      Peiformance Standards
                      Regulations that permit uses based on a particular set of standards of
                      operation rather than on particular type of use. Performance standards
                      may provide specific criteria limiting noise, air pollution, emissions,
                      odors, vibration, dust, dirt, glare, heat, fire hazards, wastes, traffic
                      impacts, and visual impact of a use.
                      Planned Community
                      A large-scale development whose essential features are a defmable
                      boundary; a consistent, but not necessarily uniform, character; overall
                      control during the development process by a single development entity;
                      private ownership of recreation amenities; and enforcement of covenant5,
                      conditions, and restrictions by a master community association.
                      Planning Area
                      The Planning Area (plan Area) is the land area addressed by the General
                      Plan. For a city, the Planning Area boundary typically coincides with the
City of Indian Wells                      VA-I8                                       General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                                VA. Glossary of Tenns and Index
                      sphere of influence and encompasses land both within the city limits and
                      potentially annexable land.
                      Planning Commission
                      A body, usually having five or seven members, created by a city or
                      county in compliance with California law which requires the assignment
                      of the planning functions of the city or county to a planning department,
                      planning commission, hearing officers, and/or the legislative body itself,
                      as deemed appropriate by the legislative body.
                      Policy
                      A specific statement of principle or of guiding actions that implies clear
                      commitment but is not mandatory.             A general direction that a
                      governmental agency sets to follow, in order to meet its goals and
                      objectives before undertaking an action program. (See "Program. ")
                      Pollution
                      The presence of mater or energy whose nature, location, or quantity
                      produces undesired environmental effects.
                      Potentially Active Fault
                      Evidence of Late Quaternary surface faulting within the last 11,000 years.
                      Poverty Level
                      As used by the U.S. Census, families and unrelated individuals are
                      classified as being above or below the poverty level based on a poverty
                      index that provides a range of income cutoffs or "poverty thresholds"
                      varying by size of family, number of children, and age of householder.
                      The income cutoffs are Updated each year to reflect the change in the
                      Consumer Price Index.
                      Preserve
                      To keep safe from destruction or decay; to maintain or keep intact.
                      Program
                      An action, activity, or strategy carried out in response to adopted policy
                      to achieve a specific goal or objective. Policies and programs establish the
                      "who," "how," and "when" for carrying out the "what" and "where" of
                      goals and objectives.
                      Project
                      The whole of an action, which has a potential for resulting in a physical
                      change in the environment.
City of Indian Wells                       VA-J9                                        General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                               VA. Glossary of Tenns and Index
                      Protect
                      To maintain and preserve beneficial uses in their present condition as
                      nearly as possible.
                      Public and Quasi-Public Facilities
                      Institutional, academic, governmental, and community service uses, either
                      publicly owned or operated by non-profit organizations.
                      Rare Species
                      A species which, although not presently threatened with extinction, is in
                      such small numbers throughout its range that it may become endangered
                      if its present environment worsens.
                      Recycle
                      The process of extraction and reuse of materials from waste products.
                      Residential
                      Land designated in the city or county general plan and zoning ordinance
                      for buildings consisting only of dwelling units. May be improved, vacant,
                      or unimproved. (See "Dwelling Unit. ")
                      Residential, Multiple Family
                      Usually three or more dwelling units on a single site, which may be in the
                      same or separate building.
                      Residential, Single-Family
                      A single dwelling unit on a building site.
                      Ridgeline
                      A line connecting the highest points along a ridge and separating drainage
                      basins or small-scale drainage systems from one another.
                      Right-of-Way
                      A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by certain
                      transportation and public use facilities, such as roadways, railroads, and
                      utility lines.
                      Riparian
                      The area or zone along the banks of a stream or lake that is not covered
                      by water.
                      Scenic Highway/Scenic Route
                      A highway, road, drive, or street that, in addition to its transportation
                      function, provides opportunities for the enjoyment of natural and man-
                      made scenic resources and access or direct views to areas or scenes of
                      exceptional beauty or historic or cultural interest. The aesthetic values of
City of Indian Wells                       VA-20                                       General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                                VA. Glossary ofTenns and Index
                      scenic routes often are protected and enhanced by regulations governing
                      the development of property or the placement of outdoor advertising.
                      Until the mid-1980's, general plans in California were required to include
                      a Scenic Highways element.
                      Section 8 Rental Assistance Program
                      A Federal (HUD) rent-subsidy program that is one of the main sources of
                      Federal housing assistance for low-income households. The program
                      operates by providing "housing assistance payments" to owners,
                      developers, and public housing agencies to make up the difference between
                      the "Fair Market Rent" of a unit (set by HUD) and the household's
                      contribution toward the rent, which is generally calculated at 30 percent
                      of the household's adjusted gross monthly income (GMI). "Section 8"
                      includes programs for new construction, existing housing, and substantial
                      or moderate housing rehabilitation.
                      Second Unit
                      A self-contained living unit, either attached to or detached from, and in
                      addition to, the primary residential unit on a single lot. Sometimes called
                      "Granny Flat."
                      Seismic
                      Caused by or subject to earthquakes or earth vibrations.
                      Sensitive Receptor
                      That segment of the population that because of age or weak health is more
                      susceptible to the effects of air pollution, noise, etc., than the popUlation
                      at large.
                      Sensitive Species
                      Generic term for any plant or animal species which is recognized by the
                      government or by any conservation group as being depleted, rare,
                      threatened, and/or endangered.
                      Setback
                      The horizontal distance between the property line and any structure.
                      Shall
                      That which is obligatory or necessary.
                      Should
                      Signifies a directive to be honored if at all possible.
                      Shrink-Swell Potential
                      The expansion or contraction of primarily clay-rich soils during alternating
                      wetting and drying cycles.
City of Indian Wells                       VA-21                                         General Plan.
V. Glossary and Index                                                 VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                      Significant Effect
                      A beneficial or detrimental impact on the environment. May include, but
                      is not limited to, significant changes in an area s air, water, and land
                                                                            I
                      resources.
                      Significant Environmental Impact
                      As defined by CEQA, Chapter 3, Article 1, Section 15002(g), it is "a
                      substantial adverse change in the physical conditions which exist in the
                      area affected by the proposed project."
                      Single-Family Dwelling, Attached
                      A dwelling unit occupied or intended for occupancy by only one household
                      that is structurally connected with at least one other such dwelling unit.
                      Single-Family Dwelling, Detached
                      A dwelling unit occupied or intended for occupancy by only one household
                      that is structurally independent from any other such dwelling unit or
                      structure intended for residential or other use.
                      Slope
                      Land gradient described as the vertical rise divided by the horizontal run,
                      and expressed in percent.
                      Soil Liquefaction
                      A condition where soil strength is greatly reduced because of excessive
                      pore water pressure buildup, especially in saturated sandy soils that are
                      subject to compaction remolding triggered by earthquake vibrations.
                      Solid Waste
                      General category that includes organic wastes, paper products, metals,
                      glass, plastics, cloth, brick, rock, soil, leather, rubber, yard wastes, and
                      wood. Organic wastes and paper products comprise about 75 percent of
                      typical urban solid waste.
                      Specific Plan
                      Under Article 8 of the Government Code (§65450 et seq.), a legal tool for
                      detailed design and implementation of a defmed portion of the area
                      covered by a general plan. A specific plan may include all detailed
                      regulations, conditions, programs, and/or proposed legislation that may be
                      necessary or convenient for the systemic implementation of any general
                      plan element(s).
                      Sphere ofIrif/uence
                      The probable ultimate physical boundaries and service area of a local
                      agency (city or district) as determined by the Local Agency Formation
                      Commission (LAFCO) of the County.
City of Indian Wells                        VA-22                                         General Plan

V. Glossary and Index                                               VA. Glossary of Tenns and Index
                      State Implementation Plan (SIP)
                      A document required periodically from each county by EPA that indicates
                      the progress and the planning of the country for improving the quality of
                      its air.
                      Storm Channel
                      A course through which storm water is directed, thereby protecting
                      adjacent land areas from flooding.
                      Street Tree Plan
                      A comprehensive plan for all trees on public streets that sets goals for
                      solar access, and standards for species selection, maintenance, and
                      replacement criteria, and for planting trees in patterns that will defme
                      neighborhood character while avoiding monotony or maintenance
                      problems.
                      Subsidence
                      The settling or sinking of soil layers due to water or oil extraction
                      resulting in compaction and uneven surface elevations.
                      Suljw Dioxide (SO:z)
                      A corrosive and poisonous gas produced from the complete combustion of
                      sulfur in fuels.       .
                      Suljw Oxides (SO)
                      The group of compounds formed during combustion or thereafter in the
                      atmosphere of sulfur compounds in the fuel, each having various levels of
                      oxidation, ranging from two oxygen atoms for each sulfur atom to four
                      oxygen atoms.
                      Terrestrial
                      Related to or living on land. Terrestrial biology deals with upland areas
                      as opposed to shorelines or coastal habitats.
                      Threatened Species
                      Species which, although not presently threatened with extinction, are likely
                      to become endangered in the foreseeable future in the absence of special
                      protection and management efforts.
                      Topography
                      Configuration of a surface, including its relief and the position of natural
                      and man-made features.
                      Total SUYpended Particulates (!SP)
                      Solid ,or liquid particles small enough to remain suspended in air. PM lO
                      is the portion of TSP that can be inhaled.
==========================================================~--
City of Indian Wells                       VA-23                                       General Plan
       V. Glossary and Index                                               VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                              Towism
                             The business of providing services for persons traveling for pleasure.
                             Tourism contributes to the vitality of the community by providing revenue
                             to local business. Tourism can be measured through changes in the
                             transient occupancy tax, or restaurant sales.
                             Traffic Model
                             A mathematical representation of traffic movement within an area or
                             region based on observed relationships between the kind and intensity of
                             development in specific areas. Many traffic models operate on the theory
                             that trips are produced by persons living in residential areas and are
                             attracted by various non-residential land uses. (see "Trip")
                             Transportation Demand Management (lDJt,1)
                             A strategy for reducing demand on the road system by reducing the
                             number of vehicles using the roadways andlor increasing the number of
                             persons per vehicle. TDM attempts to reduce the number of persons who
                             drive alone on the roadway during the commute period and to increase the
                             number in carpools, vanpools, buses and trains, walking, and biking.
                             TDM can be an element of TSM (see below).
                             Transportation Systems Management (lSJt,1)
                             A comprehensive strategy developed to address the problems caused by
.,,--.                       additional development, increasing trips, and a shortfall in transportation
                             capacity. Transportation Systems Management focuses on more efficiently
                             utilizing existing highway and transit systems rather than expanding them.
                             TSM measures are characterized by their low cost and quick
                             implementation time frame, such as computerized traffic signals, metered
                             freeway ramps, and one-way streets.
                             Trip
                             A one-way journey that proceeds from an origin to a destination via a
                             single mode of transportation; the smallest unit of movement considered
                             in transportation studies. Each trip has one "production end" (or origin-
                             often from home, but not always) and one "attraction end" (destination).
                             (See "Traffic Model. ")
                             Trip Generation
                             The dynamics that account for people making trips in automobiles or Ly
                             means of public transportation. Trip generation is the basis for estimating
                             the level of use for a transportation system and the impact of additional
                             development or transportation facilities on an existing, local transportation
                             system. Trip generations of households are correlated with destinations
                             that attract household members for specific purposes.
       City of Indian Wells                        VA-24                                       General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                                VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
                      Truck Route
                      A path of circulation required for all vehicles exceeding set weight or axle
                      limits. A truck route generally follows major arterials through commercial
                      or industrial areas and avoids sensitive areas.
                      Use
                      The purpose for which a lot or structure is or may be leased, occupied,
                      maintained, arranged, designed, intended, constructed, erected, moved,
                      altered, andlor enlarged in accordance with the city or county zoning
                      ordinance and general plan land use designations.
                      Utility Corridor
                      A strip of land, or an easement, on which utility or pipelines are
                      constructed.
                      Vacant
                      Lands or buildings that are not actively used for any purpose.
                      Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMl)
                      A key measure of overall street and highway use. Reducing VMT is often
                      a major objective in efforts to reduce vehicular congestion and achieve
                      regional air quality goals.
                      Very Low-Income Household
                      A household with an annual income usually no greater than 50 percent of
                      the area median family income adjusted by household size, as determined
                      by a survey of incomes conducted by a city or a county, or in the absence
                      of such a survey, based on the latest available eligibility limits established
                      by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (BUD) fOi"
                      the Section 8 housing program.
                      Vzsual Resource
                      The physical features of a landscape which can be seen (e. g., land, water,
                      vegetation, structures, and other features).
                      Volzone to Capacity Ratio (VIC)
                      A measure of the capacity of a roadway. When VIe is 100 percent, no
                      more traffic can be accommodated.
                      Watercourse
                      Natural or once natural flowing (perennially or intermittently) water
                      including rivers, streams, and creeks. Includes natural waterways that
                      have been channelized, but does not include man-made channels, ditches,
                      and underground drainage and sewage systems.
City of Indian Wells                       VA-25                                         General Plan
V. Glossary and Index                                                v.4. Glossary of Tenns and Index
                      Watershed
                      The area contained within a drainage divide above a specified point on a
                      stream.
                      Zoning
                      The division of a city or county by legislative regulations into areas, or
                      zones, that specify allowable uses for real property and size restrictions for
                      buildings within these areas. A program that implements policies of the
                      general plan.
City of Indian Wells                       VA-26                                          General Plan
 V. Glossary and Index                                                        VA. Glossary of Terms and Index
 Index
                       The following index is provided as a tool to assist the reader in locating
                       information within the General Plan. Phrases, words, and ideas are
                       identified with corresponding page reference numbers.
                       lWn                                                                                fage
                       Affordable Housing. . . . .. IA-9; IIB-2,14,15,17,IS,20-23,25,29-37
                       Agriculture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ITA-l,9; llIA-17; NA-ll
                       Blowsand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llIA-9,17,20; IVA-l,2,7,16
                       Buildout . . . . . . . IA-9; IIA-13,14,17; llB-2l; nC-12,20,30; llIA-24
                       Capital Improvement Program . . . . . . . . . . . ITA-13,28; nC-IO,29
                       Coachella Valley Association of Governments. .. nC-IO; llIA-23,37;
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " NA-2,17
                       Coachella Valley Water District .... llA-9,10; llB-lS,2l;llIA-15,16;
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IVA-12,15,16
                       Community Commercial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. IA-9; ITA-14,lS
                       Community Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . lA-I; llB-2,3
                       Conservation . . . . . . . .. IA-7-9; ITA-25; llB- 20, 29, 32; nC-l,24;
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. mA-l,2,17,20,2l,29,33,35-39; NA-S,IO
                       Cook Street .. IA-4; ITA-6,9,10; nC-7,S,10,24,31; mA-6,16; NA-13;
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . !VB-7,10
                       Cove Communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llA-12,12,26; IVA-2
                       Date Palms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. IIA-I1
                       Deep Canyon . . . . . . . . . . . . . ITA-12,20; llIA-15,30,35; N A-S,15
                       Earthquakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , IA-9; IVA-2,3,6,7,12; !VB-I
                       Eldorado Drive '"             IA-9; ITA-9,11; llB-21; nC-7,S,10,19,20,24,27;
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llIA-6,30; !VB-I0
                       Emergency Preparedness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IA-9; N A-2,12,16
                       Evacuation Routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IVA-13,14,16
                       Faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . N A-3,4,6
                       Fire Protection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ITA-12,26; N A-2,16
                       Fiscal . . . . . . . . . . . . IA-6; ITA-2,13,22,27,2S; llB-22,37; nC-lO
                       Flood Control . IIA-9,12,20; lIB-IS; nc-s; llIA-7,15,30; IVA-7,S,15
                       Fred Waring Drive IA-9; ITA-2,9,10,13,14; llB-21; nC-7,S,19,20,24;
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llIA-6,16; IVB-7,10
                       Future Housing Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . liB-2S,33
                       Golf . . . . . . . IA-l,4,6,9; ITA-2,9,10,13,20,22; llB-l,2S; nC-26,2S;
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . llIA-3,6,7,15,16,29,30,33,36; IVA-S,12; !VB-7,13
                       Highway III Specific Plan . . . . . . . . IIA-2,6,S,25; nC-27; !VB-13
                       Highway 111 .. IA-l,4,S,9; IIA-2,6,S-13,19,25,2S; llB-lS; nC-4,7,S,
                       .. 10,19,20,24,27; llIA-2,6,29,30,33,34; NA-S, 12, 13; !VB-7,10,13
                       Hillsides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. IllA-33; N A-16
                       History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IA· I
                       Hotel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ITA-6,IS,22
City of Indian Wells                           VA-27                                                General Plan

 V. Glossary and Index                                                        VA. Glossary of Terms and Iruiex
                       IWn                                                                            .~
                       Housing Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llA-20; IIB-l,2,2S,26,2S-30,33
                       Housing Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llA-21; IIB-1,2,22,32,33
                       Impact Fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , llA-21,22
                       Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llA-2,9,14,24,26; IIB-30;· He-1
                       Intersections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . nC-17,lS~20,2l,23,2S; IVB~i3'
                       Interstate 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . lA-I; llA-9; nC4,8,30; rVB-7
                       Land Use Designations. . . . . . . . . . . IA-S; llA-1,13,14,19; fiB-I;
                       Living Desert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llA-2; nC4; IDA-6,7,29,33,3S
                       Miles Avenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . IA4; llA-9; nC-S,19,20; IVB-lO
                       Mission Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IA-6
                       Noise Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llA-21; IVB-1-3,7,8,10,13,14
                       Parks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llA-13,20; IllA-2,3,S,6,29,30,33,'34,36,38
                       Police . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llA-12,19,28
                       Pollution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IllA-16,23,~7
                       Public Transportation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. llB-26; nC-1~.c
                       Quality of Life . . . . . . . . .. IA-6,S; IIA-1,2,13; fiB-I; nC-2,12,28
                       Recreation . . . . . . . . IIA-l,13,lS,20;' llIA-2,3,S,17 ,29,30,33,34~~8 .'
                       Redevelopment. IIA-6,7,12,13,27,28; fiB-1S,21-23,2S,28-37; lllA-38
                       Residential . IA-1,4,S,7-9; nA-6,10,ll,13,14,l'S,20..22,26; fiB-1,3,S,
                         S,12,14-2l,23-2S,31,33,34; nC-lO,18,19,21,24,26,2S; InA-I ,3, lS,37;
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IVA-2,S,lS; IVB-1,S,7,10,13-fs"
                       Resort ..... IA-1,4,S,8; llA-6,13,14,18,20-22,27; IIB-l,28; nC-lO:
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llIA-2,6,16,30; IVB-7
                       Resort Commercial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. llA-lS,22,27
                       San Jacinto Mountains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . lA-I; nC4
                       Santa Rosa Mountains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . llA-2; llIA-9,10,29,34
                       Schools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IIA-ll,19
                       Sewer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IIA-9,13,14,28; lIB-IS
                       Signs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. IIA-2S; nC-24,26
                       Southern California Association of Governments ... fiB-1,28; IDA-23
                       Sphere of Influence .... IA-1,S,9; IIA-2,6,lO,13,14,27; IIB-3,lS,21;
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. nC-8; InA-9; IVA-3,7; IVB-7,10
                       Tennis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " IA-1,6; UA-20; IIB-l; InA-7,30
                       Tourism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , nC-I0
                       Value Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. IA-6
                       Washington Street . . . . . . nC-7,8,lO,20,31; IllA-9; IVA-13; IVB-lO
                       Whitewater River ..... UA-9,12,20; fiB-IS; nC-S,19,20; InA-9,IS,
                       · . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16,30,3S; IVA-7,8
City of lruiian Wells                          VA-2B                                             General Plan

