3Mobility
                                               General Plan
          The Mobility Element seeks to enhance vehicle,
          walking, bicycling, and public transportation
          systems options within Carlsbad, and improve
          mobility through increased connectivity and
          intelligent transportation management.
          Increasing transportation options and improving
          connectivity within the city are core values
          of the Carlsbad Community Vision and
          also support other core values of the vision,
          including sustainability, access to recreation
          and active, healthy lifestyles, and neighborhood
          revitalization.
                                                         3-1
      City of Carlsbad
3                        This element provides a short context for
                         Carlsbad’s existing mobility system, identifies
Mobility
                         how that system was developed, and
                         communicates the current vision for the future
                         of mobility within the city. Topics addressed
                         include:
                            •	Livable Streets
                              ºº Multi-Modal Levels of Service
                              ºº Walking
                              ºº Bicycling
                              ºº Transit
                            •	Connectivity to Support Mobility
                            •	Parking
                            •	Transportation Demand Management
                            •	Traffic Signal Management
                            •	Freight and Goods Movement and
                            •	Innovation in Transportation Mobility
      3-2

                                                                                      General Plan
3.1	 Introduction
Background and Purpose
Much of Carlsbad’s transportation system has developed within the last
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                  Mobility
30 years, concurrent with the city’s physical expansion. The transportation
emphasis during this period has been on improving travel by the automobile,
within the framework provided by Proposition E (commonly referred to as the
Growth Management Plan) passed by Carlsbad voters in 1986. The 1994 General
Plan and the Growth Management Plan helped assure that infrastructure was
provided in a systematic fashion as the city grew and developed.
The transportation system envisioned in the 1994 General Plan has largely
been realized, with the majority of the street infrastructure constructed to its
ultimate configuration. As the city looks increasingly to infill development
rather than outward expansion, the primary transportation issues relate to pro-
tecting and enhancing the community’s quality of life, as reflected in the core
values of the Carlsbad Community Vision. The community’s vision includes
better pedestrian and bicycle connections between neighborhoods, destina-
tions, and different parts of the community, and a balanced transportation
system rather than a singular focus on automobile movement.
In recent years, the city has been taking steps to support complete and livable
streets. In January 2012, the City Council identified complete and livable streets
as a top strategic focus area for the city. In February 2013, the city completed
a Livable Streets Assessment report that reframes potential challenges into
opportunities, based on best practices in other jurisdictions wrestling with
similar challenges. In 2011-2013 the city implemented a traffic signal program
to better serve and manage motorists and connect traffic signals throughout the
city. This element focuses on providing livable streets that improve mobility and
connectivity for all users of the transportation system.
Relationship to State Law
California state law (Government Code Section 65032(b)) requires that a general
plan include a circulation element that consists of “the general location and
extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes,
terminals… and other local public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the
land use element of the [general] plan.” This Mobility Element includes all infor-
mation required of circulation elements, except that the location and extent
of “other local public utilities and facilities” is addressed in the Public Safety
Element.
Additionally, in 2008, the State of California passed Assembly Bill 1358, the Cal-
ifornia Complete Streets Act. This bill requires that all circulation elements
developed after January 1, 2011 include a complete streets approach that balances
the needs of all users of the street, including motorists, pedestrians, bicycles,
                                                                                                3-3

      City of Carlsbad
3
                         children, persons with disabilities, seniors, movers of commercial goods, and
                         users of public transportation. This Mobility Element uses the term “livable
                         streets” in place of “complete streets”; providing livable streets throughout the
                         community is the core focus of this element.
Mobility
                         Relationship to Community Vision
                         While the Mobility Element responds to many of the core values of the Carlsbad
                         Community Vision, it most closely furthers:
                         Core Value 5: Walking, Biking, Public Transportation and Connectivity.
                         Increase travel options through enhanced walking, bicycling and public trans-
                         portation systems. Enhance mobility through increased connectivity and
                         intelligent transportation management.
                         Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
                         The Mobility Element generally focuses on mobility and connectivity of the
                         city’s transportation system and is complementary to other elements within the
                         General Plan. This element was developed to support and enhance the Land Use
                         and Community Design Element, which has the strongest relationship to this
                         element.
                         In addition, the Mobility Element will inform future updates to the city’s Bicycle
                         Master Plan, Pedestrian Master Plan, and Americans with Disabilities Act
                         (ADA) Transition Plan, and Trails Master Plan efforts; all of which provide a
                         greater level of detail related to those planning efforts compared to this element.
                         Furthermore, future noise contours in the Noise Element and air quality policies
                         in the Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element reflect considerations
                         of future traffic generation, as outlined in this element.
      3-4

                                                                                                          General Plan
3.2	 Context: Existing
     Transportation System
Currently, Carlsbad’s transportation system includes streets (travel lanes,
bicycle lanes, sidewalks, etc.), trails, transit (bus and train), truck routes, and the
                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                             Mobility
McClellan-Palomar airport. The existing transportation system is described
below.
Streets
The city accommodates motorists via its system of freeways, regional streets
and local streets. North/south facilities include Interstate-5, El Camino Real,
Carlsbad Boulevard, College Boulevard, Paseo del Norte, Avenida Encinas,
Rancho Santa Fe Road and Melrose Drive. East/west facilities include Carlsbad
Village Drive, Chestnut Avenue, Tamarack Avenue, Cannon Road, Faraday
Avenue, Palomar Airport Road, Poinsettia Lane, Aviara Parkway, and La Costa
Avenue. Many of these streets not only serve Carlsbad, but also provide regional
connectivity to the north county area. Although there are numerous east/west
streets through the city, major barriers interrupt connectivity – the north/
south railroad that parallels Interstate-5 and Carlsbad Boulevard, the Inter-
state-5 freeway, three lagoons, and the general rolling hill topography of the city.
While State Route 78 does not run within the city limits of Carlsbad, it provides
a regional east-west freeway just north of Carlsbad that connects with Interstate
15 in Escondido.
Many city-maintained streets provide for pedestrian and bicycle travel on such
facilities as parallel bike lanes, trails, and/or sidewalks. Walking and bicycling
environments are critical to Carlsbad’s high quality of life, especially in areas
that have a high demand for those services (such as the Village area, along the
coast and near the lagoons).
Trails
Trails typically serve pedestrians and, where allowed, bicycles. Automobiles are
prohibited on trails. While the city’s rolling topography can be challenging, its
open space areas, three lagoons, coastline and Mediterranean climate make it
an ideal location to provide an extensive trail system.
In April 2013, the city initiated a Trails Master Plan update. This update will
include identification of existing and proposed trails within the city that will
integrate with other transportation system elements. Additionally, the Trails
Master Plan will ensure consistency with the city’s recently completed and
accepted ADA Transition Plan. The Trails Master Plan will be completed in
coordination with the Carlsbad Active Transportation Strategy, also initiated             Pedestrian-attracting land uses
by the city in April 2013. The Comprehensive Active Transportation Strategy               include lagoons (top) and the coastline
                                                                                          (bottom).
will result in a set of strategies to identify and construct livable streets solutions
for the city’s street system.
                                                                                                                          3-5

      City of Carlsbad
3
                         Transit
                         Transit in Carlsbad includes bus service, ADA paratransit service, the
                         COASTER commuter rail, and Amtrak rail service; indirectly, transit service
                         is also provided by the Sprinter light rail system and Metrolink commuter rail.
                         These services are described below:
Mobility                 •	 Bus Service – Bus service is provided by the North County Transit
                            District (NCTD) and is referred to the BREEZE. BREEZE currently oper-
                            ates approximately ten bus routes within the city.
                         •	 Paratransit Service – NCTD also offers LIFT, a curb-to-curb service for
                            eligible disabled persons who are unable to utilize the BREEZE.
                         •	 COASTER Commuter Rail – This is a north-south commuter rail transit
                            service connecting north San Diego County to the City of San Diego.
                            Carlsbad is served by two COASTER stations, one located north of
                            Poinsettia Lane (just west of Interstate-5) and the other is located in the
                            Carlsbad Village area.
                         •	 Sprinter – This is an east-west light rail transit service connecting
                            Oceanside to Escondido and many educational destinations such as Mira
                            Costa College and California State University San Marcos. Although the
                            Sprinter does not run within the city limits, it is just north of Carlsbad and
                            connections to Carlsbad are provided via the COASTER and BREEZE
                            services in addition to bicycle accessibility.
                         •	 Amtrak – Amtrak is a national passenger rail service connecting San
                            Diego to San Luis Obispo. There are currently six Amtrak trains per day
                            at associated Amtrak stations in Carlsbad.
                         •	 Metrolink – Metrolink is a commuter rail service serving Los Angeles,
                            Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino counties. The Orange County line
                            connects to the COASTER line in Oceanside.
                         This Mobility Element also recognizes the unique opportunity the city has
                         with its two COASTER stations and Amtrak stations. The city has the ability
                         to service regional commuting in the area via transit without requiring the use
                         of an automobile on north-south corridors in the city. In addition to the special
                         treatment of streets and connectivity in and around the transit stations, this
                         Mobility Element also seeks to connect people with businesses and other des-
                         tinations by improving the quality of bus service through coordination with
                         NCTD, evaluating transit quality along routes that connect to employment
                         areas, important destinations and transit stations, encouraging the provision of
                         shuttle services, and in other new innovative ways.
      3-6

                                                                                      General Plan
                                                                                                 3
Although the basic regional transit backbone infrastructure has been imple-
mented within the city (discussed above), one of the biggest deterrents to transit
use is the “first mile/last mile” portion of the transit trip, which refers to the
method and ability for transit users to actually connect to their ultimate desti-
nation once they get off of the primary transit mode. This concept is also referred
                                                                                                  Mobility
to as “door-to-door” transit service, which addresses transit in a more compre-
hensive manner than “stop-to-stop.” This Mobility Element further promotes
the improvement of the “first mile/last mile”/“door-to-door” transit service
through development incentives that incorporate and encourage shuttles and
other connectivity to and from the transit infrastructure system.
Goods Movement
The movement of goods in Carlsbad typically occurs on the rail line, freeway
and via designated truck routes within the city. This connectivity assures
that goods can be moved safely and efficiently in the city. Many of Carlsbad’s
businesses and residents rely on goods movement whether for deliveries or
importing/exporting product.
Carlsbad Municipal Code Section 10.32.091 enumerates the designated and
established truck routes in Carlsbad. The designated truck routes provide access
from Interstate-5 and State Route 78 to commercial areas, the Village, business
park areas, McClellan-Palomar Airport, and points beyond the city limits.
Carlsbad streets that are designated truck routes are designed to accommodate
large vehicles.
McClellan-Palomar Airport
McClellan-Palomar Airport is a class 1 commercial service airport (pursuant
to its operating certificate issued by the Federal Aviation Administration). The
airport serves all types of scheduled operations of large air carrier aircraft (31
or more passenger seats), as well as small air carrier aircraft (more than nine
but less than 31 passenger seats). The airport currently serves smaller general
aviation aircraft up to larger corporate jet aircraft, and is the only airport with
an instrument landing system between Lindbergh Field (San Diego) and John
Wayne (Santa Ana) airports that can accommodate the majority of instrument
rated aircraft.
Medevac and transient helicopters also operate at the heliport/helipad located
east of the runway. The Carlsbad Municipal Code prohibits the City Council
from approving any legislative act (such as a zone change or general plan
amendment) authorizing the expansion of McClellan-Palomar Airport without
voter approval.
                                                                                                3-7

      City of Carlsbad
3                        3.3	 Livable Streets Vision and
                              Strategies
                         Livable Streets
Mobility
                         A livable streets vision is more than implementation of a state-mandated
                         approach during a general plan update process. It is a fundamental shift in how
                         the city will plan and design the street system – recognizing the street as a public
                         space and ensuring that the public space serves all users of the system (elderly,
                         children, bicycles, pedestrians, etc.) within the urban context of that system (e.g.
                         accounting for the adjacent land uses).
                         The Mobility Element is consistent with and further enhances the state and
                         federal requirements for complete streets by implementing a “livable streets”
                         strategy. Livable streets recognize that each street within the city is unique given
                         its geographic setting, adjacent land uses, and the desired use of that facility.
                         As such, this element identifies a street typology appropriate for the uniqueness
                         of the street and surrounding land uses and identifies which modes of travel
                         (pedestrian, bicycle, vehicles, etc.) should be accommodated on that street.
      3-8

                                                                                        General Plan
                                                                                                   3
The following are notable examples of how Carlsbad streets have been, or are
planned to be, developed or retrofitted to better accommodate all users of the
street system and interface appropriately with adjacent land uses:
•	 Streets within Bressi Ranch, the Village area, Robertson Ranch, and the
   Pine Park area;
•	 The “road diet” along La Costa Avenue to improve safety. A road diet is a                        Mobility
   process whereby streets are modified from (traditionally) a four-lane facility
   with no turn lanes or bicycle lanes to a two-lane facility with a two-way left-
   turn lane and bicycle facilities;
•	 Installation of the Kelly Drive crosswalk and pedestrian median island at
   Kelly Elementary School;
•	 Pedestrian crosswalks and median improvements and rectangular rapid
   flashing beacons along Carlsbad Boulevard;
•	 Enhancing, buffering and widening bike lanes during routine street
   maintenance;
•	 Repurposing of Carlsbad Boulevard across Buena Vista Lagoon – reduce
   the number of vehicle lanes with enhanced pedestrian and bicycle facilities
   (trail, bike lanes, sidewalk);
•	 Installation of a roundabout at the Carlsbad Boulevard and State Street
   intersection; and
•	 Installation of sharrows on State Street connecting to the Coastal Rail Trail
   Reach 2 through the Village. Sharrows are special pavement stencils denot-
   ing that bicycles may use the lane with motorists.
•	 Planned traffic calming improvements, such as traffic circles, roundabouts,
   and median islands, in the Barrio and Village areas.
The City of Carlsbad Livable Streets Assessment (February 2013) is a document
that benchmarks the city’s position on implementing livable streets. It
documents best practices of other jurisdictions and recommends actions the
city can take to continue to implement livable streets concepts. The Carlsbad
Active Transportation Strategies study will serve as the livable streets imple-
mentation plan for the city.
While many transportation projects have historically been vehicle capacity
enhancing and traffic control focused, this Mobility Element supports a new
paradigm to evaluate each project and explore all potential solutions to enhance
the mobility for all users of the street, including vehicles, pedestrians, bikes, and
transit. Many of these projects will involve repurposing existing right-of-way
rather than acquiring and constructing new right-of-way.
                                                                                                  3-9

      City of Carlsbad
                         The city’s approach to provide livable streets recognizes that optimum service
                         levels cannot be provided for all travel modes on all streets within the city. This
3
                         is due to competing interests that arise when different travel modes mix. For
                         example, pedestrian friendly streets typically have slow vehicle travel speeds,
                         short-distance pedestrian crossings, and include some type of buffer between
                         the vehicle travel way and the pedestrian walkway. However, automobile
                         friendly streets typically have wide travel lanes, multiple turn lanes (increas-
                         ing the pedestrian crossing distance), and high automobile speeds. Therefore,
Mobility
                         this Mobility Element utilizes a livable streets approach to provide a balanced
                         mobility system that identifies, based on the location and type of street (street
                         typology), the travel modes for which service levels should be enhanced and
                         maintained per the multi-modal level of service (MMLOS) standard specified
                         in the city’s Citywide Facilities and Improvements Plan.
                         Table 3-1 describes the city’s livable street typologies and Figure 3-1 depicts the
                         city’s livable street system. Table 3-1 identifies which modes of travel are accom-
                         modated on each street typology and specifies, depending on the type of street,
                         which modes are subject to the MMLOS standard and which modes are not.
                         While Table 3-1 does not require a minimum level of service for some travel
                         modes on some types of streets, the intent is not to degrade levels of service for
                         any travel mode. Rather, Table 3-1 provides the city with the flexibility to provide
                         a balanced mobility system that meets the mobility needs of all modes and
                         persons of all ages and abilities; and recognizes that to do so it may not always be
                         possible to provide an optimum level of service for all travel modes on all streets.
                         The Environmental Impact Report (EIR) evaluated the transportation impacts
                         of the General Plan, including this Mobility Element. At the time the EIR was
                         prepared, the draft Mobility Element used the terms “prioritized” and “non-pri-
                         oritized” travel modes to indicate whether or not a travel mode is subject to the
                         MMLOS standard (“prioritized”) or not subject to the standard (“non-priori-
                         tized”). In order to clarify the meaning and intent of those terms, this Mobility
                         Element was revised to indicate which modes of travel are subject to the MMLOS
                         standard and which modes are not, without the use of the terms “prioritized” and
                         “non-prioritized.” Where Table 3-1 identifies that a travel mode is subject to the
                         MMLOS standard, the EIR evaluated such modes as “prioritized” travel modes;
                         and where Table 3-1 identifies that a travel mode is not subject to the MMLOS
                         standard, the EIR evaluated such modes as “non-prioritized” travel modes.
      3-10

                                                                                                                      General Plan
Table 3–1:	 CARLSBAD LIVABLE STREETS GUIDE
STREET TYPOLOGY AND ACCOMMODATED MODES
                                                                                                                                      3
ACCOMMODATED       SUBJECT          STREET TYPOLOGY DESCRIPTION AND PREFERRED ATTRIBUTES
MODES              TO MMLOS
                   STANDARD (Y/N)
Freeways
                         Y          •	 High-speed facilities designed to accommodate vehicles and buses moving through the
                                       city and region
                                                                                                                                      Mobility
                         Y          •	 Bicycles and pedestrians are prohibited
Arterial Streets
                         Y          •  These are the primary vehicle routes through the city for both local and regional vehicle
                                       trips.
                                    •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel while efficiently moving vehicles and buses
                                        throughout the city.
                         N          •	 Traffic signals shall be coordinated to optimize vehicle movements
                                    •   Bicycle lanes shall be provided and can be further enhanced or complemented by other
                                        facilities or off-street pathways
                                    •   Pedestrian facilities to be provided consistent with ADA requirements
                         N          •   Mid-block crossings should not be provided
                                    •   On-street parking should be prohibited along these corridors
                                    •   Vertical traffic calming techniques (such as speed tables, humps, etc.) should not be
                                        considered
                         Y          •   Special considerations can be considered on arterials within proximity to schools to
                                        enhance Safe Routes to Schools for pedestrians and bicyclists.
Identity Streets
                         N          •   These streets provide the primary access to and from the heart of the city - the Village
                                    •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel while enhancing mobility for pedestrians
                                        and bicyclists
                                    •   Vehicle speeds should be managed to promote safe pedestrian and bicycle movement
                                    •   No pedestrian shall cross more than five vehicular travel and/or turn lanes
                                    •   In addition to ADA compliant ramps and sidewalks, sidewalks should support the adja-
                                        cent land uses as follows:
                         Y             –– Adjacent to retail uses, modified/new sidewalks should generally be a minimum of
                                          10 feet (12 feet preferred) in width where feasible and taking into consideration the
                                          traffic volumes of the adjacent roadway, and allow for the land use to utilize the
                                          sidewalk with outdoor seating and other activities
                                       –– Adjacent to residential uses, modified/new sidewalks should be a minimum of six
                                          feet in width
                                    Elsewhere, modified/new sidewalks should be a minimum of eight feet in width
                         Y          •   Where feasible, bicycle lanes should be provided
                                    •   Vehicle  speeds should complement the adjacent land uses
                                    •   Bicycle parking should be provided in retail areas
                                    •   Bike racks should be readily provided within the public right-of-way and encouraged on
                                        private property
                                    •   Traffic calming devices, such as curb extensions (bulbouts) or enhanced pedestrian
                                        crossings should be considered and evaluated for implementation
                         N          •   Street furniture shall be oriented toward the businesses
                                    •   Mid-block pedestrian crossings could be provided at appropriate locations (e.g. where
                                        sight distance is adequate and speeds are  appropriate)
                                    •   On-street vehicle parking should be provided. In areas with high parking demand, in-
                                        novative parking management techniques should be implemented / considered
                                    •   Pedestrians should typically be “buffered” from vehicle traffic using landscaping or
                                        parked vehicles
                                                                                                                                   3-11

      City of Carlsbad
             Table 3–1:	 CARLSBAD LIVABLE STREETS GUIDE
             STREET TYPOLOGY AND ACCOMMODATED MODES
3
             ACCOMMODATED      SUBJECT          STREET TYPOLOGY DESCRIPTION AND PREFERRED ATTRIBUTES
             MODES             TO MMLOS
                               STANDARD (Y/N)
             Village Streets
                                      N         •   Primary purpose is to move people throughout the Village; providing access to busi-
                                                    nesses, residences, transit and recreation within the Village area.
Mobility
                                                •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel while enhancing mobility for pedestrians
                                                    and bicyclists.
                                      Y
                                                •   Vehicle speeds should be managed  to promote safe pedestrian and bicycle movement
                                                •   Promote pedestrian and bicycle connectivity through short block lengths
                                                •   Bicycle lanes should be provided
                                      Y
                                                •   Bicycle boulevards can be considered
                                                •   Pedestrians should be accommodated on sidewalks adjacent to the travel way (mini-
                                                    mum 5’ wide sidewalk)
                                      N         •   Mid-block pedestrian crossings and traffic calming devices should be considered, but
                                                    only at locations with high pedestrian activity levels or major destinations/attractions
                                                •   On-street parking may be provided
             Arterial Connector Streets
                                      Y         •   Primary purpose is to connect people to different areas and land uses of the city by con-
                                                    necting to/from arterial streets
                                                •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel while enhancing mobility for pedestrians
                                      Y             and bicyclists and efficiently moving vehicles between arterial streets.
                                                •   Bicycle lanes should be provided
                                      Y         •   Pedestrians should be accommodated on sidewalks adjacent to the travel way (mini-
                                                    mum 5’ wide sidewalk)
                                                •   Mid-block pedestrian crossings and traffic calming devices should be considered, but
                                      N             only at locations with high pedestrian activity levels or major destinations/attractions
                                                •  On-street parking may be provided
             Neighborhood Connector Street
                                      N         •   Primary purpose is to connect people to different neighborhoods and land uses of the
                                                    city
                                                •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel while enhancing mobility for pedestrians
                                                    and bicyclists.
                                      Y
                                                •   Vehicle speeds should be managed to promote safe pedestrian and bicycle movement
                                                •   Bicycle lanes should be provided
                                      Y         •   Bicycle boulevards can be considered
                                                •   Pedestrians should be accommodated on sidewalks adjacent to the travel way (mini-
                                                    mum 5’ wide sidewalk)
                                      N         •   Mid-block pedestrian crossings and traffic calming devices should be considered, but
                                                    only at locations with high pedestrian activity levels or major destinations/attractions
                                                •   On-street parking may be provided
      3-12

                                                                                                                    General Plan
Table 3–1:	 CARLSBAD LIVABLE STREETS GUIDE
STREET TYPOLOGY AND ACCOMMODATED MODES
                                                                                                                                     3
ACCOMMODATED      SUBJECT          STREET TYPOLOGY DESCRIPTION AND PREFERRED ATTRIBUTES
MODES             TO MMLOS
                  STANDARD (Y/N)
Employment/Transit Connector Streets
                        N          •	 Primary purpose is to connect people to and from the employment areas of the city, as
                                      well as important destinations and major transit facilities.
                                                                                                                                     Mobility
                                   •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel while enhancing mobility for pedestrians
                        Y              and bicyclists and efficiently moving buses to employment, transit stations and major
                                       destinations.
                                   •   Vehicle speeds should be managed to promote safe pedestrian and bicycle movement
                        Y          •	 Direct connections to bus stops should be provided
                                   •   Enhanced bus stops should be considered that include shelters, benches, and lighting
                                   •   Bicycle lanes and sidewalks should be provided
                        Y
                                   •   Pedestrian crossing distances should be minimized
                                   •   On-street parking may be provided
Coastal Streets
                        N          •   Primary purpose is to move people along the city’s ocean waterfront and connect
                                       people to the beach, recreation, businesses and residences in close proximity to the
                                       waterfront.  The street serves as a destination for people who seek to drive, walk and
                                       bicycle along the ocean waterfront.
                                   •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel while enhancing mobility for pedestrians
                                       and bicyclists.
                        Y          •   Vehicle  speeds shall be managed to support uses along the coast
                                   •   Enhanced bicycle and pedestrian crossings should be provided, including:
                                       –– High visibility crosswalks
                                       –– Enhanced pedestrian notifications (e.g.  responsive push-button devices)
                                       –– Enhanced bicycle detection
                        Y
                                       –– Bicycle lanes shall be provided and can be further enhanced or complemented by
                                          other facilities (such as bicycle lane buffers or off-street pathways)
                                   •   Pedestrian facilities should be a minimum of five feet and shall strive for six to eight
                                       feet in width and shall conform to ADA requirements
                                   •   Pedestrian crossing distances should be minimized
                        N
                                   •   Trail facilities should be encouraged
                                   •   Opportunities for mid-block pedestrian crossings should be investigated
                                   •   On-street parking should be provided
                                   •   Transit facility and operation improvements should be encouraged
                                                                                                                                  3-13

      City of Carlsbad
             Table 3–1:	 CARLSBAD LIVABLE STREETS GUIDE
3
             STREET TYPOLOGY AND ACCOMMODATED MODES
             ACCOMMODATED         SUBJECT          STREET TYPOLOGY DESCRIPTION AND PREFERRED ATTRIBUTES
             MODES                TO MMLOS
                                  STANDARD (Y/N)
             School Streets
                                        N          •   Primary purpose is to connect people to schools from nearby residential neighbor-
Mobility
                                                       hoods.
                                                   •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel with an emphasis on providing safe pedes-
                                                       trian and bicycle access for students traveling to and from nearby schools.
                                                   •   Vehicle  speeds shall be managed to support school uses (typically 25 MPH)
                                        Y
                                                   •   Enhanced bicycle and pedestrian crossings should be provided, including:
                                                      –– High visibility crosswalks
                                                      –– Enhanced pedestrian notifications (e.g.  responsive push-button devices)
                                        Y             –– Enhanced bicycle detection
                                                      –– Bicycle lanes shall be provided and can be further enhanced or complemented by
                                                         other facilities or off-street pathways
                                                   •   Pedestrian facilities should be a minimum of six feet and shall strive for eight feet in
                                                       width and shall conform to ADA requirements
                                        N
                                                   •   Pedestrian crossing distances should be minimized
                                                   •   Opportunities for mid-block pedestrian crossings should be investigated
                                                   •   Traffic calming devices that improve service levels and safety for pedestrians and bicy-
                                                       clists should be considered
             Industrial Streets
                                        Y          •   Primary purpose is to connect people to businesses within the city’s industrial parks.
                                                   •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel while efficiently moving vehicles and buses
                                                       from arterial streets and employment/transit connector streets to businesses.
                                        N
                                                   •   Traffic calming devices are generally discouraged given the propensity for larger trucks
                                                       and heavy vehicles in this area
                                        N          •   On-street parking may be provided as long as it does not interfere with the turning
                                                       radii of heavy vehicles.
                                        Y
             Local/Neighborhood Street
                                        N          •   Primary purpose is to connect people to and through residential neighborhoods and
                                                       local areas of the city.
                                                   •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel while enhancing mobility for pedestrians
                                                       and bicyclists.
                                        Y          •   Vehicle speeds should be managed to promote safe pedestrian and bicycle movement
                                                   •   Pedestrians should be accommodated on a sidewalk or soft surface trail (such as de-
                                                       composed granite) unless those facilities are  inconsistent with the existing desirable
                                                       neighborhood character
                                        Y
                                                   •   Bicycles can be accommodated with a bicycle lane or route if vehicle volumes and/or
                                                       speeds necessitate; otherwise bicycles can share the street
                                                   •   Bicycle boulevards can be considered
                                        N          •   Traffic calming measures should be considered when supported by the neighborhood
                                                       or when warranted for safety reasons
                                                   •   On-street parking should be considered
      3-14

                                                                                                                     General Plan
Table 3–1:	 CARLSBAD LIVABLE STREETS GUIDE
                                                                                                                                      3
STREET TYPOLOGY AND ACCOMMODATED MODES
ACCOMMODATED       SUBJECT            STREET TYPOLOGY DESCRIPTION AND PREFERRED ATTRIBUTES
MODES              TO MMLOS
                   STANDARD (Y/N)
Bicycle/Pedestrian Pathway
                           Y          •   Primary purpose is to provide safe bicycle and pedestrian access throughout the com-
                                                                                                                                      Mobility
                                          munity by connecting people to residences, businesses and recreation uses.
                                      •   For bicycles and pedestrians only – no vehicular access is permitted
                           Y
                                      •   Serves commuters and recreational users
Streets within ½ Mile of a Transit Center
                          N           •   Primary purpose is to connect people to/from the city’s transit centers.
                                      •   Designed to safely move all modes of travel while enhancing mobility for pedestrians
                                          and bicyclists and efficiently moving vehicles and buses to/from transit centers.
                           Y          •   Vehicle speeds should be managed to promote safe pedestrian and bicycle movement
                                      •   Provides access to the Breeze/COASTER system via enhanced bicycle/pedestrian connec-
                                          tivity or via shuttle service  from the stations to the ultimate destination
                           Y
                                      •   Could include enhanced transit systems, such as signal priority for transit, dedicated
                                          ROW for transit, or queue bypass lanes.
                                      •   Mid-block pedestrian crossings and traffic calming devices should be considered in
                           Y
                                          these areas
                                      •   Parking should be provided and managed using innovative parking techniques
    Multi-Modal Levels of Service
    Traditionally, transportation systems have been designed to achieve a level
    of service from the perspective of the driver, not pedestrians or bicyclists.
    However, cities throughout the country are now designing their transportation
    systems to achieve levels of service for all travel modes. Some cities, such as Fort
    Collins, CO, San Francisco, CA, Gainesville, FL, Charlotte, NC, and others,
    have been doing this for more than a decade; and in 2010, national guidelines
    were developed by the Transportation Research Board to encourage other cities
    to establish levels of service for all travel modes.
    The California Complete Streets Act (2008) requires cities in California to plan
    for a balanced, multi-modal transportation system that meets the needs of all
    travel modes. This Mobility Element establishes a multi-modal level of service
    (MMLOS) methodology for Carlsbad that determines the vehicle level of service
    by the Highway Capacity Manual and evaluates the service levels for pedestri-
    ans, bicyclists and transit users.
    The city’s MMLOS methodology will provide a qualitative “grade” assigned to
    specified travel modes (see Table 3-1), ranging from a level of service (LOS) A to
    LOS F. LOS A reflects a high service standard for a travel mode (e.g. outstanding
    characteristics and experience for that mode) and LOS F would reflect a poor
    service standard for a travel mode (e.g. congestion for vehicles, no bicycle, pedes-
    trian, or transit facilities, etc.). Thresholds are identified to balance supply and
    demand to create a sustainable system of public right-of-way, keeping in mind
                                                                                                                                   3-15

      City of Carlsbad
3
                         on-going maintenance of the infrastructure and implementation of livable
                         streets. The level of service of the various travel modes are evaluated according
                         to the following factors:
                         •	 Vehicular Level of Service. Level of service will be determined by the
                            most recent version of the Highway Capacity Manual. This methodology
Mobility
                            evaluates vehicles based on their freedom to maneuver and overall delay
                            experienced at intersections.
                         •	 Pedestrian Level of Service. Level of service to be evaluated using the
                            Carlsbad MMLOS method. This method evaluates the quality of the
                            pedestrian system (e.g. number of vehicle lanes that need to be crossed
                            and the speed of adjacent traffic) and the friendliness of the infrastructure
                            at intersections (e.g. pedestrian countdown heads, dedicated pedestrian
                            phases (e.g. a scramble phase), curb extensions, refuge median).
                         •	 Bicycle Levels of Service. Level of service to be evaluated using the
                            Carlsbad MMLOS method. This method evaluates the quality of the
                            bicycle system (e.g. bicycle route, bicycle lanes, or bicycle pathway; pres-
                            ence of bicycle buffers from the vehicle travel way), the amenities of the
                            system (e.g. presence of bicycle parking), and the friendliness of the infra-
                            structure (e.g. bicycle detection at intersections, pavement conditions,
                            presence of vehicle parking).
                         •	 Transit Levels of Service. Level of service to be evaluated using the
                            Carlsbad MMLOS method. This method evaluates the transit vehicle
                            right-of-way (e.g. dedicated or shared, signal priority), hours and fre-
                            quency of service (e.g. weekday/weekend hours, peak period headway);
                            performance (e.g. on-time or late); amenities and safety (e.g. lighting,
                            covered stop, bench, on-board bike/surfboard storage); and connectivity
                            (e.g. to other transit routes, employment areas, schools, visitor attrac-
                            tions, and other major destinations).
                         Future Operations and Street Improvements
                         Most of the envisioned Carlsbad street system is built out. The remaining planned
                         street improvements are summarized in Table 3-2; these facilities serve the needs
                         of land uses identified in the Land Use and Community Design Element. The
                         planned streets are identified on the Street Network map, Figure 3-1.
                         In addition to the new street connectivity and capacity expansion described in
                         Table 3-2, the city is also implementing a citywide traffic signal system upgrade
                         effort. This effort includes retiming of traffic signals, upgrading the control-
                         ler and detection technology, and integration of the traffic control system
                         to a single point traffic management center. This enables the city to monitor,
                         manage, and adjust traffic signal timing along major corridors to improve
                         mobility and manage vehicle flow within the city. Improved traffic signal timing
                         also enhances the safety for drivers, improves air quality by reducing emissions
                         and brake dust, and improves commute times.
      3-16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 3-1
             OCEANSIDE
                                                     78                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 3-1:	 Street System
                City of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GENERAL PLAN
                Oceanside                           RO             RD
                                                M AR N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Street System Map
                            Buena                               DR
                                                          AG                                                                                                                                                                                                      78
                            Vista
                            Lagoon                   IL
                                                            E               EL                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Freeway
                                                        L                                                                                                     Calavera
                                                      V
                                                AD                                                                                                            Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Arterial Streets
                                                                                 INO
                                             SB
                                           RL
                                                                             C AM
                                      CA                                                                                           CO
                                                                                                                   E                      E                                                City of                                                                                              Identity Streets
                                                                                                               AV                      EG
                                                                                                                                     LL                                                   Oceanside
                                                                                                             ACK                                                                                                                                                                                Village Streets
                                                                                      R EA                                                   D
                                                                                        L              AR                                BLV
                                                                     E                                   M                                                                                                                                                                                      Arterial Connector Streets
                                                               K   AV                               TA
                                                            AC
                                                   M      AR                                                                                      RD
                                                 TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Neighborhood Connector Streets
                                                                                                                                  ON
                                                                                                                                NN
                                                                                                                           CA
                                                                                                                              EL                                                                                                                                                                Coastal Streets
                                                                                                                                      CA                                                               Maerkle
                                                                                                                                        MIN                                                            Reservoir
                                                                                                                                           O                                                                                                                                                    School Streets
                                                                                                                                                        RE
                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                            Agua                                                                                              L                                                                                                                                 Employment/Transit Connector Streets
                                           BA                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SAN MARCOS
                                       R LS
                                                               H ed io nda
                                     CA
                                                                      La goo n
                                                                                                                                    FARA                                                                                                City of                                                 Industrial Streets
                                           D                                                                                            DA    Y                                                                                          Vista
                                                                         CANN                                                                      AV
                                                                                                                                                     E                                                                                                                                          Local/Neighborhood Street
                                                 D                               ON
P a c i f i c                                BLV                                            RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Planned Arterial Streets
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                   PALOM A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                              T    RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Planned Arterial Connector Streets
                                                                                                                                                              MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                               -PALOMAR                                                                                           City of
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                                                                                                                         Planned Local/Neighborhood Streets
                                                                                                         PORT           RD                                                                                                                                      San Marcos
                                                                                                    AI R
                                                                                        PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                     ROB
                                                                                                                                                                                        LE                                                                                                      Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DR
                                                                                                                                                                  C           VIDA
                                                                                                                                                                      A M INO                                    IA    LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ETT                                       SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           INS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PO                                                                                      Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Transit Centers
                                                                                                                                   LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                            TTIA                                                                                                     A R                                                        Half Mile Radius
                                                                                                                          SE                                                                                                     A LG
                                                                                                                       IN
                                                                                                                PO                         AV                                                                                                                                                   City Limits
                                                                                     L SB
                                                                                                                                              IA   RA
                                                                                 C AR                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                     AD                                                                   KW
                                                                                            D
                                                                                        BLV
                                                                                                                                   Ba tiquitos            Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                      AVE
                                                                                                                                           LA          C O STA                                                                                                   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO           E                         M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O JU N
                                                                                                                                                                                           MINO                                                                       IN
                                                                                                                                                                                         CA                                           FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                      EL                                                                                  IPE                                                   500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D                                      RO
                                                                                                    SAN                                                 City of
                                                                                                                                                       Encinitas                             RE                                      N TA
                                                                                                      DI E G                                                                                      AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SA                                                                                            100
                                                                                                         O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O                                                                                           ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                  RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                              ERN
                                                                                                          RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0            0.5          1                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; SANDAG, 2013; Fehr & Peers, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                            ENCINITAS                                                                                                 Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3-17

                                                                                      General Plan
                                                                                                  3
 Table 3–2:	 PLANNED CITY OF CARLSBAD STREET CAPACITY
             IMPROVEMENTS
 IMPROVEMENT NAME            IMPROVEMENT DESCRIPTION
 College Boulevard           Complete improvements between Cannon Road
                             and El Camino Real to arterial street typology
                                                                                                  Mobility
                             standards
 Poinsettia Lane             Complete improvements between Cassia Road
                             and El Camino Real to connector street typology
                             standards
 Camino Junipero             Extend to the eastern city limit as a local street
 Extension
 Interstate-5 North Coast    Includes the widening of Interstate-5 to include
 Project                     high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) (carpool) managed
                             lanes and auxiliary lanes connecting adjacent
                             interchange off-ramps and on-ramps as needed
 Interstate-5/State          While in preliminary design, identifying
 Route-78 Interchange        transportation options will relieve congestion
 Improvement                 on the freeway as it is a bottleneck that impacts
                             adjacent interchanges, regional streets, and the
                             movement of goods and people. This interchange
                             is not located within the City of Carlsbad but is
                             part of the Caltrans Public Works Plan for the
                             Interstate-5 North Coast Corridor Project.
Future Traffic Operations
With build-out of the Land Use and Community Design Element, the completed
street network presented in Table 3-1 and on Figure 3-1 will have capacity con-
straints on arterial streets and on freeways within and adjacent to the city. The
analysis of the Land Use and Community Design Element indicated that the
following freeways and arterial street facilities will operate at LOS E or LOS F in
the city at build-out:
•	 Interstate-5
•	 State Route-78
•	 La Costa Avenue between Interstate-5 and El Camino Real
•	 El Camino Real between Palomar Airport Road and La Costa Avenue
•	 Palomar Airport Road between Interstate-5 and College Boulevard
•	 Palomar Airport Road between El Camino Real and Melrose Drive
These facilities would generally be congested during peak periods; however,
during most hours of the day, these facilities would have sufficient capacity
to serve the vehicle demand. The city does not have regulatory authority over
Interstate-5 or State Route-78 and has no control over managing traffic on those
                                                                                               3-19

      City of Carlsbad
3
                         facilities. When these freeways are beyond capacity, some motorists will use City
                         of Carlsbad arterials rather than the freeways to bypass congestion. Adjacent
                         communities outside of Carlsbad also utilize Carlsbad’s regional infrastructure
                         to bypass congestion on freeways.
                         The four Carlsbad arterial street segments listed above would need to be
Mobility
                         widened beyond their six-lane cross-section to operate at the city’s standard for
                         vehicle level of service on those facilities (LOS D or better); however, creating
                         streets wider than six lanes is inconsistent with the goals of this Mobility
                         Element. In addition, widening these streets beyond six lanes creates new chal-
                         lenges for intersection operations, maintenance, and storm water management.
                         Therefore, rather than widening these arterial streets beyond six lanes, the city
                         shall implement transportation demand management (e.g. promote travel by
                         modes other than the single-occupant vehicle), transportation system manage-
                         ment (e.g. signal timing coordination and improved transit service) and livable
                         streets techniques to better manage the transportation system as a whole.
                         Concurrent with City Council adoption of this Mobility Element, the city’s
                         Growth Management standard for circulation identified in the Citywide
                         Facilities and Improvement Plan will be amended to reflect the livable streets
                         approach to mobility described in this element.
                         Bicycling, Walking, and Transit
                         A balanced transportation system in Carlsbad will provide adequate facilities
                         for people to bicycle, walk, or take transit to their destinations. To achieve this
                         balanced transportation system, service levels for bicycle, pedestrian and transit
                         modes will be maintained/enhanced on a variety of streets, as shown in Table
                         3-1 and Figure 3-1.
                         In addition to maintaining and enhancing bicycling, walking and transit
                         service levels on streets, the city has a series of off-street trails and pathways
                         that also serve the mobility needs of bicyclists and pedestrians (these facilities
                         are described in more detail in the Open Space, Conservation and Recreation
                         Element). Additionally, transit is provided on dedicated right-of-way within
                         the city, consisting of the COASTER commuter rail line. This Mobility Element
                         integrates and enhances the service levels of travel modes that complement uti-
                         lization of transit facilities near the COASTER stations.
                         Bicycle Facility Classification System
                         Caltrans has defined three bikeway facility types in Chapter 1000 of the
                         Highway Design Manual. These facility types are described below as well as in
                         the City of Carlsbad Bicycle Master Plan.
      3-20

                                                                                      General Plan
                                                                                                  3
Class I Bikeway (bike path) – provides a separated corridor that is not served
by streets and highways and is away from the influence of parallel streets. Class
I bikeways are for non-vehicle use only with opportunities for direct access and
recreational benefits, right-of-way for the exclusive use of bicycles and pedestri-
ans, and cross flow conflicts are minimized.
                                                                                                  Mobility
Class II Bikeway (bike lane) – provides a delineated right-of-way assigned to
bicyclists to enable more predictable movements, accommodating bicyclists
through corridors where insufficient room exists for side-by-side sharing of
existing streets by motorists and bicyclists.
Class III Bikeway (bike route) – shared facility that serves either continuity
to other bicycle facilities or designates preferred routes through high demand
corridors.
In addition to the three facility types described above, a number of local streets
help complete the bicycle network. These streets typically do not have a bikeway
designation; however, the entire street system may be fully adequate for safe
and efficient bicycle travel, where signing and pavement marking for bicycle use
may be unnecessary. These are most commonly found along local streets where
vehicle speeds are relatively low, which enables bicycle travel to be accommo-
dated with vehicle travel.
Proposed Bikeway System
As of 2010, there was an estimated 98 miles of bicycle facilities in Carlsbad.
Of these facilities, approximately 92 miles were Class II bicycle lanes located
throughout the city on streets such as Carlsbad Boulevard, Carlsbad Village
Drive, Tamarack Avenue, Chestnut Avenue, El Camino Real, Palomar Airport
Road, Rancho Santa Fe Road, Melrose Drive, College Boulevard, Cannon Road,
and La Costa Avenue. These on-street bikeways provide direct routes for expe-
rienced cyclists comfortable with riding on relatively high vehicle volume and
speed streets. New cyclists may be encouraged to use these on-street bikeways
by designing the bikeways to increase the comfort and safety of less experienced
riders, narrowing travel lanes to manage vehicle travel speeds, implementing
traffic calming measures, and by promoting land use patterns that decrease
distances between destinations. In addition to incorporating additional routes
into the bikeway network, clear directional/way-finding signage and secure
bicycle parking at schools, shopping centers, beaches, employment centers and
transit stops will encourage more people to ride bicycles and enhance the level
of comfort for all.
While the majority of the Mobility Element streets within the city currently
include a bicycle facility of some type within the right-of-way, there are several
gaps at critical locations. In particular, bicycle lanes are discontinuous along
Palomar Airport Road, just east of Carlsbad Boulevard, and within many
                                                                                               3-21

      City of Carlsbad
3
                         of the Interstate-5 interchanges and crossings. These gaps and other barriers,
                         such as the railroad and freeway, greatly diminish connectivity to the coastline
                         for cyclists. Caltrans’ Interstate-5 North Coast Corridor Public Works Plan –
                         a proposed 40-year program to create a multi-modal system of rail, highway,
                         transit, bicycle and pedestrian improvements that span from La Jolla to
Mobility
                         Oceanside – proposes additional trail connections across lagoons and along the
                         freeway, and to enhance all interchanges and crossings to better integrate and
                         accommodate bicyclists and pedestrians.
                         The Carlsbad Bicycle Master Plan identifies the location of bikeways and
                         recommends the enhancement of the existing bicycle network with the imple-
                         mentation of approximately 6.5 miles of new Class I bike paths, 2.8 miles of
                         new Class II bike lanes, and 4.2 miles of new Class III bike routes. The planned
                         bikeways include the Coastal Rail Trail, a Class I bike path on Carlsbad
                         Boulevard at Ponto, two Class II bike lanes – one on Hillside Drive and another
                         on Avenida Encinas, and five Class III bike route projects in the northwest
                         quadrant of the city.
                         In addition to the planned bikeways and bicycle facilities, the Carlsbad Bicycle
                         Master Plan outlines new educational and promotional programs aimed at bicy-
                         clists and motorists. These programs include bicycle parking improvements,
                         multi-modal (transit) support facilities, bicycle safety and education programs
                         for cyclists and motorists, safe routes to schools programs, community and
                         employer outreach programs, continued development of bikeway network
                         maps, and bike-to-work and school day events, among others.
                         The Carlsbad Bicycle Master Plan is a comprehensive document that provides
                         detailed information on the city’s bicycle network and a bicycle network map
                         depicting existing and planned bikeways and facilities.
                         Pedestrian Facilities
                         Pedestrian facilities (i.e., sidewalks, crosswalks, trails) are a key component of
                         a multi-modal transportation system, which should enable people of all age
                         groups and abilities to safely walk to their destinations. Pedestrian facilities
                         connect various land uses, like neighborhoods, schools, shopping, employment,
                         transit stations, community services, and recreation. Areas that are particularly
                         attractive to pedestrians include the coastline, lagoon areas and the Carlsbad
                         Village, which offers a pedestrian friendly environment and concentration of
                         shopping, dining and entertainment uses. In general, pedestrian-attracting
                         land uses are fairly evenly distributed across the city.
                         Proposed Pedestrian System
                         Carlsbad has adopted several programs and plans related to improving the
                         walking environment. The city’s Pedestrian Master Plan identifies the location
                         of pedestrian facilities and guides the future development and enhancement of
      3-22

                                                                                  General Plan
                                                                                              3
pedestrian facilities to ensure that walking becomes an integral mode of trans-
portation in Carlsbad. The Carlsbad Residential Traffic Management Program
provides a mechanism for community members to report issues relating to
speeding and traffic volumes on residential streets, which assists the city in
“calming” traffic in these areas to make them more comfortable for vehicles,
                                                                                              Mobility
pedestrians and bicyclists.
Physical barriers to pedestrian access include gaps in sidewalks, topography,
lagoons, high-volume high-speed streets, incomplete or missing road segments,
and regional infrastructure such as freeways and railways. There are four sig-
nificant concentrations of high pedestrian needs across the city, including the
following locations:
•	 The entire northwest quadrant, especially the Carlsbad Village area,
   Barrio area and along the coast
•	 The entire coastal area along Carlsbad Boulevard
•	 Several locations along El Camino Real, near Camino Vida Roble, Aviara
   Parkway/Alga Road and La Costa Avenue
•	 The southeastern portion of the city, stemming from the intersection of
   La Costa Avenue and Rancho Santa Fe Road
A range of potential improvement projects exist to enhance pedestrian mobility,
local connectivity, usage, safety and accessibility. These improvements include
missing sidewalk connectivity, upgrading substandard sidewalks, new connec-
tions to pedestrian attracting designations (such as access across the railroad
track to the beach at Chestnut Avenue, for example), safe routes to school,
enhanced crosswalks, pedestrian countdown signals, improved signage and
markings and provision of ADA improvements.
Proposed Transit System
Future transit service in the city will primarily be coordinated by NCTD.
However, there are several transit improvements, which are part of San Diego
Association of Governments (SANDAG) regional planning efforts, which are
reflected in this Mobility Element:
•	 Coastal rail improvements are proposed for the tracks serving the
   COASTER and Surfliner trains in San Diego County along the Los
   Angeles to San Diego rail corridor. These proposed improvements
   include double tracking, bridge replacements, grade separated pedes-
   trian crossings, safety improvements for at-grade crossings, and station
   improvements. Improvements to the COASTER service (2020 and 2030)
   are also proposed and would increase service and reduce headways.
•	 Route 653 (2035) is a proposed bus rapid transit (BRT) route which would
   operate in the peak period between Kearny Mesa and Palomar Airport
   Road.
                                                                                           3-23

      City of Carlsbad
3
                         The future transit improvements described above will continue to advance
                         transit service in the city. Other potential improvements to the rail corridor
                         that the city is currently pursuing through discussions with NCTD include
                         the creation of quiet zones and construction of a grade separated corridor
                         that could include grade separated crossings at Carlsbad Village Drive, Grand
Mobility
                         Avenue, Tamarack Avenue and Cannon Road, as well as new pedestrian and
                         bicycle crossings at Chestnut Avenue, Chinquapin Avenue and the Village and
                         Poinsettia COASTER stations, and other locations.
                         One key component to improving transit use is improving the “first mile/last
                         mile” experience for transit users. This typically includes end of trip facilities
                         (bike lockers and racks, showers, changing rooms, etc.) and better connectivity
                         from the transit stop to the ultimate destination via bicycle facilities, pedestrian
                         facilities, local transit circulators, shuttles, etc.
                         Carlsbad’s future transit effectiveness will be dependent on major employers
                         assisting with providing some of these “first mile/last mile” facilities through
                         transportation demand management (TDM) measures. TDM is envisioned to
                         include shuttle circulators from transit stations to major employers and des-
                         tinations, showers and changing rooms at those locations, and a host of other
                         typical TDM techniques that would support transit usage and the connection
                         to the ultimate destination. This Mobility Element also supports TDM through
                         potential incentives (such as reduced parking standards for TDM implementa-
                         tion) to further support transit access to these destinations.
                         The final component to improving transit use in the city is working with
                         NCTD to improve the transit experience; particularly along the bus routes. This
                         includes improving bus stops in the city to ensure that they are well lit, have
                         seating, and are covered to protect users from weather.
                         Connectivity to Support Mobility
                         Connectivity in the city is critical to achieving the Carlsbad Community Vision.
                         As previously described, there are a number of street improvements that are
                         planned that will complete connections within the city. This Mobility Element
                         also recommends additional connectivity for bicycles and pedestrians, as noted
                         below:
                         •	 Cannon Road connection. Provide a bicycle/pedestrian facility that
                            would begin at the current eastern terminus of Cannon Road and con-
                            tinue eastward to the city’s eastern boundary.
                         •	 Marron Road connection. Provide a bicycle/pedestrian facility that
                            would begin at the current eastern terminus of Marron Road and extend
                            eastward to the city’s eastern boundary.
                         •	 Additional crossings of Interstate-5 and the railroad. Continue to look
                            for opportunities to add crossings of these two barriers and improve
      3-24

                                                                                      General Plan
                                                                                                  3
   east-west connectivity to and from the coast. Key connections will
   include: improvements (bicycle, pedestrian, and vehicular) to the cross-
   ings at Chestnut Avenue (under the freeway) and at Chinquapin Avenue
   (over the freeway); and new connections (bicycle and pedestrian) across
   the railroad at Chestnut Avenue and Chinquapin Avenue. Additionally,
                                                                                                  Mobility
   Caltrans is designing a number of new pedestrian and bicyclist connec-
   tions along and across Interstate-5 and near the lagoons as part of the
   Interstate-5 North Coast Corridor Public Works Plan. The city will con-
   tinue to coordinate with Caltrans on these improvements.
•	 Improved accessibility to the lagoons and to the coast are envisioned to
   improve connectivity to those areas.
Parking
Parking is critical to ensuring the success of any area. Inadequate parking means
that businesses and residents suffer. Too much parking underutilizes valuable
land; promotes lower density development; discourages using other forms of
transportation (such as public transit); spreads out land uses; and creates gaps in
store fronts, thereby requiring the use of the automobile. Additionally, too much
parking also requires more driveways for accessibility, introducing conflicts
between pedestrians and vehicles. Restrictive parking requirements impact the
ability to rejuvenate/repurpose older buildings and revitalize activity centers
that can be better served and connected by enhancing facilities and amenities
for bicyclists and pedestrians. Therefore, it is important to manage parking such
that there is enough to support the needs generated by the use, but not so much
that it wastes land and impairs other ways of getting around.
The city’s Zoning Ordinance and adopted master and specific plans provide
standards for parking facilities based on development types within the city. To
promote efficient parking supply, the city will develop flexible parking require-
ments that may include the following techniques:
•	 Shared parking. Continue to allow uses that have different parking
   demands at different times of the day to share the same parking facili-
   ties. This is an effective way to minimize pavement, allow denser land use,
   provide for more landscaping, and provide improved walkability within
   a mixed use area. The best example of shared parking is an office build-
   ing and an apartment building as office’s peak parking demand occurs
   at 10:00 a.m. and apartment’s peak parking demand occurs at 11:00 p.m.
•	 Collective parking. Allow uses in mixed use projects/areas to reduce the
   standard parking rate to account for shared mixed use on-site parking.
•	 Unbundled parking. Rather than provide free guaranteed parking,
   “unbundle” the parking from the development and require residents and/
   or employees to pay for use of a parking space.
                                                                                               3-25

      City of Carlsbad
3
                         •	 Park once. A strategy in destination districts to enable visitors to “park
                            once” and visit a series of destinations. Park once strategies work well in
                            areas like the Village and areas that are well connected by pedestrian and
                            bicycle facilities. The creation of centralized parking areas supports this
                            strategy.
Mobility
                         •	 In-lieu parking fees. Continue strategies in appropriate areas that allow
                            developers to contribute fees toward the development of a common
                            parking facility in lieu of providing on-site parking. This works best in
                            concentrated commercial areas, and assists in paying for unified struc-
                            tured parking and provides developers an opportunity to increase density
                            on their parcels.
                         •	 Parking management strategies. A business district or businesses
                            manage high demand parking locations and destinations through a
                            number of different strategies including demand pricing, time restric-
                            tions, valet parking, and other techniques.
                         •	 Public-private partnerships. The city, business owners, and developers
                            collaborate to provide both private and public parking opportunities.
                            Instances where this works well include parcels owned by the city, where
                            a private entity develops, manages, and enforces parking in these public
                            lots.
                         •	 Parking locater signs. Electronic monitoring devices that identify the
                            available parking in a given facility and utilize changeable message signs
                            to assist travelers in identifying available parking locations. This may
                            require modifications to the city’s Zoning Ordinance to be implemented
                            in some areas of the city.
                         •	 Parking way-finding signs. Signs identifying where public parking is
                            available, which supports the “park once” concept.
                         •	 Reduced parking standards. Reduce parking standards in areas that
                            are well served by transit, provide shuttle accessibility to the COASTER
                            station, provide parking cash out programs (employers pay employees to
                            not drive a single occupancy vehicle to work), or provide other programs
                            that will reduce parking demand.
                         •	 Biking equals business program. Businesses provide bicycle parking or
                            corrals and provide incentives to encourage their patrons and employees
                            to ride rather than drive.
                         •	 Transit equals business program. Businesses provide their customers
                            and employees incentives to encourage them to use transit rather than
                            drive.
                         •	 Bicycle corrals in-lieu of vehicle parking. For certain businesses, reduce
                            required onsite parking for vehicles if they provide a bicycle corral that
                            accommodates more people.
      3-26

                                                                                       General Plan
                                                                                                   3
Although there are additional parking strategies that are available and may
become available in the future, most of the strategies work best in smart growth/
mixed use development areas and will be necessary to accomplish the goals and
visions identified in the General Plan and this Mobility Element.
                                                                                                   Mobility
Transportation Demand Management and Traffic
Signal Management
This Mobility Element also supports and promotes TDM and traffic signal
management (TSM) techniques.
TDM consists of programs and policies to reduce the demand for the single
occupant automobile. Common techniques include carpool programs,
car-sharing and bike-sharing programs, flexible work hours, telecommute pro-
visions, shuttle services to nearby transit stations, employee transit subsidies
(e.g. employers will subsidize bus or rail tickets), installation of bicycle facili-
ties (lockers, racks, lanes, showers at employment areas, etc.), or other measures
that would reduce the demand to drive, particularly during the peak commute
hours. TDM is critical for the city to build-out without expanding the trans-
portation infrastructure beyond what is envisioned in this Mobility Element.
Additionally, as previously described, TDM is a major component in improving
the effectiveness of transit as it can assist in serving the “first mile/last mile”
component of a transit trip.
The city has also implemented a state-of-the-practice TSM system. This system
integrates traffic signals in the city to a single access point, allowing city staff
to monitor and update signal timings to improve safety and mobility for all
users in the city. This Mobility Element supports further implementation of this
program and use of other technologies that become available, which have the
ability to improve mobility for all users of the city’s transportation system.
                                                                                                3-27

      City of Carlsbad
3                        3.4	 Goals and Policies
                         Goals
                         3-G.1	 Keep Carlsbad moving with livable streets that provide a safe,
                                balanced, cost-effective, multi-modal transportation system
Mobility
                                (vehicles, pedestrians, bikes, transit), accommodating the mobility
                                needs of all community members, including children, the elderly and
                                the disabled.
                         3-G.2	 Improve connectivity for residents, visitors and businesses.
                         3-G.3	 Provide inviting streetscapes that encourage walking and promote
                                livable streets.
                         3-G.4	 Manage parking to support all modes of transportation and ensure
                                efficient use of land.
                         3-G.5	 Implement transportation demand and traffic signal management
                                techniques to improve mobility.
                         3-G.6	 Protect and enhance the visual, environmental and historical charac-
                                teristics of Carlsbad through sensitive planning and design of scenic
                                transportation corridors.
                         3-G.7	 Provide for the safe and efficient movement of goods throughout
                                the city.
                         Implementing Policies
                         Street Typology and Multimodal Levels of Service
                         3-P.1	 Implement a comprehensive livable streets network. This network,
                                as outlined in Table 3-1 and shown on Figure 3-1, identifies the trans-
                                portation modes that shall be accommodated, based on street
                                typology, to ensure accessibility of the city’s street system to persons
                                of all ages and abilities.
                         3-P.2	 Integrate livable streets in all capital improvement projects, where
                                applicable, as well as new development projects.
                         3-P.3	 Apply and update the city’s multi-modal level of service (MMLOS)
                                methodology and guidelines that reflect the core values of the
                                Carlsbad Community Vision related to transportation and con-
                                nectivity. Utilize the MMLOS methodology to evaluate impacts of
                                individual development projects and amendments to the General
                                Plan on the city’s transportation system.
                         3-P.4	 Implement the city’s MMLOS methodology and maintain LOS D or
                                better for each mode of travel for which the MMLOS standard is
                                applicable, as identified in Table 3-1 and Figure 3-1.
      3-28

                                                                                  General Plan
                                                                                              3
3-P.5	 Require developers to construct or pay their fair share toward
       improvements for all travel modes consistent with this Mobility
       Element, the Growth Management Plan, and specific impacts associ-
       ated with their development.
3-P.6	 Require future development projects, which are determined during
                                                                                              Mobility
       site-specific environmental review to have a significant impact on
       freeway facilities (I-5 and SR-78), to implement a freeway traffic
       mitigation program approved by the city that will avoid, reduce or
       offset the increase in freeway traffic directly attributable to the
       proposed project. The mitigation program may include, but is not
       limited to, payment of a fair share fee to Caltrans for necessary
       improvements to affected freeway facilities or to NCTD or such
       other transit agency for improvement of public transit on affected
       freeways, or such other activities as will avoid, reduce or offset the
       project’s significant impacts on freeway facilities.
3-P.7	 Encourage Caltrans to identify and construct necessary improve-
       ments to improve service levels on Interstate-5 and State Route 78.
3-P.8	 Utilize transportation demand management strategies, non-auto-
       motive enhancements (bicycle, pedestrian, transit, train, trails,
       and connectivity), and traffic signal management techniques as
       long-term transportation solutions and traffic mitigation measures
       to carry out the Carlsbad Community Vision.
3-P.9	 Develop and maintain a list of street facilities where specified modes
       of travel are exempt from the LOS standard (LOS exempt street
       facilities), as approved by the City Council. For LOS exempt street
       facilities, the city will not implement improvements to maintain
       the LOS standard outlined in Policy 3-P.4 if such improvements are
       beyond what is identified as appropriate at build out of the General
       Plan.  In the case of street facilities where the vehicle mode of travel
       is exempt from the LOS standard, other non-vehicle capacity-build-
       ing improvements will be required to improve mobility through
       implementation of transportation demand and transportation
       system management measures as outlined in Policy 3-P.11, to the
       extent feasible, and/or to implement the livable streets goals and
       policies of this Mobility Element. Evaluate the list of exempt street
       facilities, as part of the Growth Management monitoring program,
       to determine if such exemptions are still warranted. 	
       	
       To exempt the vehicle mode of travel from the LOS standard at a
       particular street intersection or segment, the intersection or street
       segment must be identified as built-out by the City Council because:
      a.	 acquiring the rights of way is not feasible; or
      b.	the proposed improvements would significantly impact the envi-
         ronment in an unacceptable way and mitigation would not
         contribute to the nine core values of the Carlsbad Community
         Vision; or
                                                                                           3-29

      City of Carlsbad
3
                               c.	 the proposed improvements would result in unacceptable
                                   impacts to other community values or General Plan policies; or
                               d.	the proposed improvements would require more than three
                                  through travel lanes in each direction.
                         3-P.10	 Allow the following street facilities to be exempt from the vehicle
Mobility
                                 LOS standard identified in Policy 3-P.4, subject to the requirements
                                 described in Policy 3-P.9.
                               •	 La Costa Avenue between Interstate-5 and El Camino Real
                               •	 El Camino Real between Palomar Airport Road and La Costa Avenue
                               •	 Palomar Airport Road between Interstate-5 and College Boulevard
                               •	 Palomar Airport Road between El Camino Real and Melrose Drive
                         3-P.11	 Require new development that adds vehicle traffic to street facili-
                                 ties that are exempt from the vehicle LOS standard (consistent with
                                 3-P.9) to implement:
                               a.	 Transportation demand management strategies that reduce the
                                   reliance on single-occupant automobile and assist in achieving
                                   the city’s livable streets vision.
                               b.	Transportation system management strategies that improve
                                  traffic signal coordination and improve transit service.
                         3-P.12	 Update the Citywide Facilities and Improvements Plan to ensure
                                 consistency with the General Plan. This includes updating the cir-
                                 culation LOS standards methodologies to reflect a more balanced/
                                 multi-modal approach.
                         3-P.13	 Use public outreach to educate and encourage alternative modes of
                                 travel and inform the community about the benefits of participation
                                 in new programs, approaches and strategies that support Mobility
                                 Element goals and policies.
                         3-P.14	 Require performance measures tied to transportation facilities and
                                 services to comply with the Climate Action Plan and other state reg-
                                 ulations and policies.
                         Street Design and Connectivity
                         3-P.15	 Evaluate methods and transportation facility improvements to
                                 promote biking, walking, safer street crossings, and attractive
                                 streetscapes. The City Council shall have the sole discretion to
                                 approve any such road diet or vehicle traffic calming improvements
                                 that would reduce vehicle capacity to or below a LOS D; this also
                                 applies to streets where the vehicle is not subject to the MMLOS
                                 standard as specified in Table 3-1.
                         3-P.16	 Design new streets, and explore funding opportunities for existing
                                 streets, to minimize traffic volumes and/or speed, as appropriate,
                                 within residential neighborhoods without compromising connec-
                                 tivity for emergency first responders, bicycles, and pedestrians
                                 consistent with the city’s Carlsbad Active Transportation Strat-
                                 egies. This should be accomplished through management and
      3-30

                                                                                  General Plan
                                                                                              3
       implementation of livable streets strategies and such programs like
       the Carlsbad Residential Traffic Management Plan.
3-P.17	 Consider innovative design and program solutions to improve the
        mobility, efficiency, connectivity, and safety of the transportation
        system. Innovative design solutions include, but are not limited to,
                                                                                              Mobility
        traffic calming devices, roundabouts, traffic circles, curb extensions,
        separated bicycle infrastructure, pedestrian scramble intersections,
        high visibility pedestrian treatments and infrastructure, and traffic
        signal coordination. Innovative program solutions include, but are
        not limited to, webpages with travel demand and traffic signal
        management information, car and bike share programs, active
        transportation campaigns, and intergenerational programs around
        schools to enhance safe routes to schools. Other innovative solutions
        include bicycle friendly business districts, electric and solar power
        energy transportation systems, intelligent transportation systems,
        semi- or full autonomous vehicles, trams, and shuttles.
3-P.18	 Encourage and seek partnerships to foster innovations in emerging
        technology for transportation mobility to support the city’s
        workforce, residents, and tourists. Integration between communi-
        cation technology, energy, and transportation mobility should be
        encouraged.
3-P.19	 Encourage Caltrans, SANDAG, NCTD, and adjacent cities to improve
        regional connectivity and service consistent with regional planning
        efforts. This includes expansion of Interstate-5 with two HOV lanes
        in each direction, auxiliary lanes, and associated enhancements, a
        Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) route along Palomar Airport Road, shuttle
        bus services from COASTER stations, and other enhancements to
        improve services in the area.
3-P.20	 Engage Caltrans, the Public Utilities Commission, transit agencies,
        the Coastal Commission, and railroad agency(s) regarding opportu-
        nities for improved connections within the city, including:
      •	 Improved connections across the railroad tracks at Chestnut Avenue
         and other locations
      •	 A grade separated rail corridor that includes grade separated street
         crossings at Grand Avenue, Carlsbad Village Drive, Tamarack Avenue
         and Cannon Road, as well as new pedestrian and bicycle crossings
      •	 Completion and enhancements to the Coastal Rail Trail and/or
         equivalent trail along the coastline
      •	 Improved connectivity along Carlsbad Boulevard for pedestrians
         and bicyclists, such as a trail
      •	 Improved access to the beach and coastal recreational opportunities
      •	 Improved crossings for pedestrians across and along Carlsbad
         Boulevard
                                                                                           3-31

      City of Carlsbad
3
                         3-P.21	 Implement connections and improvements identified in this
                                 Mobility Element, including those identified in policy 3-P.19, as well
                                 as:
                               •	 Extension of College Boulevard from Cannon Road to El Camino
                                  Real
Mobility
                               •	 Completion of the Poinsettia Lane connection near El Camino Real
                                  (Reach E)
                               •	 Extension of Camino Junipero to the eastern city boundary
                               •	 A bicycle/pedestrian trail/pathway connecting the eastern terminus
                                  of Marron Road to the east
                               •	 A bicycle/pedestrian trail/pathway connecting the eastern terminus
                                  of Cannon Road to the east, and coordination with adjacent
                                  agencies to appropriately link to their facilities
                         3-P.22	 Support pedestrian and bicycle facilities at all Interstate-5 and State
                                 Route 78 interchanges.
                         3-P.23	 Maintain the city’s scenic transportation corridors as identified in
                                 the Carlsbad Scenic Corridor Guidelines.
                         Pedestrian and Bicycle Movement
                         3-P.24	 Update the pedestrian, trails and bicycle master plans, as necessary,
                                 to reflect changes in needs, opportunities and priorities.
                         3-P.25	 Implement the projects recommended in the pedestrian, trails
                                 and bicycle master plans through the city’s capital improvement
                                 program, private development conditions and other appropriate
                                 mechanisms.
                         3-P.26	 Identify and implement necessary pedestrian improvements on
                                 streets where pedestrians are to be accommodated per Table 3-1,
                                 with special emphasis on providing safer access to schools, parks,
                                 community and recreation centers, shopping districts, and other
                                 appropriate facilities.
                         3-P.27	 Implement the Safe Routes to School and Safe Routes to Transit
                                 programs that focus on pedestrian and bicycle safety improvements
                                 near local schools and transit stations. Prioritize schools with access
                                 from arterial streets for receiving Safe Routes to School projects.
                         3-P.28	 Improve and enhance parking, connectivity, access, and utilization
                                 for pedestrians and bicycles to COASTER stations, utility corridors,
                                 and open spaces consistent with city planning documents.
                         3-P.29	 Evaluate incorporating pedestrian and bicycle infrastructure within
                                 the city as part of any planning or engineering study, private devel-
                                 opment, or capital project.
                         3-P.30	 Complete the Carlsbad Active Transportation Strategies to assist in
                                 identifying livable street implementation parameters within the
                                 city.
      3-32

                                                                                    General Plan
                                                                                                3
3-P.31	 Engage the community in the policy setting and planning of street,
        bicycle, pedestrian, transit, and connectivity studies, plans and
        programs.
3-P.32	 Require developers to improve pedestrian and bicycle connectiv-
        ity consistent with the city’s bicycle and pedestrian master plans and
                                                                                                Mobility
        trails master planning efforts. In addition, new residential develop-
        ments should demonstrate that a safe route to school and transit
        is provided to nearby schools and transit stations within a half mile
        walking distance.
3-P.33	 Work with existing neighborhoods and businesses to improve
        pedestrian and bicycle connectivity and safety consistent with the
        city’s pedestrian and bicycle master plans and trails master planning
        efforts.
3-P.34	 Actively pursue grant programs such as SANDAG’s Active Trans-
        portation Grant Program and Smart Growth Incentive Program
        to improve non-automotive connectivity throughout the city.
        The emphasis of grant-funded projects shall be on implementa-
        tion, which includes planning documents that guide and prioritize
        implementation, programs that encourage the use of active trans-
        portation modes, education for the use of active transportation
        modes, or physical improvements themselves.
Transit
3-P.35	 Partner with other agencies and/or developers to improve transit
        connectivity within Carlsbad. As part of a comprehensive transpor-
        tation demand management (TDM) strategy and/or with transit
        oriented development (TOD), a shuttle system could be established
        that connects destinations and employment centers like LEGOLAND,
        hotels, the Village, McClellan-Palomar Airport, business parks, the
        COASTER and Breeze transit stations, public activity centers (such
        as senior centers, city hall, libraries, etc.) and key destinations along
        the coast. The system could incorporate shuttle service in adjacent
        cities to maximize connectivity.
3-P.36	 Encourage NCTD, SANDAG and other transit providers to provide
        accessibility for all modes of travel to the McClellan-Palomar Airport
        area.
3-P.37	 Coordinate with NCTD to improve the quality of bus stop facilities in
        the city.
Parking and Demand Management
3-P.38	 Develop flexible on-site vehicle parking requirements. Such
        requirements will include implementation of innovative parking
        techniques, implementing effective TDM programs to reduce
        parking demand, and consideration of other means to efficiently
        manage parking supply and demand.
                                                                                             3-33

      City of Carlsbad
3
                         3-P.39	 Require new employment development to provide secure bicycle
                                 parking on-site. Major employers should provide shower and
                                 changing rooms for employees as appropriate.
                         3-P.40	 Assist Village businesses to manage parking in the Village area
                                 to maximize parking efficiency. Any potential parking-related
Mobility
                                 revenues generated in this area should be reinvested into the Village
                                 area for implementing livable streets and other parking, pedestrian,
                                 and bicycle enhancements, including way-finding signage and main-
                                 tenance of associated infrastructure.
                         3-P.41	 Consider supporting new development and existing businesses with
                                 various incentives (such as parking standards modifications) for
                                 implementing TDM programs that minimize the reliance on single-
                                 occupant automotive travel during peak commute hours.
                         Rail and Truck Movement
                         3-P.42	 Identify and update truck routes within the city that provide suf-
                                 ficient turning radii and other design attributes to support large
                                 vehicles on those facilities.
                         3-P.43	 Coordinate with other agencies and private entities to investi-
                                 gate methods of improving service, implementing a quiet zone,
                                 and enhancing connectivity and safety along the rail corridor; such
                                 as through development of a grade separated rail corridor that
                                 includes grade separated street crossings at Grand Avenue, Carlsbad
                                 Village Drive, Tamarack Avenue and Cannon Road, as well as new
                                 pedestrian and bicycle crossings at Chestnut Avenue, Chinquapin
                                 Avenue and the Village and Poinsettia COASTER stations, and other
                                 locations.
                         Air Movement
                         3-P.44	 Work with the County of San Diego and other agencies to ensure
                                 continued safe and efficient operation of the McClellan-Palomar
                                 Airport, consistent with the Carlsbad Community Vision and existing
                                 city policy.
      3-34
5Noise
                                           General Plan
       Noise is an important and complex issue in
       Carlsbad. Almost every part of the city is
       susceptible to noise impacts, due mainly to the
       presence of major noise generators. Significant
       sources of noise in the city include McClellan-
       Palomar Airport, and major transportation
       corridors such as Interstate 5, Highway
       78, and railroad tracks. The city’s land
       use pattern generally accommodates these
       conditions with industrial uses clustered close
       to the airport, and commercial, residential
                                                     5-1

    City of Carlsbad
5                      and other uses adjacent or close to Interstate
                       5 and the railroad tracks.
Noise
                       The Noise Element is intended to ensure
                       compliance with state requirements and
                       promote a comprehensive, long-range
                       program of achieving acceptable noise levels
                       throughout Carlsbad. The Noise Element:
                          •	Identifies and defines existing and
                            future environmental noise levels from
                            sources within or adjacent to the city, by
                            means of noise contour maps.
                          •	Establishes goals, policies, and
                            standards to minimize noise generation
                            and mitigate impacts, especially on
                            noise-sensitive uses such as homes and
                            schools.
    5-2

                                                                                         General Plan
5.1	 Introduction
Background and Purpose
                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                     Noise
Noise can be defined as unwanted sound. It is sound or a series of sounds that
are intrusive, irritating, objectionable and/or disruptive to daily life. Noise varies
widely in its scope, source, and volume, ranging from individual occurrences
such as a barking dog, to the intermittent disturbances of trains and overhead
aircraft, to the fairly constant noise generated by traffic on Interstate 5.
Noise can affect all aspects of daily life and acceptable noise thresholds are estab-
lished and controlled based on the various types of uses and their sensitivity to
noise - uses such as residences, schools, churches, and hospitals are considered
to be the most noise sensitive. The known effects of noise on humans include
hearing loss, communication interference, sleep interference, physiological
responses, and annoyance.
Relationship to State Law
State law (Government Code Section 65302(f)) requires general plans to include
a Noise Element that identifies and appraises noise problems in the community.
The Noise Element shall recognize the guidelines established by the State
Department of Public Health and analyze and quantify, to the extent practica-
ble, as determined by the jurisdiction’s legislative body, current and projected
noise levels for all of the following sources:
•	 Highways and freeways;
•	 Primary arterial and major local streets;
•	 Passenger and freight online railroad operations and ground rapid transit
   systems;
•	 Commercial, general aviation, heliport, helistop, and military airport
   operations, aircraft overflights, jet engine test stands, and all other ground
   facilities and maintenance functions related to airport operation;
•	 Local industrial plants, including, but not limited to, railroad classifica-
   tion yards; and
•	 Other ground stationary noise sources identified by local agencies as con-
   tributing to the community noise environment.
                                                                                                   5-3

    City of Carlsbad
5                      Relationship to Community Vision
                       The Noise Element is most closely tied to the community’s quality of life objec-
                       tives in the Carlsbad Community Vision:
Noise
                       Core Value 9: Neighborhood Revitalization, Community Design and Livabil-
                       ity. Revitalize neighborhoods, and enhance citywide community design and
                       livability.
                       Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
                       The Noise Element is correlated with the Land Use and Community Design,
                       Mobility, and Housing Elements. Future noise contour information is based on
                       traffic volumes, speeds, etc., and railroad and airport operations as described
                       in the Mobility Element. Noise can have a significant impact on land use, and
                       policies in the Noise Element are designed to ensure protection from noise for
                       sensitive uses, as shown on the Land Use Map in the Land Use and Community
                       Design Element. The Noise Element relates to the Housing Element by
                       promoting desirable residential environments that are buffered from undesir-
                       able noise impacts.
    5-4

                                                                                  General Plan
5.2	 Noise Characteristics and
     Measurement                                                                             5
Noise Measurement                                                                             Noise
Three aspects of noise are used in assessing the community noise environment:
•	 Level is the magnitude or loudness of sound. Sound levels are measured
   and expressed in decibels (dB) with 10 dB roughly equal to the threshold
   of hearing. Transient noise events may be described by their maximum
   noise level (Lmax), measured in decibels “A-weighted” to correct for the
   frequency response of the human ear (dBA). Another term that is some-
   times used is Leq or Equivalent Continuous Sound Level, used to describe
   with one single figure sound pressure levels that vary over time. Figure 5-1
   shows the decibel levels associated with different common sounds.
•	 Frequency is the composition or spectrum of the sound. Frequency is a
   measure of the pressure fluctuations per second.
•	 Variation is sound level over time. Most community noise is produced by
   many distant noise sources that change gradually throughout the day and
   result in steady background noise with no identifiable source. Identifiable
   events of brief duration, such as aircraft flyovers, cause the commu-
   nity noise level to vary from instant to instant. The Community Noise
   Equivalent Level (CNEL) and Day-Night Noise Level (Ldn) both reflect a
   weighted average of noise exposure over an average day. Different weight-
   ing factors are used for day, evening, and nighttime periods to recognize
   that community members are most sensitive to noise in late night hours
   and are more sensitive during evening hours than in daytime hours. The
   weighting factors require an addition of 5 decibels (dB) to sound levels in
   the evening hours between 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. and an addition of 10
   dBs to sound levels at nighttime hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Reporting Noise Levels
Measuring and reporting noise levels involves accounting for variations in sen-
sitivity to noise during the daytime versus nighttime hours. Knowledge of the
following relationships is helpful in understanding how changes in noise and
noise exposure are perceived:
•	 Except under special conditions, a change in sound level of 1 dB cannot
   be perceived;
•	 A 3 dB change is considered a just noticeable difference;
•	 A 5 dB change is required before any noticeable change in community
   response would be expected; and
•	 A 10 dB increase is subjectively heard as an approximate doubling in
   loudness.  
                                                                                            5-5

    City of Carlsbad
5                      In establishing noise contours for land use planning, it is customary to ignore
                       noise attenuation provided by buildings, street elevations, and depressions, and
                       to minimize the barrier effect of natural terrain features. The result is a worst-
                       case estimate of the existing and future (projected) noise environment. The
Noise
                       purpose of noise contours is to identify the potential need for more detailed
                       acoustical studies, not to predict with certainty the noise level throughout the
                       city. The assumption is that it is desirable to overestimate the potential noise at
                       a future noise-sensitive development site than to underestimate the noise envi-
                       ronment and allow for potentially incompatible land use development.
                       Figure 5-1:	 Noise Measurement
                                                              A-Weighted
                                                          Sound Pressure Level
                                                              in Decibels
                                                                140
                                                                130              Threshold of Pain
                         Civil Defense Siren (100 ft.)
                                  Jet Takeoff (200 ft.)
                                                                120
                                    Riveting Machine            110
                                                                                 Rock Music Band
                                                                100              Piledriver (50 ft.)
                                                                                 Ambulance Siren (100 ft.)
                                 NCTD/AmTrak                     90
                                 Train Passby (10 ft.)                           Boiler Room
                                                                                 Printing Press Plant
                                                                 80              Garbage Disposal in the Home
                              Pneumatic Drill (50 ft.)                           Inside Sports Car, 50 mph
                               Freight Cars (100 ft.)            70
                             Vacuum Cleaner (10 ft.)             60              Data Processing Center
                                        Speech (1 ft.)
                                                                                 Department Store
                           Auto Traffic near Freeway             50              Private Business Office
                          Large Transformer (200 ft.)
                                                                                 Light Traffic (100 ft.)
                                                                 40
                                  Average Residence                              Typical Minimum Nighttime Levels
                                                                                 — Residential Areas
                                                                 30
                                         Soft Whisper
                                                                 20
                                      Rustling Leaves                            Recording Studio
                                                                 10
                                Threshold of Hearing                             Mosquito (3 ft.)
                                                                  0
                        (n ft.) = Distance in feet between
                                      source and listener
    5-6

                                                                                    General Plan
5.3	 Noise Sources in Carlsbad
Common noise sources in Carlsbad are described below. Figure 5-2 shows
existing noise contours for all major streets in the community based on a noise
                                                                                               5
                                                                                                Noise
survey conducted in August 2013 at various locations in Carlsbad, information
on traffic flows, railroad operations, and other sources, such as the McClellan-
Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan. Figure 5-3 shows future (year
2035) noise contours. The policies of this element are intended to avert future
problems caused by significant noise. The city regulates site design and requires
sound attenuation measures for new development in the vicinity of incompat-
ible noise sources.
Traffic
Vehicular noise has three main component sources: engine/transmission
noise, exhaust noise and tire noise. The intensity of noise emissions from any
given vehicle will vary with its size and other factors, such as speed, acceler-
ation, braking, street grade and conditions of the street surface. Thus, a busy
downtown arterial with stop and go traffic is often noisier than an open street
with comparable traffic volumes.
Street traffic noise, including Interstate-5, is the most extensive noise problem
faced by Carlsbad. Noise from Interstate-5 has the greatest existing and
projected street noise emissions. As part of the North Coast Corridor Program,
future expansion of Interstate-5 is proposed in combination with expansion
of the train tracks along the north San Diego County coastline. Expansion of
Interstate-5 through Carlsbad is proposed to include two additional lanes in
each direction and additional lanes for merging and exiting, and ramp improve-
ments. Train tracks used by the Coaster commuter train and Amtrak trains are
planned to be bolstered with a second track along the entire coast.  The proposal
must be considered by the California Coastal Commission, and if approved the
improvements are planned to be constructed in phases through year 2040.  
Other major streets with high levels of noise include Highway 78 and several
arterial streets—El Camino Real, Palomar Airport Road, Rancho Santa Fe
Road, Melrose Drive and Carlsbad Boulevard.
Noise contours have been prepared for all major streets in Carlsbad, as shown
on the current and future noise contour maps (See Figure 5-2: Existing Noise
Contour Map and Figure 5-3: Future Noise Contour Map).
Railroad
The North County Transit District (NCTD) owns the rail line and two
passenger rail stations located within the city: Carlsbad Village and Carlsbad
Poinsettia stations. NCTD operates the Coaster commuter rail service on this
rail line; the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe freight line and the Amtrak passenger
                                                                                              5-7

    City of Carlsbad
5                      service also use the rail line through the city. Proposed expansion of the railroad
                       is described above in the discussion regarding traffic noise.
                       Airport Noise
Noise                  McClellan-Palomar Airport is presently operating as a commercial service
                       facility and is located west of El Camino Real, just north of Palomar Airport
                       Road. State law requires regional airport land use commissions to prepare
                       airport land use compatibility plans in order to “provide for the orderly growth
                       of each public airport and the area surrounding the airport... [and to] safeguard
                       the general welfare of the inhabitants within the vicinity of the airport and the
                       public in general (Public Utilities Code Section 21675).” Such compatibility plans
                       must be based on a long range master plan or airport layout plan that reflects
                       the airport’s anticipated growth over the next 20 years. The McClellan-Palomar
                       Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) was adopted in December 2010,
                       and amended in December 2011. It is based on the Airport Master Plan, dated
                       1997, and the Airport Layout Plan, which was approved by the Federal Aviation
                       Administration in 2004. The County of San Diego has initiated the process of
                       developing a new 20-year (2015 to 2035) master plan for McClellan-Palomar
                       Airport as the current 1997 Master Plan nears the end of its planning period in
                       2015.
                       The current McClellan-Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
                       (ALUCP) modeled exposure levels based on approximately 289,100 annual
                       aircraft operations, which is the aviation forecast in the current 1997 Airport
                       Master Plan. In general, land in the immediate vicinity of the airport or under
                       the take-off or landing approach is subject to noise levels that are unsuitable for
                       residential development, schools, hospitals and other similar noise sensitive
                       uses. Projected noise contours around the airport are provided in the ALUCP
                       and have been included in this element (See Figure 5-3: Future Noise Contours).
                       In December 2005, the County of San Diego, as the owner/operator of McClel-
                       lan-Palomar Airport, prepared an update to the airport’s FAR Part 150 Noise
                       Study. The purpose of the study is to assess the noise impacts on surrounding
                       land uses, and, if necessary, recommend changes to existing zoning ordinances
                       and general plans. The findings of this study resulted in FAA approval of a
                       number of recommended measures in December 2006, as follows:
                       •	 Provide the City of Carlsbad with the recommended noise impact notifi-
                          cation area (NINA) and noise exposure maps and any future updates to
                          these boundaries;
                       •	 Recommend rezoning undeveloped land within the 60 CNEL contour for
                          industrial use;
                       •	 Require real estate disclosures within the airport influence area (AIA);
    5-8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 5-2
                                                   78
                City of
             OCEANSIDE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GENERAL 5-2:	 Existing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PLAN Noise Contours
                Oceanside                        RO            RD
                                             M AR N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Existing Noise Contour Map
                            Buena                              DR
                                                       LA                                                                                                                                                                                                               78
                            Vista
                            Lagoon
                                                         GE                 EL                                                                                                                                                                                                              Existing Noise Contours
                                                       IL                                                                                                     Calavera
                                                       V
                                                   D                                                                                                          Lake                                                                                                                                    70 + CNEL
                                              BA
                                                                                 INO
                                        R   LS
                                                                             C AM
                                     CA                                                                                                   EB
                                                                                                                                        EG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65 - 70 CNEL
                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                     AV               LL
                                                                                                                                                                                             City of
                                                                                                               ACK                  CO                                                      Oceanside                                                                                                 60 - 65 CNEL
                                                                                  R EA
                                                                                       L                AR                                  LV D
                                                                     E                                   M
                                                                  AV                              TA
                                                             CK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Airport Noise Contour Lines
                                                           RA
                                                  MA                                                                                           RD
                                               TA                                                                                   ON
                                                                                                                                  NN
                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                                                EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Highways
                                                                                                                                       CA                                                               Maerkle
                                                                                                                                            MIN
                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Reservoir                                                                                     Major Street
                                                                                                                                                        RE
                                                                                                                                                          AL
                                                            Ag ua                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Planned Street
                                     CA                         Hedi on da                                                                                                                                                                                            SAN MARCOS
                                        BA                            L agoon                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Railroad
                                     RLS                                                                                             FARA                                                                                                       City of
                                          D                                                                                                DA Y                                                                                                  Vista
                                                                         C AN N
                                                                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City Limits
P a c i f i c                               BLV                                ON        RD
                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60-65
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                   PALOM A
                                                                                                                                                                                                    R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                              T RD
                                                                                                                                                                                    75+
                                                                                                                                                              MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                             75+
                                                                                              60-65                  65-70                        75+          -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City of
                                                                                                                               70-75                            AIRPORT
                                                                                                          RT              RD                                                                                                                                          San Marcos
                                                                                                  A   IRPO
                                                                                      PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                      BLE
                                                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                      A M INO
                                                                                                                                                                              VIDA R O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LN                                SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TIA                                      LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                            IN                                             ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                         PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DR
                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                       L
                                                                                                                            TTI A                                                                                                            A        RD
                                                                                                                         NSE                                                                                                             ALG
                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                     PO                     AV
                                                                                CAR
                                                                                                                                              IAR
                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                     A
                                                                                 LSB                                                                         Y
                                                                                   D                                                                      KW
                                                                                          D
                                                                                      BLV
                                                                                                                                    Ba tiq uitos          Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                      AVE
                                                                                                                                            LA      C O STA                                                                                                            CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OST           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              O JU N
                                                                                                                                                                                           MIN O                                                                            IN
                                                                                                                                                                                         CA                                                   FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                      EL                                                                                        IPE                                                  500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D                                    RO
                                                                                                          D                                           City of
                                                                                                      SAN                                            Encinitas                               RE                                              N TA
                                                                                                                                                                                               AL
                                                                                                        IEGO                                                                                                                            SA                                                                                         100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                                                                                        ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H
                                                                                                              NO R                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RA
                                                                                                                  R                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                               THE                                                                                                                                                                                0           0.5           1                         2
                                                                                                                 N RR                                                                                                                                                                                                     Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Source: DUDEK, 2013; City of Carlsbad, 2013; SANDAG, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                            ENCINITAS                                                                                                       McClellan-Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, 2010;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5-9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 5-3
                                                   78
             OCEANSIDE
                City of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GENERAL 5-3:	 Future
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PLAN Noise Contours
                Oceanside                        RO            RD
                                             M AR N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Future Noise Contour Map
                            Buena                              DR
                                                       LA                                                                                                                                                                                                          78
                            Vista
                            Lagoon
                                                         GE                 EL                                                                                                                                                                                                         2035 Noise Contours
                                                       IL                                                                                                Calavera
                                                       V
                                                   D                                                                                                     Lake                                                                                                                                    70 + CNEL
                                              BA
                                                                                 INO
                                        R   LS
                                                                             C AM
                                     CA                                                                                             EB
                                                                                                                                  EG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 65 - 70 CNEL
                                                                                                             AV
                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                LL
                                                                                                                                                                                        City of
                                                                                                           ACK                CO                                                       Oceanside                                                                                                 60 - 65 CNEL
                                                                                  R EA
                                                                                       L               AR                              LV D
                                                                     E                                 M
                                                                  AV                              TA                                                                                                                                                                                             Airport Noise Contour Lines
                                                             CK
                                                           RA
                                                  MA                                                                                     RD
                                               TA                                                                             ON
                                                                                                                            NN                                                                                                                                                                   Highways
                                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                                           EL
                                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                                      MIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Maerkle                                                                                       Major Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Reservoir
                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                                  RE                                                                                                                                             Planned Street
                                                                                                                                                    AL
                                                            Ag ua
                                     CA                         Hedi on da                                                                                                                                                                                       SAN MARCOS                      Railroad
                                        BA                            L agoon
                                     RLS                                                                                        FARA                                                                                                       City of
                                          D                                                                                          DA Y                                                                                                   Vista                                                City Limits
                                                                                                                                              AV
                                                                         C AN N                                                                  E
P a c i f i c                               BLV                                ON        RD
                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60-65
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                              PALOM A
                                                                                                                                                                                               R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                         T RD
                                                                                                                                                                               75+
                                                                                                                                                         MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                        75+
                                                                                              60-65            65-70                        75+           -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of
                                                                                                                          70-75                            AIRPORT
                                                                                                          RT         RD                                                                                                                                          San Marcos
                                                                                                  A   IRPO
                                                                                      PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                 BLE
                                                                                                                                                             C
                                                                                                                                                                 A M INO
                                                                                                                                                                         VIDA R O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LN                                SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                TIA                                      LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                       IN                                             ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                    PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DR
                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                 L
                                                                                                                      TTI A                                                                                                             A        RD
                                                                                                                   NSE                                                                                                              ALG
                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                               PO                      AV
                                                                                CAR
                                                                                                                                         IAR
                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                     A
                                                                                 LSB                                                                    Y
                                                                                   D                                                                 KW
                                                                                          D
                                                                                      BLV
                                                                                                                              Ba tiq uitos           Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                 AVE
                                                                                                                                       LA      C O STA                                                                                                            CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OST           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O JU N
                                                                                                                                                                                      MIN O                                                                            IN
                                                                                                                                                                                    CA                                                   FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                 EL                                                                                        IPE                                                  500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D                                    RO
                                                                                                      D                                          City of
                                                                                                  SAN                                           Encinitas                               RE                                              N TA
                                                                                                                                                                                          AL
                                                                                                      IEGO                                                                                                                         SA                                                                                         100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O                                                                                        ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                        NO R                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RA
                                                                                                              R                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                           THE                                                                                                                                                                               0           0.5           1                         2
                                                                                                             N RR                                                                                                                                                                                                    Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Source: DUDEK, 2013; City of Carlsbad, 2013; SANDAG, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                       ENCINITAS                                                                                                       McClellan-Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, 2010;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5-11

                                                                                     General Plan
•	 Erect signs on airport property along El Camino Real and Palomar
   Airport Road to inform drivers of the existence and location of the
   airport; and
•	 Implement the “Fly Friendly” program recently adopted by the Palomar
                                                                                                5
   Advisory Committee.                                                                           Noise
Land Use
Future noise levels may also be affected by the construction of new land uses
that generate noise. For example, industrial uses are a source of noise from use
of mechanical equipment, generators, and vehicles, which can affect adjacent
uses. Residences, schools, hospitals, and churches are generally considered more
sensitive to noise than are commercial or industrial activities. To respond to the
noise sensitivity of certain land uses, this element includes policies to reduce
noise impacts on such uses.
Other Mobile Sources
Occasional noise from mobile sources, such as off-road motorcycles, motorboats
and vehicles with faulty exhaust systems, can affect residents. The city controls
these noise sources by prohibiting motorized off-road vehicles, enforcing the
vehicle code, and enforcing the city’s boating regulations for Agua Hedionda
Lagoon.
                                                                                              5-13

    City of Carlsbad
5                      5.4	 Regulations and Noise
                            Exposure Standards
                       Federal and state standards, and city standards established in this General Plan,
Noise                  are designed to protect community members and sensitive receptors from noise
                       hazards and establish criteria to mitigate noise impacts accordingly.
                       Federal Regulations
                       Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
                       HUD’s environmental criteria and standards are presented in Title 24 of the
                       Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 51. New construction proposed in high
                       noise areas (exceeding 65 dBA Ldn) must incorporate noise attenuation features
                       to maintain acceptable interior noise levels (45 dBA Ldn). It is assumed that
                       with standard construction, any building will provide sufficient attenuation to
                       achieve an interior noise level of 45 dBA Ldn or less if the exterior noise level
                       is 65 dBA Ldn or less. Development in a “normally unacceptable noise zone”
                       (exceeding 65 decibels, but not exceeding 75 decibels) require a minimum of
                       5 decibels of additional noise attenuation for buildings having noise sensitive
                       uses if the day-night average is greater than 65 decibels, but does not exceed
                       70 decibels, or a minimum of 10 decibels of additional noise attenuation if the
                       day-night average is greater than 70 decibels, but does not exceed 75 decibels.
                       Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)
                       Title 23 of the CFR, Part 772 (Procedures for Abatement of Highway Traffic Noise
                       and Construction Noise) requires an assessment of noise and consideration
                       of noise abatement for proposed federal or federal-aid highway construction
                       projects on a new location, or the physical alteration of an existing highway that
                       significantly changes either the horizontal or vertical alignment, or increases
                       the number of through-traffic lanes. FHWA considers noise abatement for
                       sensitive receivers, such as picnic areas, recreation areas, playgrounds, active
                       sport areas, parks, residences, motels, hotels, schools, churches, libraries, and
                       hospitals when “worst-hour” noise levels approach or exceed 67 dBA Leq.
                       Federal Transit Administration (FTA)
                       The FTA uses noise vibration impact criteria for buildings with noise sensitive
                       uses, residences, and institutional land uses near railroads. The noise vibration
                       thresholds for residences and buildings where people normally sleep are 72 VdB1
                       for frequent vibration events (more than 70 vibration events of the same source
                       per day), 75 VdB for occasional vibration events (30 to 70 vibration events of the
                       same source per day), and 80 VdB for infrequent vibration events (less than 30
                       vibration events of the same source per day).
                       1	 VdB is a logarithmic scaling of vibration amplitude, allowing relative measurements to be easily
                          made.
    5-14

                                                                                      General Plan
Federal Railroad Administration (FRA)
The FRA’s Office of Safety is responsible for enforcing the Railroad Noise
Emissions Compliance Regulation that sets maximum sound levels from
railroad equipment and for regulating locomotive horns.
                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                  Noise
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
Enforced by the FAA, Title 14 of the CFR, Part 150 describes the proce-
dures, standards and methodology governing the development, submission,
and review of airport noise exposure maps and airport noise compatibility
programs. Title 14 also identifies the land uses that are normally compatible
with various levels of noise exposure. The FAA has determined that sound levels
up to 45 dBA CNEL are acceptable within residential buildings.
State Regulations
The California Building Standards Code (Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations (CCR)) provides regulations for both exterior and interior sound
insulation. For general residential uses, the regulations specify that existing and
future interior noise levels generated by exterior noise sources shall not exceed
45 dB in any habitable room with windows closed. Future noise levels must be
predicted at least 10 years from the time of building permit application. CCR
Title 24 standards are enforced through the building permit application process.
Carlsbad Municipal Code and Noise Guidelines
The Carlsbad Municipal Code regulates noise related to construction, events,
animals, and other temporary nuisances. The city also maintains the Noise
Guidelines Manual, which is consistent with the General Plan and provides
detailed project review and design criteria related to noise.
Noise Standards
General Plan noise standards are shown in Table 5-1 and Table 5-2.
Community Noise Exposure
Table 5-1 presents the community noise exposure matrix, establishing criteria
the city shall use to evaluate land use compatibility based on noise emanating
from all sources.
Allowable Noise Exposure
Table 5-2 indicates acceptable limits of noise for various land uses for both
exterior and interior environments from transportation sources. While Table 5-1
establishes standards to help the city determine the appropriateness of locating
specific uses in noise-prone environments, Table 5-2 provides standards that
development shall attain through noise attenuation measures. These limits are
based on guidelines provided by the California Office of Planning and Research.
                                                                                               5-15

    Envision Carlsbad
5                       Table 5–1:	 LAND USE COMPATIBILITY FOR COMMUNITY NOISE
                                    ENVIRONMENTS
Noise
    5-16

                                                                                                              General Plan
Table 5-3 provides standards for noise from non-transportation noise sources
such as, but not limited to, industrial facilities, automotive servicing, car washes,
equipment yards, nightclubs, hotels, and shopping centers. These standards
apply to the noise sources themselves, as measured at the edge of the property
                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                          Noise
line; noise caused by motor vehicles traveling to and from the site is exempt
from this standard.
 Table 5–2:	 ALLOWABLE NOISE EXPOSURE1
 LAND USE                                    OUTDOOR ACTIVITY2, 3             INTERIOR SPACES
                                             AREAS (DBA CNEL)                 (DBA CNEL)
 Residential                                                           60 4                              45
 Motels, Hotels                                                          65                              45
 Hospitals, Residential Care                                             65                              45
 Facilities, Schools, Libraries,
 Museums, Churches, Day
 Care Facilities
 Playgrounds, Parks,                                                     65                              50
 Recreation Uses
 Commercial and Office Uses                                              65                              50
 Industrial Uses                                                         70                              65
 1	 Development proposed within the McClellan-Palomar Airport Area of Influence shall also be subject
    to the noise compatibility policies contained in the ALUCP.
 2	 For non-residential uses, where an outdoor activity area is not proposed, the standard does not ap-
    ply. Where the location of outdoor activity areas is unknown, the exterior noise level standard shall
    be applied to the property line of the receiving use.
 3	 Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas to the allowable maximum, levels
    up to 5 dB higher may be allowed provided that available exterior noise level reduction measures
    have been implemented and interior noise levels are in compliance with this table.
 4	 An exterior noise exposure level of 65 dBA CNEL is allowable for residential uses in a mixed-use
    project and for residential uses within the McClellan-Palomar Airport Area of Influence, pursuant to
    the noise compatibility policies contained in the ALUCP.
 Table 5–3:	 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NON-
             TRANSPORTATION SOURCES (AS MEASURED AT
             PROPERTY LINE OF SOURCE/SENSITIVE USE)
 NOISE LEVEL DESCRIPTOR              DAYTIME                              NIGHTTIME
                                     (7 A.M. TO 10 P.M.)                  (10 P.M. TO 7 A.M.)
 Hourly Leq, dB                                                     55                                  45
 Maximum Level, dB                                                  75                                  65
 Each of the noise levels specified above shall be lowered by 5 dB for simple tone noises, noises consist-
 ing primarily of speech or music, or for recurring impulsive noises.
                                                                                                                       5-17

    City of Carlsbad
5                      5.5	 Goals and Policies
                       Goals
Noise
                       5-G.1	 Protect public health and welfare by eliminating existing noise
                              problems where feasible, maintaining an acceptable indoor and
                              outdoor acoustic environment, and preventing significant degrada-
                              tion of the acoustic environment.  
                       5-G.2	 Ensure that new development is compatible with the noise environ-
                              ment, by continuing to use potential noise exposure as a criterion in
                              land use planning.
                       5-G.3	 Guide the location and design of transportation facilities, industrial
                              uses and other potential noise generators to minimize the effects of
                              noise on adjacent land uses.
                       5-G.4	 Ensure long-term compatibility between the airport and surround-
                              ing land use.
                       5-G.5	 Foster healthy and productive work environments that do not cause
                              hearing damage or other adverse noise related health impacts to
                              workers in Carlsbad.
                       Policies
                       Land Use and Noise Compatibility
                       5-P.1	 Acceptability of Use Location. Use the noise and land use compat-
                              ibility matrix (Table 5-1) and Future Noise Contours map (Figure
                              5-3) as criteria to determine acceptability of a land use, including
                              the improvement/construction of streets, railroads, freeways and
                              highways. Do not permit new noise-sensitive uses—including
                              schools, hospitals, places of worship, and homes—where noise
                              levels are “normally unacceptable” or higher, if alternative locations
                              are available for the uses in the city.
                       5-P.2	 Required Noise Analysis. Require a noise analysis be conducted
                              for all discretionary development proposals (except for develop-
                              ments of single family homes with four units or fewer) located
                              where projected noise exposure would be other than “normally
                              acceptable”.
                              A required noise analysis should:
                              a.	 Be prepared by a certified noise consultant or acoustical
                                  engineer; 
                              b.	Be funded by the applicant;
                              c.	 Include a representative, on-site day and night sound level
                                  measurement;
                              d.	Include a delineation of current (measured) and projected
                                 (General Plan or 10 years in future, whichever horizon extends
                                 further out) noise contours;
    5-18

                                                                                   General Plan
       e.	 Identify noise levels with and without the proposed project,
           ranging from 55 to 75 dBA (Ldn) within the proposed develop-
           ment site; and
       f.	 If noise levels exceed the standards in Table 5-1, include a
           description of adequate and appropriate noise abatement
                                                                                              5
           measures to mitigate the noise to allowable levels for the                          Noise
           proposed use.
5-P.3	 Noise-Attenuation. For all projects that require discretionary review
       and have noise exposure levels that exceed the standards in Table
       5-1, require site planning and architecture to incorporate noise-
       attenuating features. With mitigation, development should meet
       the allowable outdoor and indoor noise exposure standards in Table
       5-2. When a building’s openings to the exterior are required to be
       closed to meet the interior noise standard, then mechanical ventila-
       tion shall be provided.
5-P.4	 Exterior Noise Levels Exceeding Acceptable Level. If the noise
       analysis shows that exterior noise levels cannot be mitigated to an
       acceptable level as identified in Table 5-2, the development should
       not be approved without one or more of the following findings:
       a.	 Changes or alterations have been required in, or incorporated
           into, the project that avoid or substantially lessen the noise.
       b.	Changes or alterations to avoid or substantially lessen noise
          are within the responsibility and jurisdiction of another public
          agency and not the City of Carlsbad. Such changes have been
          adopted by such other agency or can and should be adopted by
          such other agency.
       c.	 Specific economic, social, or other considerations make infeasible
           the mitigation measures or project alternatives to avoid or sub-
           stantially lessen noise.
       If a project is approved with exterior noise levels exceeding the
       acceptable noise level, all purchasers of the impacted property
       shall be notified in writing prior to purchase, and by deed disclo-
       sure in writing, that the property they are purchasing is, or will
       be, impacted by noise and does not meet City of Carlsbad noise
       standards for residential property.
5-P.5	 Noise Generation. As part of development project approval, require
       that noise generated by a project does not exceed standards estab-
       lished in Table 5-3.
5-P.6	 Berms and Sound Walls. Discourage the use of berms and sound
       walls for noise mitigation; rather, encourage the use of project
       design techniques such as increasing the distance between the
       noise source and the noise sensitive receiver and use non-noise
       sensitive structures (e.g., a garage) to shield noise sensitive areas. If
       a berm or wall is determined necessary to mitigate noise, discourage
       exclusive use of walls in excess of six feet in height and encourage
       use of natural barriers such as site topography or constructed
       earthen berms. When walls are determined to be the only feasible
                                                                                            5-19

    City of Carlsbad
5                              solution to noise mitigation, then the walls shall be designed to limit
                               aesthetic impacts. When walls over six feet in height are necessary
                               to mitigate noise, a berm/wall combination with heavy landscaping,
                               a terraced wall heavily landscaped, or other similar innovative wall
                               design technique shall be used to minimize visual impacts.
Noise                  5-P.7	 Mitigation Cost. The City of Carlsbad shall not fund mitigation of
                              existing or future noise impacts from streets, railroad, airport or any
                              other source for existing or future private development within the
                              city.
                       5-P.8	 Noise Guidelines Manual. Update the Noise Guidelines Manual to
                              ensure consistency with General Plan standards and policies, and
                              contemporary practices.
                       Motor Vehicle/Roadway Noise
                       5-P.9	 Continue to enforce the California Motor Vehicle Code as it applies
                              to excessive noise. The Carlsbad Police Department should continue
                              to reduce the number of excessively noisy vehicles on city streets
                              and deter persons from operating their motor vehicles in a noisy
                              manner.
                       5-P.10	 Consider noise impacts in the design of road systems and give
                               special consideration to noise sensitive areas; to the greatest extent
                               possible, the design of roads should minimize roadway noise to
                               levels acceptable to surrounding areas.
                       5-P.11	 Review traffic flow systems and, wherever possible, synchronize sig-
                               nalization and/or implement other traffic flow improvements to
                               avoid traffic stops and starts, and adjust traffic flow to achieve noise
                               levels acceptable to surrounding areas.
                       Airport Noise
                       For policies related to land use compatibility in the airport environs, see Chapter
                       2: Land Use and Community Design Element; for safety policies, see Chapter 6:
                       Public Safety Element. Figure 6-7 shows safety zones, avigation easement areas,
                       and overflight notification areas. Figure 5-3 includes future noise contours asso-
                       ciated with airport operations. Figure 5-4 shows synthesis of some key features
                       – avigation easement areas, airport safety zones 1-6, and 65 dB CNEL.
                       5-P.12	 Use the noise policies in the McClellan-Palomar Airport Land Use
                               Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) to determine acceptability of a land use
                               within the airport’s influence area (AIA) as depicted in the ALUCP.
                               Additional disclosure actions for new development in the AIA, such
                               as avigation easements, deed restrictions, recorded notice, etc., are
                               required of developers/sellers of noise impacted residential units.
                       5-P.13	 For projects within the Airport Influence Area, utilize the noise
                               standards contained in the McClellan-Palomar ALUCP, as well as the
                               noise standards contained in this element. However, reserve the
                               right to overrule the ALUCP as provided for in State Public Utilities
                               Code Section 21676.
    5-20

                                                               78                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 5-4
     City o f
    Oc eanside                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
                          Y
                                                                           MARR ON RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 5-4:	 Airport Noise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 McClellan-Palomar         Compatibility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Airport Noise Policy
                         W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Compatibility Policy Map
         T       TA
      AS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LAKE
    CO       VIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BLVD
                                                                                        DR
                              Buena
            HW                Vista          5                             LA
             Y                                                               GE
                              Lagoon                                   IL
                                                                           V                                                                                                                                                  Calavera                                                                                 ME
                                                                   A   D                                                                                                                                                                                                          N           RD                            LR
                                                                SB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Lake                                              NO                                            O
                                                              RL                                                                                                                                                                                                              AN
                                                            CA                                                                                                                                                                                                            C                                                        DR                                 DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SE                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                                                                            AV                                                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                                                              E                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W                                                                                  Airport Safety Zones
                                                                                                                           M IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        LLEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SH A
                                                                                                                    EL C A
                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                        ACK
                                                                                                                                                                       AR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Zone 1- Runway Protection Zone
                                                                                                                          O                                       AM                                        B LV
                                                                                                                                                                    T                                         D
                                                                                       MA
                                                                                         RACK
                                                                                                                             RE
                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                                  A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Zone 2 - Inner Approach/Departure Zone
                                                                                    TA
                                                                                                      A   VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E AVE                                   Zone 3 - Inner Turning Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                        RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                ON
                                                                                                                                                                                              NN                                                                                                                                                                                              OR
                                                                                                                                                                                         CA                                                                                                                                                                                                  M                                            Zone 4 - Outer Approach/Departure Zone
                                          CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Squires                                                                             CA
                                             RL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Reservoir                                                                      SY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6                                                                                                                                                                                            Zone 5 - Sideline Zone
                                                    AD
                                                 SB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BUSINESS PA RK
                                                       VD                      Ag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Zone 6 - Traffic Pattern Zone
                                                     BL                             ua
                                                                                         He
                                                                                              dio
                                                                                                    nda
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Avigation Easement Areas*
                                                                                                          Lago
                                                                                                                 on                                                                                    FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of                        DR                                                        65 dB CNEL Noise Contour
                                                                                                                                                                                                            DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         RA     YA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VE                                      EL                                                                                      Vista
                                                                                                     CANN
                                                                                                               ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CA                                                               6                                                                                                             Airport Property Boundary
                                                                                                                       RD                                                                                                                                      MI                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MCCLELLAN-                                                      3                                                                                                                                                      City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PALOMAR                                          RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AIRPORT                                          AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2 AIRPOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AR
                                                                                                                                                                                             D                                                                                PALOM                          T   RD
                                                                                                                                                                                          BLV                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                       GE                                          5        c t io n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                    LLE 3                                          P ro t e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ay                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                               CO                                  Runw
                                                                                                                                  6                                                                    1                               5
                                                                                                                                                                            4            2                                                                                                                                                                                                City of                                         Major Road
                                                                                                                                                                    AIRPORT         RD
                                                                                                                                                      MAR                                                                                                        4                                                                                       ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        San Marcos
                                                                                                                                                  PALO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Planned Road
                                                                                                                                                                                             3                                                                                                                                                                  SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LR                                                 FE
                                                                                                                                                                                  IAR
                                                                                                                                                                                     A                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AM         IDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ROBL E                                                                                                DR                                            NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A                        Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                AV                                                               I NO V                                                               LN                                                                                  SA
                                                                                                                                        PASEO                                                                                                                                                                  TIA                                                                                 HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P   OIN                                                                             RAN                                              *Defined as the Runway Protection Zone or
                                                                                                                                                                                     PK W
                                                                                                                                                      ORTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          within the contour of the 65 dB CNEL or
                                                                                                                                                    LN
                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                  DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          areas where the ground penetrates a Part 77
                                                                                                                                                                                                 LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          airspace surface.
                                                                                                                                                                                       TIA                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                    SET                                                                                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                                                                  IN
                                                                                                                                        A ENC I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                PO                                                                                                                                                ALG
                                                                                                                                     NID
                                                                                                                                  AVE
                                                                                                                CAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AV
                                                                                                                 LSB                                                                                                     IA
                                                                                                                    AD                     S                                                                                 PK
                                                                                                                                         NA                                                                               RA    W
                                                                                                                        BLV                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                           D
                 Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                      Bat
                 Ocean                                                                                                                                                                       iquitos Lagoon
                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA COSTA AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LA C
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                              SAN                                                City of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Encinitas
                                                                                                                                                                DIEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RD
                                                                                                                                                        COA                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                                                          RR                                                                                                    MIN
                                                                                                                                                                     HERN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CA                                                                FE
                                                                                                                                                                 ORT
                                                                                                                                                             O N                                                                                                                       REAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SA
                                                                                                                                                                   HWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CH
0     1/4          1/2                   1                                          2                                                                          ST                                                                                                                                                           RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                       MILES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OLIVENHAIN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                           LEUCADIA BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Source: McClellan-Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, 2010.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5-21

                                                                                General Plan
5-P.14	 Recognize that procedures for the abatement of aircraft noise have
        been identified in the Fly Friendly Program for McClellan-Palomar
        Airport. The city expects the widespread dissemination of, and pilot
        adherence to, the adopted procedures.
                                                                                           5
                                                                                            Noise
5-P.15	 Expect the airport to control noise (to the extent of its limited
        authority granted by the Federal Aviation Administration to indi-
        rectly regulate aircraft noise through airport design and scheduling)
        while the city shall control land-use thus sharing responsibility for
        achieving and maintaining long-term noise/land-use compatibility
        in the vicinity of McClellan-Palomar Airport.
5-P.16	 Require new nonresidential development to comply with the noise
        compatibility criteria in the ALUCP. Require dedication of avigation
        easements for new developments designated as conditionally com-
        patible for noise in the ALUCP, and which are located within the 65
        dB CNEL noise contour as mapped on Figure 5-4: Airport Noise Com-
        patibility Policy Map.
Railroad Noise
5-P.17	 Coordinate with other agencies and private entities to investigate
        methods of implementing a railroad quiet zone and other methods
        of reducing railroad noise impacts on surrounding uses; such as
        through development of a grade separated rail corridor.
Work-Related Noise
5-P.18	 Participate in noise control and hearing conservation programs in
        all appropriate work environments owned, operated, or otherwise
        under the control of the City of Carlsbad.
5-P.19	 Promote that all persons responsible for operation of noise-produc-
        ing equipment or processes, exercise reasonable care to minimize
        casual noise exposure to unprotected workers or passers-by to
        reduce risk of hearing damage.
5-P.20	 Encourage and assist its employees in identifying and abating
        potential noise hazards on city-owned or controlled property.
                                                                                         5-23
    City of Carlsbad
5                      This page intentionally left blank.
Noise
    5-24
7 Arts, History, Culture,
  and Education
                                                     General Plan
              The Arts, History, Culture, and Education
              (AHCE) Element of the General Plan recognizes
              that an aesthetic environment and connections
              to culture and education are essential
              characteristics of a community that values
              its quality of life and wishes to be seen by its
              residents, neighbors and visitors as an attractive
              and desirable place, addressing the needs of
              the human spirit. This element is intended to
              enhance availability and accessibility of the arts
              for all residents, preservation of the important
              historic and cultural elements that make
              Carlsbad unique, and educational opportunities
              for lifelong learning.
                                                               7-1
City of Carlsbad
                                                           7-2
                   7
                   Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                                                        General Plan
7.1	 Introduction
Background and Purpose
This element addresses community attributes that contribute to Carlsbad’s
                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                    Arts, History, Culture, and Education
character, and provide enrichment to residents while fostering economic
vitality. First, the element presents a brief history of Carlsbad, tracing the city’s
cultural roots from pre-Colombian times to the modern day. Natural and
built landmarks that represent important links to the city’s cultural history
are highlighted. Second, the city’s rich arts tradition is explored, including the
institutions, public art, and events that enhance community pride and con-
nectedness. Lastly, the city’s educational institutions are addressed in order to
identify ways to maintain their high quality while serving Carlsbad’s growing
population and establishing linkages with economic development.
The AHCE Element consists of narrative goals, policies, and programs that seek
to preserve and enhance Carlsbad’s cultural resources, expand and promote
visual and performing arts and arts education, and support lifelong learning
through youth and adult educational institutions and services.
Relationship to State Law
While the inclusion of art and cultural resources, historic resources, and edu-
cational resources are not required in any of the seven mandated elements of
a general plan, California Government Code Section 65303 indicates that a
general plan may include any other elements, which the community feels relate
to the physical development of the city.
Relationship to Community Vision
The AHCE Element is most closely tied to the following core values of the
Carlsbad Community Vision:
Core Value 7: Emphasize the arts by promoting a multitude of events and pro-
ductions year-round, cutting-edge venues to host world-class performances,
and celebrate Carlsbad’s cultural heritage in dedicated facilities and programs.
Core Value 8: Support quality, comprehensive education and life-long learning
opportunities, provide housing and community services for a changing popula-
tion, and maintain a high standard for citywide public safety.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
The AHCE Element is correlated to the Land Use and Community Design
Element as well as the Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation Element.
Related to the Land Use and Community Design Element, the AHCE Element
supports its objectives of enhancing livability in Carlsbad and creating an
                                                                                                  7-3

                               City of Carlsbad
7
                                                  overall physical image for the city through the arts and preservation of cultural
                                                  and historic resources. The AHCE Element also informs the city’s land use map
                                                  by identifying facility needs for schools and libraries.
                                                  The AHCE Element relates to the Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                  Element in that all new parks include a public art component and address
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                  community needs for arts programming.
                               7-4

                                                                                                                     General Plan
7.2	 Historic Resources
Carlsbad has abundant historic resources representing human settlements that
date hundreds of years into the past. The history of its people and its physical
form are closely connected, as is highlighted in the following historical narrative.
                                                                                                                                      7
                                                                                                                                       Arts, History, Culture, and Education
Brief History of Carlsbad
Pre-Colombian History
Prior to 1798, two Native American tribes were known to occupy the area that is
currently known as Carlsbad: the Luiseños and the Diegueños (or Kumeyaay).
The Luiseños inhabited the area just north of the San Luis Rey River, east toward
Pala and south to Agua Hedionda Lagoon. The Diegueños were a larger group,
and inhabited an area spanning from the Batiquitos Lagoon south to Baja Cal-
ifornia.1 A record search/mapping project completed in 1990 indicated that
within city limits, approximately 480 prehistoric sites associated with these two
Native American tribes have been recorded. Although the locations of these
resources were documented throughout the city, the majority of the prehistoric
sites are located on broad mesa tops and along the lagoon terraces. Though few
sites remain due to land development over the past 30 years, recorded resources
range from single isolated milling features or isolated lithic tools to multi-com-
ponent settlements indicative of long-term and multicultural occupation.2
Spanish and Mexican Period
In 1769, Spanish explorers first arrived from Mexico and camped near Agua
Hedionda Lagoon. When Mexico achieved independence from Spain in 1821,
land ownership and land use patterns evolved, igniting the Rancho period in
California history where large tracts of land were granted to settlers and gov-
ernment friends to encourage settlement and cattle raising. In 1833, the mission
holdings were secularized and divided into large land grants. Much of greater
Carlsbad was part of Rancho Agua Hedionda, a 13,000-acre ranch. The holdings
extended from the Pacific Ocean east toward Vista and from the north side of
Agua Hedionda Lagoon south to Leucadia in present-day Encinitas. In 1842,
Rancho Agua Hedionda was granted to Juan María Marrón, who built a three
room adobe on the property.
                                                                                                      Carlsbad Santa Fe Train Depot (top)
1	 Carlsbad Historical Society 2010. History of Carlsbad. Available at: www.carlsbadhistoricalsoci-
   ety.com. Viewed on Sept. 13, 2010.
                                                                                                      was built in 1907 and today serves
                                                                                                      the city’s Visitor’s Information
2	 Roth and Associates, Cultural Resources Survey: City of Carlsbad, 1990.
                                                                                                      Center. Leo Carrillo Ranch Historic
                                                                                                      Park (bottom).
                                                                                                                                    7-5

                               City of Carlsbad
7
                                                                    Early American Period
                                                                    By the 1860s, the Rancho Agua Hedionda property had been acquired by
                                                                    Matthew Kelly, who established a homestead near the southeast corner and in
                                                                    1868 constructed a home and associated outbuildings, naming the property
                                                                    “Los Kiotes”. After the Civil War, the development of railroads had an enormous
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                                    effect on the development of California and the western United States. The Cali-
                                                                    fornia Southern railroad, with its link to a transnational railroad proved crucial
                                                                    to the transformation of the San Diego region from a farming community to
                                                                    a small city of emerging industry, mercantile and agricultural expansion. The
                                                                    selected route of the railroad determined the future of many coastal town sites,
                                                                    including Carlsbad. The railroad stood as the town’s center in Carlsbad Village,
                                                                    and the town grew several blocks in all directions.
                                                                    In 1886, the Carlsbad Land and Mineral Company was formed, which laid out
                                                                    a town site and initiated speculative development.3 The newly formed town was
                                                                    christened Carlsbad because the mineral water found there contained the same
                                                                    mineral properties as the famous Spa No. 7 in Karlsbad, Bohemia. Despite its
                                                                    popularity among visitors seeking the reported curative powers of Carlsbad’s
                                                                    waters, the city experienced a long period of declining growth between 1890
                                                                    and 1914 due to drought and national economic problems. During that time,
                                                                    buildings were abandoned and land uses changed; mining, industrial and agri-
                                                                    cultural endeavors were attempted but most failed.
                                                                    20th Century
                                                                    Population and economic growth resumed again in the late 1910s, spurred by
                                                                    agriculture. Development and infrastructure expanded to accommodate a
                                                                    growing population, although even in the 1920 Census, Carlsbad residen-
                                                                    tial units were still primarily farms. Also at this time, millions of Mexicans
                                                                    fled north from Mexico to seek refuge during the Mexican Revolution, some
                                                                    of whom settled in Carlsbad. These immigrants provided additional farm and
                                                                    railroad labor to the area. They built small simple houses with no electricity or
                                                                    indoor plumbing and later sold the homes to other incoming immigrants. This
                                                                    development provided the foundation for the first neighborhood in Carlsbad,
                                                                    which today is called the Barrio. By 1930, areas near the historic core were divided
                                                                    and subdivided to make room for the newly developing suburban enclaves.
                                                                    Like the rest of the country, Carlsbad felt the effects of the Great Depression in
                                                                    the 1930s, during which numerous businesses failed and many middle and lower
                                                                    class residents left the area. After WWII, however, suburban development began
                                                                    to spread throughout Southern California and, following a series of annexa-
                                                                    tions beginning in the 1960s, including La Costa in 1972, Carlsbad has grown
                                                                    gradually in area and population.
                               Gaus House (top); Twin Inns/ Ocean   3	 City of Carlsbad 1994 Final Master Environmental Impact Report for the City of Carlsbad General
                               House (bottom).                         Plan Update.
                               7-6

                                                                                        General Plan
                                                                                                   7
Regulatory Setting
Federal Regulations
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966
The National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) was signed into law in 1966. The
                                                                                                    Arts, History, Culture, and Education
act seeks to preserve historic and archaeological sites across the United States.
The NHPA solidified the role of the National Parks Service as lead agency in the
historic preservation program and created cooperative partners in the process,
including the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, State Historic Preser-
vation Offices and Tribal Historic Preservation Offices.
The NHPA was amended in 1980 to create the Certified Local Government
(CLG) program, administered through the California State Office of Historic
Preservation. This program allows for direct local government participation
and integration in a comprehensive statewide historic preservation planning
process. Cities and counties with CLG status may compete for preserva-
tion funds allocated by the United States Congress and awarded to each state.
Carlsbad is currently not a member of the CLG program.
National Register of Historic Places
The National Register of Historic Places is the nation’s official list of historic
places. The register is overseen by the National Park Service, and requires that a
property or resource eligible for listing on the register meet one of the following
four criteria at the national, state, or local level to ensure integrity and obtain
official designation.
•	 Property is associated with events that have made a significant contribu-
   tion to the broad patterns of our history.
•	 Property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past.
   Eligible properties based on this criterion are generally those associ-
   ated with the productive life of the individual in the field in which they
   achieved significance.
•	 Property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
   method of construction or represents the work of a master, or possesses
   high artistic values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity
   whose components lack individual distinction.
•	 Property has yielded, or is likely to yield, information important to pre-
   history or history.
In addition to meeting at least one of these four criteria, listed properties must
also retain sufficient physical integrity of those features necessary to convey
historic significance. The register has identified the following seven aspects of
integrity: (1) location; (2) design; (3) setting; (4) materials; (5) workmanship; (6)
feeling; and (7) association.
                                                                                                  7-7

                               City of Carlsbad
7
                                                  Properties are nominated to the register by the State Historic Preservation
                                                  Officer of the state in which the property is located, by the Federal Preservation
                                                  Officer for properties under federal ownership or control, or by the Tribal Pres-
                                                  ervation Officer if on tribal lands.
                                                  Listing in the National Register of Historic Places provides formal recognition
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                  of a property’s historic, architectural, or archeological significance. Inclusion in
                                                  the register’s database provides incentives to property owners such as: federal
                                                  preservation grants for planning and rehabilitation; federal investment tax
                                                  credits; preservation easements to nonprofit organizations; international
                                                  building code, fire and life safety code alternatives; state tax benefits; and grant
                                                  opportunities.4 Listing does not lead to public acquisition or require public
                                                  access. In addition, listing does not place any obligations on the private property
                                                  owners, and there are no restrictions on use, treatment, transfer, or disposition
                                                  of private property.
                                                  National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
                                                  The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) was signed into law in 1970.
                                                  NEPA created an environmental review process requiring federal agencies to
                                                  consider the effects of their actions on the environment. Under NEPA, all federal
                                                  agencies must carry out their regulations, policies and programs in accordance
                                                  with NEPA’s policies for environmental protection, including project compli-
                                                  ance with Section 106 of the NHPA, the purpose of which is to identify historic
                                                  properties, assess the effects a proposed action might have, and provide ways to
                                                  avoid, minimize, or mitigate any adverse effect that may occur.
                                                  State Regulations
                                                  California Environmental Quality Act of 1970
                                                  The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was enacted in 1970. This
                                                  act requires that state and local agencies in California to evaluate the environ-
                                                  mental implications of their actions. Furthermore, CEQA requires that cultural
                                                  resources be considered when assessing the environmental impact of a proposed
                                                  project, and that agencies avoid or reduce the project’s significant impact(s) to
                                                  these resources.
                                                  Senate Bill 18
                                                  California Senate Bill 18 was enacted in 2005, and requires cities and counties to
                                                  notify and consult with California Native American tribes regarding proposed
                                                  local land use planning decisions for the purpose of protecting traditional tribal
                                                  cultural places (otherwise known as sacred sites), prior to adopting or amending
                                                  a general plan or designating land as open space. Once tribes are contacted, they
                                                  have 90 days to request consultation.
                                                  4	 National Park Service. 2010. National Register of Historic Places Fundamentals. Available at:
                                                     http://www.nps.gov/nr/national_register_fundamentals.htm
                               7-8

                                                                                       General Plan
                                                                                                  7
California Register of Historic Resources
The California Office of Historic Preservation maintains the California
Register, which is the authoritative guide to the state’s significant historic and
archeological resources. The program provides for the identification, evaluation,
registration and protection of California’s historic resources. The California
                                                                                                   Arts, History, Culture, and Education
Register has established criteria to be used when evaluating the eligibility of a
property or resource for listing. The four criteria are as follows:
•	 It is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
   the broad patterns of local or regional history, or the cultural heritage of
   California or the United States;
•	 It is associated with the lives of persons important to local, California, or
   national history;
•	 It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
   construction or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic
   values;
•	 It has yielded, or is likely to yield, information important to prehistory or
   history of the local area, California or the nation.
Similar to the National Register of Historic Places, eligibility to be listed on the
California Register requires an establishment of physical integrity, including the
seven aspects previously described for the National Register, although Califor-
nia’s list of special considerations is less stringent.
Local Regulations and Authorities
City of Carlsbad Municipal Code—Historic Preservation
City of Carlsbad Municipal Code Chapter 22.06 states that a historic resource
may be considered and approved by the City Council for inclusion in the city’s
historic resources inventory based on one or more of the following:
•	 It exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city’s cultural, social, eco-
   nomic, political, aesthetic, engineering or architectural history;
•	 It is identified with persons or events significant in local, state or national
   history;
•	 It embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period or method
   of construction, is a valuable example of the use of indigenous materials
   or craftsmanship or is representative of a notable work of an acclaimed
   builder, designer or architect;
•	 It is an archaeological, paleontological, botanical, geological, topograph-
   ical, ecological or geographical site which has the potential of yielding
   information of scientific value;
                                                                                                 7-9

                               City of Carlsbad
7
                                                                     •	 It is a geographically definable area with a concentration of buildings,
                                                                        structures, improvements, or objects linked historically through loca-
                                                                        tion, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and/or association,
                                                                        in which the collective value of the improvements may be greater than the
                                                                        value of each individual improvement.
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                                     Historic Preservation Commission
                                                                     The city’s Historic Preservation Commission consists of five members appointed
                                                                     by the City Council and one ex-officio representative of the Planning Commis-
                                                                     sion. The Historic Preservation Commission advises the City Council and the
                                                                     Planning Commission on all matters related to the identification, protection,
                                                                     retention and preservation of historic areas and sites.
                                                                     City of Carlsbad Cultural Resource Guidelines
                                                                     In 1990, the city developed guidelines for the treatment of cultural resources
                                                                     consistent with federal, state, and local laws, as well as the United States
                                                                     Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Archaeology and Historic Preservation.
                                                                     The city’s guidelines establish standards of performance for resource investi-
                                                                     gation and present a systematic method of preserving identified resources. The
                                                                     guidelines are applicable to cultural resources from the prehistoric through
                                                                     historic periods and are implemented during CEQA compliance.5 The city’s
                                                                     current process for designating landmarks and points of interest is outlined in
                                                                     Carlsbad Municipal Code Section 22.06.030.
                                                                     Heritage Tree Preservation
                                                                     In keeping with direction from the city’s Community Forest Management Plan,
                                                                     which provides guidelines for planting, maintaining, removing, and preserv-
                                                                     ing trees in the city’s rights-of-way and other public places, the City of Carlsbad
                                                                     prepared a Heritage Tree Report to identify the city’s most significant trees -
                                                                     heritage trees, which are links to the past that are often unique, large, or special to
                                                                     the community in some other way. Benefits of heritage trees include their diversity
                                                                     of age and species composition, prominence as visual land marks, wildlife habitat
                                                                     niches, sensitivity as indicators of environmental problems, and influence on
                                                                     property values. The Heritage Tree Report was conducted in two phases under
                                                                     the direction of the Historic Preservation Commission. Phase I (Village area) was
                                                                     accepted by the Historic Preservation Commission and the Parks and Recreation
                                                                     Commission (the Parks and Recreation Commission oversees implementation of
                                                                     the Community Forest Management Plan). Phase II of the report (areas outside
                                                                     of the Village) has been accepted by the Historic Preservation Commission and is
                                                                     now pending review by the Parks Department staff and the Parks and Recreation
                                                                     Commission. It is anticipated that once sewer lateral issues have been resolved,
                                                                     both phases of the Heritage Tree Report will be presented to the City Council for
                               Magee House (top) and grounds         inclusion in the Community Forest Management Plan.
                               (bottom) –home to the Carlsbad His-
                               torical Society.                      5	 City of Carlsbad 1994 Final Master Environmental Impact Report for the City of Carlsbad Gen-
                                                                        eral Plan Update.
                               7-10

                                                                                                        General Plan
                                                                                                                     7
 Table 7–1:	 CARLSBAD NATIONAL AND STATE HISTORIC RESOURCES
 NAME/DESCRIPTION                       ADDRESS                         NATIONAL REGISTER CALIFORNIA REGISTER
                                                                        OF HISTORIC PLACES OF HISTORIC RESOURCES
 Carlsbad Santa Fe Depot                400 Carlsbad Village Dr.                 X
 Rancho de los Kiotes (Leo Carrillo     6200 Flying Leo Carrillo Ln.             X                  X
                                                                                                                      Arts, History, Culture, and Education
 Ranch Historic Park)
 Frazier's Well/Alt Karlsbad            2802 Carlsbad Blvd.                                         X
 Source: Dyett & Bhatia, 2010.
Historic and Cultural Places and Landmarks
Carlsbad is home to many structures and places with historical and cultural
value that help to connect the city’s heritage to its present and future, as described
in the historical narrative above. There are three resources in Carlsbad listed on
the National Register of Historic Places and/or the California Register of Histor-
ical Resources (see Table 7-1). In addition, there are several resources potentially
eligible for nomination to the state or federal registers. More information on
listed resources and potential historic resources, including addresses and a map,
can be found in Envision Carlsbad Working Paper 4 – History, the Arts and
Cultural Resources; High Quality Education and Community Services.
Paleontological Resources
Paleontological resources are the remains and/or traces of prehistoric plant
and animal life, exclusive of human remains. The formation of fossils typically
involves the rapid burial of plant or animal remains and the formation of casts,
molds, or impressions in the associated sediment (which subsequently becomes
sedimentary rock). Because of this, the potential for fossil remains in a given
geologic formation can be predicted based on known fossil occurrences from
similar (or correlated) geologic formations in other locations.
The City of Carlsbad contains several geologic formations that include a
sequence of marine and non-marine sedimentary rock units that record
portions of the last 140 million years of earth history. The geologic forma-
tions found in the city are primarily the Lusardi Formation of the Cretaceous
Age, as well as the Santiago Formation and Del Mar Formation of the Tertiary
Age that overlie the Lusardi Formation. The Lusardi Formation consistently
produces significant fossils and consists of sandstones and conglomerate that
were deposited in a shallow sea that covered the region approximately 74 million
years ago. The Santiago Formation and Del Mar Formation make up the sand-
stones and siltstones of the La Jolla Group, which is approximately 45 million
years old and has produced a large number of vertebrate and invertebrate fossils.
The La Jolla Group has a high potential for containing significant fossils. Loma
Linda terrace deposits of the Quaternary Age have the potential to contain fos-
siliferous rock from Pleistocene terrace deposits of not more than two million
years in age. These fossils are also potentially significant.
                                                                                                                   7-11

7                                                                       7.3	 Arts and Culture
                                                                        Carlsbad boasts a variety of arts and cultural events, institutions and programs
                                                                        aimed at promoting a sense of community identity and providing education
                                                                        and information about the city’s heritage. Events such as ArtSplash, TGIF Jazz
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                                        in the Parks, and exhibits at the William D. Cannon Art Gallery provide outlets
                                                                        for the arts and cultural community. These events help Carlsbad residents from
                                                                        all cultural backgrounds to celebrate local traditions and heritage in creative
                                                                        and inspiring ways by building connections between historic resources and the
                                                                        arts and by promoting and strengthening both. A partial list of major arts and
                                                                        cultural institutions, organizations, events, and programs both within Carlsbad
                                                                        and regionally is included in Table 7-2.
                                        Table 7–2:	 CARLSBAD CULTURAL INSTITUTIONS, EVENTS, AND PROGRAMS (SELECTED)
                                        NAME                                                       ADDRESS                          TYPE
                                        Cultural Institutions
                                        Carlsbad Cultural Arts Office                              2955 Elmwood St.                 Municipal
                                        Carlsbad History Room                                      1250 Carlsbad Village Dr.        Municipal
                                        Carlsbad Sculpture Garden                                  2955 Elmwood St.                 Municipal
                                        William D. Cannon Art Gallery                              1775 Dove Ln.                    Municipal
                                        Carlsbad Historical Society                                258 Beech Ave.                   Non-Profit
                                        New Village Arts Theatre                                   2787 State St.                   Non-Profit
                                        Museum of Making Music                                     5790 Armada Dr.                  Non-Profit
                                        Carlsbad Community Cultural Arts Center                    3557 Lancer Way                  Non-Profit
                                        Gemological Institute of America Museum                    5345 Armada Dr.                  Non-Profit
                                        Carlsbad Village Theatre                                   2822 State St.                   Private, For-Profit
                                        San Diego Archaeological Center                            Escondido                        Regional
                                        Save Our Heritage Organization                             San Diego                        Regional
                                        California Center for the Arts Escondido                   Escondido                        Regional
                                        Events and Programs
                                        City of Carlsbad Art in Public Places                                                       Municipal
                                        TGIF Jazz in the Parks                                                                      Municipal
                                        Holiday at the Rancho                                                                       Municipal
                                        Leo Carrillo Film Festival                                                                  Municipal
                                        Wild West Fest                                                                              Municipal
                                        Dinner and a Movie                                                                          Municipal
                                        Three-Part-Art                                                                              Municipal
                                        This is Jazz                                                                                Municipal
                                        Carlsbad Village Street Faire                                                               Non-Profit
                                        Art Splash                                                                                  Non-Profit
                                        Carlsbad Art in the Village                                                                 Non-Profit
                                        Carlsbad Art Walk                                                                           Non-Profit
                                        Art At Jazz                                                                                 Non-Profit
                                        Carlsbad Music Festival                                                                     Non-Profit
                                        Meet the Masters                                                                            Private, For-Profit
                                        Source: Dyett & Bhatia, 2010.
                               7-12

                                                                                    General Plan
                                                                                               7
Public Art
Public art can serve as a key component of place-making, playing a significant
role in defining the character of a community while contributing to the aesthetic
quality of public spaces. These distinct visual elements whether permanent or
temporary, kinetic or stationary, stand-alone or integrated into the architecture
                                                                                                Arts, History, Culture, and Education
and landscaping can define a destination and gathering place, as well as serving
as a wayfinding element.
Public art can serve as a point of reference and landmark, welcoming and
orienting residents and visitors to Carlsbad. It can reinforce primary gateways,
streets, bikeways, traffic islands, medians, and neighborhood centers. It can
strengthen critical linkages, including pedestrian passages to the beach, and
enliven the pedestrian experience.
Public art for streetscape and neighborhood improvement can take many forms
including:
•	 Iconic Artwork. Iconic artwork is significant, large-scale permanent
   artwork serving as defining landmarks at major gateways into Carlsbad, at
   civic centers, and on major boulevards and intersections.
•	 Wayfinding Artwork. Wayfinding artwork is permanent artwork located
   in active vehicular and pedestrian intersections. It serves to connect key
   locations within Carlsbad’s core, enhance pedestrian circulation, and guide
   passage to and from the beach and other destinations.
•	 Temporary Art. Temporary art installations are non-permanent artwork
   in a range of media and scale that are displayed for a limited amount of
   time. The artwork serves to enliven and refresh the pedestrian experi-
   ence, enhance tourism and pique public awareness of the built and natural
   environments. Priority placement is in high-traffic pedestrian areas where
   first-time and repeat visitors can delight in a changing environment.
•	 Points-of-Interest Artwork. Points of interest artwork at boulevards and
   special streets are individual or multiple artworks placed at select locations
   along the sidewalks, bikeways, and in open spaces along a heavily trafficked
   vehicular and pedestrian thoroughfare. The artworks serve as points of
   interest and visual respite along the corridors and to delineate and connect
   key places and neighborhoods.
•	 Neighborhood Identity Artwork. Neighborhood identity artwork is per-
   manent artwork located in neighborhood centers and parks where people
   congregate, interact, and engage in social activities. The artwork augments
   a sense of neighborhood identity and signals a community gathering place.
                                                                                             7-13

                               City of Carlsbad
7                                                                     7.4	 Educational Resources
                                                                      The Carlsbad community places a priority on supporting a high quality, com-
                                                                      prehensive educational system, including lifelong learning opportunities for
                                                                      all ages. The community hosts institutions such as Army and Navy Academy,
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                                      Pacific Ridge School, and the Gemological Institute of America. Values identi-
                                                                      fied in the community include maintaining high standards and performance,
                                                                      pursuing opportunities for improvement and growth, and ensuring equal
                                                                      access to educational resources.
                                                                      Public Schools
                                                                      Facilities
                                                                      Public school systems are organized into districts that define the population area
                                                                      to be served. Each school district controls, among other things, construction of
                                                                      the public school facilities it provides, including the number, size, and location
                                                                      of these facilities. Carlsbad is served by four school districts: Carlsbad Unified
                                                                      School District (CUSD), San Marcos Unified School District, Encinitas Union
                                                                      Elementary School District and San Dieguito Union High School District.
                                                                      Although the Vista Unified School District overlaps with two small areas of
                                                                      Carlsbad, these areas do not contain any residential uses. The boundaries of the
                                                                      districts are indicated on Figure 7-1. Most of Carlsbad (about 62 percent of the
                                                                      residential land—4,187 of 6,797 acres) is served by CUSD, which comprises nine
                                                                      elementary schools that feed into three middle schools and two high schools,
                                                                      accommodating more than 10,000 students. One of the CUSD high schools,
                                                                      Sage Creek High School, recently opened for the 2013-2014 school year. Table 7-3
                                                                      lists all CUSD facilities within Carlsbad and Table 7-4 lists facilities in the three
                                                                      other school districts that serve Carlsbad students.
                                                                      Current and Projected Enrollment
                                                                      According to Education Data Partnership, after steadily increasing for more
                                                                      than 15 years, enrollment in California schools is leveling off and even declining
                                                                      in some areas. Locally, CUSD’s elementary and middle schools have seen a slow
                                                                      and steady increase in enrollment over the past five years, with a new elemen-
                                                                      tary school and a new homeschooling program starting up to meet demand.
                                                                      Between 2008 and 2010, the Carlsbad High School had seen a small drop in
                                                                      enrollment but those numbers have begun to rebound, as seen in Table 7-5.
                                                                      Table 7-6 lists total current enrollment for all school districts serving Carlsbad.
                               Senior Center (bottom) – offers edu-
                               cational programs to the community,
                               including computer classes.
                               7-14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 7-1
                                                           78
                City of
             OCEANSIDE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 7-1:	PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GENERAL       School Districts and Facilities
                Oceanside                              RO             RD
                                                   M AR N
                                                                                                                Hope
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            School Districts & Facilities
                                        Buena
                                                                      DR                                     Elementary
                                        Vista
                            Buena
                                     Elementary                 AG                                                                                                                                                                                                                 78          #
                            Vista                                 E
                            Lagoon                         IL                     EL                                                           Calavera Hills
                                                                      Beautiful                                                                               Calavera
                                                            V
                                                              L
                                                                      Saviour
                                                                                                                                            Elementary/Middle                                                                                                                                          Senior Center
                                                       D                                                                                                      Lake
       Army & Navy                                  BA
                                                                                   C AM
                                               S
         Academy                             RL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City Library
                                           CA1                                         3                                                                  VD                                                City of
                                                                                                                                                      E BL
                                                                                       INO
                                                                   Carlsbad                                                  E
                                                                     High
                                                                                                                                                    EG
                                                     Carlsbad                                                         ACK
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oceanside                                                                        Schools
                                                      Village                                                             AV                      LL
                                                                                        R EA                                                    CO
                                                                            Magnolia
                                                     Academy
                                                                           Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                               Sage Creek                                                                                                              Elementary School
                                                                                             L                   AR                                                               High
                                                            VE
                                                     St. Patrick                                                AM
                                                         KA                                                 T                                                                                                                                                                                          Middle School
                                       Jefferson     R AC Valley
                                      Elementary   MA     Middle                                                                                          RD
                                                 TA                                                                                            ON
                                                                                                                                             NN                                                                                                                                                        High School
                                                                                                       Kelly                            CA
                                                                                                    Elementary                             EL                                                                                                                                                          Alternative/Continuation School
                                                                                                                                                   CA                                                                  Maerkle
                                                                                                                                                        MIN                                                            Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                  RE                                                                                                                                   Private School
                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                  Agu a                                                                                                    L
                                          CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Post-Secondary/Specialty School
                                                                      Hed iond a                                                                                                                                                                                              SAN MARCOS
                                               B
                                           RLS                              La goon
                                                                                                                                                 FARA                                                                                                   City of
                                               AD                                                                                                      DA Y
                                                                                                                                                               AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                            5                                            Vista                                         Public School District Boundary
                                                                            CANN                                                                                  E
                                                       D                        ON
P a c i f i c                                      BLV                                        RD
                                                                                             Gemological
                                                                                             Institute                                                                                                                                                                                                 Highways
 O c e a n                                                                                   of America                                                       CARLSBAD UNIFIED                             PALOM A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T RD
                                                                                                                                                                          MCCLELLAN                                                                                                                    Major Street
                                                                                                                                                                           -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                            AIRPORT                                             Pacific                                          City of
                                                                                                                                                                                              Vitality                                                                                                 Planned Street
                                                                                                                  PORT                RD                   Golf                                                                  Ridge                                         San Marcos
                                                                                                            AIR                                         Academy
                                                                                                                                                                                              College
                                                                                            PALOM A R                                                                                        of Healing
                                                                                                                                                        of America                              Arts                                                                                                   Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BLE           Poinsettia
                                                                                                                                                                                 C         VIDA R O                                                   Carrillo           S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LRO                               City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                         O                        Elementary               LN
                                                                                                                                                                                   A M IN                                        IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ETT                   Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ME
                                                                                                                Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O INS
                                                            National                                            Rim                                                                                                     P                                              ED
                                                            University                                          Elementary                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                        ETT
                                                                                                                                           IA                                                                                                             A R
                                                                                                                                      NS                                                                                                           ALG
                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                            PO                          AV                   Aviara Oaks
                                                                                      CAR
                                                                                                                  4                                       IAR             Elementary/Middle                                                             La Costa
                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                      P                                                                                 Meadows
                                                                                       LSB
                                                                                                                                                                         Y                                                                             Elementary
                                                                                        AD                                                                            KW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SAN MARCOS UNIFIED
                                                                                                D
                                                                                            BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                Ba tiq uitos           Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                                  AVE                                                                        ENCINITAS UNION/
                                                                                                                                                        LA      C O STA                                                                              AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 STA        SAN DIEGUITO UNION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                     EL                                     La Costa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Heights
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MINO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                El Camino
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creek                                    D
                                                                                                             S AN                                                 City of                                       Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                 Encinitas                                 RE                                       N TA
                                                                                                                     O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                             AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                                                                                                 DIEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O                                                                               ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CH Mission             La Costa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Estancia
                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RA                             Canyon
                                                                                                                          ERN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N      Elementary             High
                                                                                                                      RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0           0.5           1                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Olivenhain
                                                                                                                            R                                                                                                                            Pioneer                                                           Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Elementary                          Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; SANDAG, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                        ENCINITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7-15

                                                                                                                                  General Plan
                                                                                                                                                 7
Table 7–3:	 CARLSBAD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT FACILITIES SUMMARY
SCHOOL                                ADDRESS                               GRADE        CAMPUS CLASSROOMS SQUARE                      YEAR
                                                                            RANGE       ACREAGE            FOOTAGE                     BUILT
Elementary Schools
Aviara Oaks Elementary                6900 Ambrosia Ln.                         K–5             16                 41         65,391   1990
                                                                                                                                                  Arts, History, Culture, and Education
Buena Vista Elementary                1330 Buena Vista Way                      K–5               9                29         47,877   1960
Calavera Hills Elementary             4100 Tamarack Ave.                        K–5               9                28        40,000    2002
Hope Elementary                       3010 Tamarack Ave.                        K–5             14                 38        53,446    1986
Jefferson Elementary                  3743 Jefferson St.                        K–5               8                42         62,896   1999
Kelly Elementary                      4885 Kelly Dr.                            K–5               8                31         45,790   1977
Magnolia Elementary                   1905 Magnolia Ave.                        K–5             11                 38         59,301   1956
Pacific Rim Elementary                1100 Camino de las Ondas                  K–5             10                 36         50,625   1999
Poinsettia Elementary                 2445 Mica Rd.                             K–5             10                 24        49,000    2007
Middle Schools
Aviara Oaks Middle                    6880 Ambrosia Ln.                         6–8             29                 33        68,054    1999
Calavera Hills Middle                 4104 Tamarack Ave.                        6–8             28                 28        54,000    2004
Valley Middle                         1645 Magnolia Ave.                        6–8             20                 48         86,925   1965
High Schools
Carlsbad High                         3557 Monroe St.                          9–12             29                131        218,460   1957
Sage Creek High                       3900 Cannon Rd.                          9-12             52                                     2013
Alternative Schools
Carlsbad Seaside Academy1             1640 Magnolia Ave.                       K–12            n/a                n/a            n/a    n/a
Carlsbad Village Academy              1640 Magnolia Ave.                     10–12                5                12         16,000   2002
1	 Seaside Academy is a homeschooling program, so campus acreage, classrooms, square footage, and year built do not apply.
Sources: Carlsbad Unified School District Facilities Master Plan and Proposition P Construction Program (2007); Dyett & Bhatia, 2010.
Table 7–4:	 OTHER SCHOOL DISTRICT FACILITIES SERVING CARLSBAD
SCHOOL                                          ADDRESS                                         SCHOOL DISTRICT
Elementary Schools
La Costa Meadows Elementary                     6889 El Fuerte St.                              San Marcos Unified
Carrillo Elementary                             2875 Poinsettia Ln.                             San Marcos Unified
La Costa Heights Elementary                     3035 Levante St.                                Encinitas Union Elementary
El Camino Creek Elementary                      7885 Paseo Aliso                                Encinitas Union Elementary
Capri Elementary                                941 Capri Rd, Encinitas                         Encinitas Union Elementary
Mission Estancia Elementary                     3330 Calle Barcelona                            Encinitas Union Elementary
Olivenhain Pioneer Elementary                   8000 Calle Acervo                               Encinitas Union Elementary
Middle Schools
San Elijo Middle                                1600 Schoolhouse Way, San Marcos San Marcos Unified
Oak Crest Middle                                675 Balour Dr., Encinitas                       San Dieguito Union High
Diegueno Middle                                 2150 Village Park Way, Encinitas                San Dieguito Union High
High Schools
San Marcos High                                 1615 W San Marcos Blvd.                         San Marcos Unified
La Costa Canyon High                            1 Maverick Way                                  San Dieguito Union High
Sources: Carlsbad Unified School District Facilities Master Plan and Proposition P Construction Program (2007); Dyett & Bhatia, 2010.
                                                                                                                                               7-17

                               City of Carlsbad
7
                                        Table 7–5:	 CARLSBAD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT ENROLLMENT (2007-2012)
                                                                                                                        ENROLLMENT
                                        SCHOOL                                     2007-2008            2008-2009            2009-2010            2010-2011            2011-2012
                                        Elementary Schools                               4,929               4,993                5,152                5,211                5,156
                                        Aviara Oaks Elementary                             784                  771                  770                 744                  734
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                        Buena Vista Elementary                             282                  287                  255                 276                  286
                                        Calavera Hills Elementary                          636                  636                 640                  610                  566
                                        Hope Elementary                                    452                  469                  502                 539                  592
                                        Jefferson Elementary                               619                  639                  693                 729                  707
                                        Kelly Elementary                                   442                  450                  495                 477                  449
                                        Magnolia Elementary                                450                  423                  419                 435                  432
                                        Pacific Rim Elementary                             817                  807                 844                  879                  849
                                        Poinsettia Elementary                              447                  511                  534                 522                  541
                                        Middle Schools                                   2,514               2,504                2,548                2,575                2,647
                                        Aviara Oaks Middle                                 914                  919                  977               1,007                1,055
                                        Calavera Hills Middle                              547                  569                  594                 561                  564
                                        Valley Middle                                    1,053                1,016                  977               1,007                1,028
                                        High Schools                                     3,020               2,944                2,957                3,034                3,049
                                        Carlsbad High                                    3,020               2,944                2,957                3,034                3,049
                                        Alternative Schools                                258                  237                  227                 203                  187
                                        Carlsbad Seaside Academy                           102                   91                   83                   62                  60
                                        (homeschool)
                                        Carlsbad Village Academy                           156                  146                  144                 141                  127
                                        TOTAL ENROLLMENT IN CUSD                        10,721               10,678              10,906               11,046               11,063
                                        Source:	 DataQuest, California Department of Education, Educational Demographics Unit, 2013 (http://www.cde.ca.gov/ds/sd/cb/data-
                                                 quest.asp).
                                        Table 7–6:	 SCHOOL DISTRICTS SERVING CARLSBAD, ENROLLMENT
                                        SCHOOL DISTRICT                                                                                         TOTAL DISTRICT ENROLLMENT
                                        Encinitas Union Elementary                                                                                                          5,562
                                        San Dieguito Union High                                                                                                           12,606
                                        Carlsbad Unified                                                                                                                  10,695
                                        San Marcos Unified                                                                                                                20,107
                                        Sources: Carlsbad Unified School District Facilities Master Plan and Proposition P Construction Program (2007); Dyett & Bhatia, 2010 ; San
                                                  Marcos Unified School District, 2014.
                               7-18

                                                                                             General Plan
                                                                                                        7
According to the Carlsbad Unified School District Facilities Master Plan and
Proposition P6 Construction Program (2007), although city population and
housing units are expected to grow, student yield per housing unit is declining,
resulting in slower student population growth than in previous years. Contrib-
uting factors listed in the construction program include the cost of housing
in the city (less affordable to families with children), the economic recession,
                                                                                                         Arts, History, Culture, and Education
and a soft job market. Not listed in the construction program is the broad
demographic change Carlsbad is likely to experience—toward an older pop-
ulation—which may also be a primary cause of changes in student yield per
housing unit today and into the future.
Future school enrollment is based on two principal factors—an increase in
housing units, and ongoing demographic changes that impact student genera-
tion rates (average number of students per household). According to SANDAG
projections, due to an aging population and demographic shifts, Carlsbad’s
school-age population as a percentage of the total population is likely to remain
stable or decline over the planning horizon—the percentage of the population
aged 5 to 9 is projected to decline by 0.2 percent and for the population aged 15
to 17 by as much as 14.5 percent. The percentage of the population aged 10 to 14
is projected to remain relatively stable, with an increase of 0.5 percent. Within
the various school districts serving Carlsbad, the percentage of the population
composed of the two younger age groups remains relatively stable or increases,
while the percentage composed of the older age group declines significantly
more. For example, in the Carlsbad Unified School District (CUSD), the per-
centage of population composed of elementary-aged children is projected to
decline by 2.3 percent between 2012 and 2035. For middle school aged and high
school aged children, the declines are 0.2 percent and 15.7 percent, respectively.
Table 7-7 projects the change in public school enrollment at buildout for the
four school districts serving Carlsbad, and compares the changes in enrollment
with capacity. Projections are based on existing dwelling units and anticipated
new units resulting from development, combined with school district student
generation rates where available, and SANDAG demographic data. Carlsbad’s
student population is expected to remain relatively stable or decline in three of
the four school districts serving the city. The largest increase is projected to be
in the elementary school aged population in CUSD, where additional capacity
in existing schools is available. For all school districts at all grade levels, capacity
is expected to be sufficient for the buildout student population with no need for
additional schools.
6	 For more information on Proposition P, see the Funding and Planned Improvements Section
   below.
                                                                                                      7-19

                               City of Carlsbad
7
                                        Table 7–7:	 EXISTING AND PROJECTED PUBLIC SCHOOL ENROLLMENT
                                                                                                      CHANGE IN ENROLLMENT
                                        DISTRICT                       ENROLLMENT                   FROM FROM NEW                       NET        EXISTING CAPACITY                 EXCESS
                                                                    FROM CARLSBAD            DEMOGRAPHIC   UNITS AT                  CHANGE            FOR CARLSBAD                CAPACITY
                                                                           2012/13                TRENDS BUILDOUT                                          STUDENTS
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                        Carlsbad Unified
                                        Elementary (K-5)                           5,077                    -97           1,458         1,361                        7,623                 1,185
                                        Middle (6-8)                               2,648                      -6             644           638                       3,430                  144
                                        High (9-12)                                3,156                   -473              449            -24                      4,950                 1,818
                                        San Marcos Unified
                                        Elementary (K-5)                           1,223                     40               23            63                        N/A1                  N/A
                                        Middle (6-8)                                 492                       3                6             9                        N/A                  N/A
                                        High (9-12)                                   451                    -78               10          -68                         N/A                  N/A
                                        Encinitas Union
                                        Elementary (K-6)                           2,691                   -106               30            -77                      3,295                  681
                                        San Dieguito Union
                                        Middle (7-8)                                 638                     -10               31            21                      2,140                 1,481
                                        High (9-12)                                1,520                   -187               57          -130                       2,717                 1,327
                                        1	 SMUSD is currently (2013) in the process of determining existing capacity at individual school s system-wide; this data is not yet available.
                                        Sources:	 CALPADS. 2013; Carlsbad Unified School District Technology and Information Systems, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013; City of
                                                  Encinitas Current Conditions Report, 2010; Encinitas Union School District Superintendent’s Office, 2013; San Dieguito Union
                                                  School District Planning Services, 2013; City of Carlsbad, 2013; Carlsbad Unified School District School Facilities Needs Analysis,
                                                  2010; San Marcos Unified School District School Facilities Needs Analysis, 2013; San Marcos Unified School District Department
                                                  of Facilities Planning and Development, 2013.
                                                                                  Funding and Planned Improvements
                                                                                  California school districts receive funding from various local, state and federal
                                                                                  sources. The largest component is usually state aid, more commonly known
                                                                                  as Proposition 98 funding. Proposition 98, passed by California voters in 1988,
                                                                                  constitutionally guarantees a minimum level of funding for K-adult education
                                                                                  and community colleges. K-adult education typically receives around 90
                                                                                  percent of total Proposition 98 funding.7 However, in addition to Proposition
                                                                                  98 funds from the state, Carlsbad voters passed local Proposition P in 2006, a
                                                                                  General Obligation Bond Measure for $198 million for renovations, modern-
                                                                                  ization, and new construction for the Carlsbad Unified School District. The
                                                                                  original anticipated state match funding of $25.2 million increased to $47
                                                                                  million due to additional eligibility for modernization and new construction
                                                                                  funding. Through December 2012, the district received $18.2 million of state
                                                                                  7	 Crouch, M. “K-12 enrollment: A slight increase is predicted for elementary, but secondary will
                                                                                     continue to see declines”, Governmental Relations, Association of California School Administra-
                                                                                     tors.
                               7-20

                                                                                    General Plan
                                                                                               7
matched funds and the anticipated remaining $28.8 million is not expected to
be received from the state until after 2014. Program spending began in 2007 and
the total planned obligation through Fall 2013 is $223.5 million to finish Phase
5 at Carlsbad High School and finish construction of the new Sage Creek High
School.
                                                                                                Arts, History, Culture, and Education
Residents in the San Marcos Unified School District passed Proposition K in
2010, a General Obligation Bond measure, for $287 million for renovations,
modernization and new construction; and recently re-constructed San Marcos
High School with $180 million of the Bond funds.
Private Schools and Higher Education
In addition to the resources provided by the public school districts, several
private schools located in Carlsbad serve residents and non-residents. These are
summarized in Table 7-8 and identified on Figure 7-1. The City of Carlsbad does
not currently have charter schools; however, the San Marcos Unified School
District charters Bayshore Preparatory Charter, which is available to students
living within the Carlsbad area of the district.
The City of Carlsbad has one post-secondary educational institution within the
city – a campus of National University, and is home to several specialty edu-
cational facilities such as Gemological Institute of America, Golf Academy of
America, and Vitality College of Healing Arts. Additionally, several colleges are
located in neighboring communities, including MiraCosta College, Palomar
College, California State University San Marcos, and San Marcos Learning
Center (University of Phoenix).
 Table 7–8:	 PRIVATE SCHOOLS IN CARLSBAD
 SCHOOL                                   ADDRESS                GRADE
                                                                 RANGE
 Army and Navy Academy                    2605 Carlsbad Blvd.    7-12
 Carlsbad Montessori School               740 Pine Ave.          Ages 5-12
 Carlsbad Montessori Arts and Sciences 3016 Highland Dr.         Ages 5-12
 Elementary
 Pacific Ridge School                     6269 El Fuerte St.     7-12
 St. Patrick Catholic School              3820 Pio Pico Dr.      1–7
 Beautiful Savior School                  3030 Valley St.        K–8
 Source: Dyett & Bhatia, 2010.
                                                                                             7-21

                               City of Carlsbad
7
                                                  In 2013, creating quality jobs in Carlsbad was identified as one of the City
                                                  Council’s priority projects; and establishing an “education hub” in the city is
                                                  one of the strategies identified to accomplish this. According to the report
                                                  titled City Council Priority Projects July 16, 2013, when a city becomes a hub for
                                                  higher education and research, high quality jobs are created. To assist the city
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                  in attracting institutions of higher learning and research organizations, the city
                                                  hired a consultant to develop local and regional academic profiles, identify local
                                                  industry needs and partners, and develop a recruitment strategy and imple-
                                                  mentation plan.
                                                  Libraries
                                                  The City of Carlsbad has had a library since 1916 and today hosts three library
                                                  facilities: Carlsbad City Library (also known as Dove Library), Georgina Cole
                                                  Library, and Carlsbad City Library Learning Center. The locations of these
                                                  libraries are indicated on Figure 7-1. In addition to its diverse collection of
                                                  resource materials, the municipal library system offers services and programs
                                                  for all ages. It also houses the William D. Cannon Art Gallery, the Ruby G.
                                                  Schulman Auditorium, and the George and Patricia Gowland Meeting Room.
                                                  Under the Growth Management Plan, the Citywide Facilities and Improve-
                                                  ments Plan (1986) establishes a performance standard for library space equal
                                                  to 800 square feet per 1,000 population, which must be scheduled for construc-
                                                  tion within a five-year period or prior to construction of 6,250 dwelling units,
                                                  beginning at the time the need is first identified. According to the FY 2012-2013
                                                  Growth Management Plan Monitoring Report, the current inventory consists
                                                  of 99,745 square feet of library space, while the standard (based on the 2013 Cali-
                                                  fornia Department of Finance population estimate of 108,246) requires about
                                                  86,597 square feet. Therefore, current facilities meet the city’s standard today.
                                                  However, based on a projected 2035 buildout of approximately 129,901 residents,
                                                  the Carlsbad library system would need a total of 103,920 square feet, or 4,175
                                                  additional square feet to remain compliant with the performance standard in
                                                  the Growth Management Plan; however, this space will not be needed until the
                                                  late stages of this General Plan.
                                                  The city’s libraries play an important role in meeting the community’s needs for
                                                  education and lifelong learning. Community members of all ages benefit from
                                                  the services provided by the library system. To keep up with the demands for
                                                  current library services and programs, as well as the demands of an increasingly
                                                  digital world, the library system requires planning and investment to ensure the
                                                  community’s education and lifelong learning needs are met. Examples of the
                                                  challenges in meeting the community’s future library needs are:
                                                  •	 Providing available and suitable spaces for the array of programs and
                                                     experiences offered and desired.
                               7-22

                                                                                              General Plan
                                                                                                         7
•	 Due to the age of the Cole Library (built in 1967), an interim renovation
   was performed in 2000; however, the structure may need to be further
   renovated or replaced in the future to continue delivering services from
   the facility.
•	 Ensuring that programs acknowledge and accommodate the needs of a
                                                                                                          Arts, History, Culture, and Education
   community with growing diversity.
•	 Providing educational resources that cater to an increasingly inter-
   national professional population, including adequate intellectual,
   development and research services for major businesses.
•	 Offering career training and retraining services to meet the growing edu-
   cational need as industries change due to wider economic trends, and
   changes in technology and processes.
Carlsbad City Library (Dove Library) (left); Carlsbad City Library Learning Center (right).
                                                                                                       7-23

                               City of Carlsbad
7                                                 7.5	 Goals and Policies
                                                  Goals
                                                  Historic Resources
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                  7-G.1	 Recognize, protect, preserve, and enhance the city’s diverse
                                                         heritage.
                                                  7-G.2	 Make Carlsbad’s history more visible and accessible to residents and
                                                         visitors.
                                                  Arts and Culture
                                                  7-G.3	 Integrate the arts, public art and art education as a vital aspect of
                                                         community life, with a wide range of facilities and public programs
                                                         designed to engage the city’s diverse audiences as active partici-
                                                         pants and patrons.
                                                  7-G.4	 Foster an environment of active participation in and attendance at
                                                         artistic and educational programs and activities by residents and
                                                         visitors.
                                                  7-G.5	 	Enhance cultural and generational diversity and social connections
                                                         through opportunities for volunteerism and civic engagement; more
                                                         public gathering places, family-friendly activities, and public art; and
                                                         more events that connect residents to one another and keep them
                                                         active in the community.
                                                  Library, Educational and Lifelong Learning Resources
                                                  7-G.6	 Promote access to lifelong learning opportunities that align with the
                                                         learning needs and abilities of all community members.
                                                  7-G.7	 Promote opportunities for higher learning and education, with
                                                         linkages to the city’s technology base and highly skilled workforce.
                                                  7-G.8	 Ensure the city’s library facilities, services and programs are
                                                         adequate and appropriate to meet the community’s needs for
                                                         education and lifelong learning services, as well as the demands of
                                                         an increasingly digital world.
                                                  7-G.9	 Attract and partner with institutions of higher learning and research
                                                         organizations to create high quality jobs in the city.
                                                  7-G.10	 Work with school districts to ensure educational facilities with suffi-
                                                          cient permanent capacity are available to meet the needs of current
                                                          and future projected enrollment. Consult with the school districts on
                                                          policies and projects that affect the provision of educational facili-
                                                          ties and services.
                                                  7-G.11	 Foster an environment in which children and youth can flourish
                                                          and become contributing members of society. The foundation of
                                                          this vision is a strong and active partnership among the city, school
                                                          districts, libraries and all segments of the community, so that
                                                          powerful learning from the earliest years is a citywide experience
                                                          and responsibility.
                               7-24

                                                                                    General Plan
                                                                                               7
7-G.12	 Promote an adequate and diverse supply of childcare facilities that
        are affordable and accessible for families, and provide safe, educa-
        tional, and high-quality services for children.
Policies
                                                                                                Arts, History, Culture, and Education
Historic Resources
7-P.1	 Prepare an updated inventory of historic resources in Carlsbad,
       with recommendations for specific properties and districts to be
       designated in national, state, and local registries, if determined
       appropriate and with agreement of the property owners.
7-P.2	 Encourage the use of regional, state and federal programs that
       promote cultural preservation to upgrade and redevelop properties
       with historic or cultural value. Consider becoming a participant in
       the Mills Act tax incentive program.
7-P.3	 Formalize a program of historical markers/plaques at resources in
       state and national registers or of local importance.
7-P.4	 Promote community education of historic resources, integration and
       celebration of such resources as part of community events:
       a.	 Enhance the community’s recognition that objects of historic
           importance increase both fiscal and community value.
       b.	Promote the use of historic resources for the education, pleasure
          and welfare of the people of the city. Cooperate with historic
          societies, schools, libraries, parks and community members to
          stimulate public interest in historic preservation.
       c.	 Maintain historical reference materials on file at the Carlsbad
           City Library.
7-P.5	 Encourage the rehabilitation of qualified historic structures through
       application of the California Historical Building Code.
7-P.6	 Ensure compliance with the City of Carlsbad Cultural Resource
       Guidelines to avoid or substantially reduce impacts to historic struc-
       tures listed or eligible to be listed in the National Register of Historic
       Places or the California Register of Historical Resources.
Archaeological and Paleontological Resources
7-P.7	 Implement the City of Carlsbad Cultural Resources Guidelines to
       avoid or substantially reduce impacts to archaeological and paleon-
       tological resources.
7-P.8	 During construction of specific development projects, require
       monitoring of grading, ground-disturbing, and other major earth-
       moving activities in previously undisturbed areas or in areas with
       known archaeological or paleontological resources by a qualified
       professional, as well as a tribal monitor during activities in areas
       with cultural resources of interest to local Native American tribes.
       Both the qualified professional and tribal monitor shall observe
       grading, ground-disturbing, and other earth-moving activities.
                                                                                             7-25

                               City of Carlsbad
7
                                                  7-P.9	 Ensure that treatment of any cultural resources discovered during
                                                         site grading complies with the City of Carlsbad Cultural Resource
                                                         Guidelines. Determination of the significance of the cultural
                                                         resource(s) and development and implementation of any data
                                                         recovery program shall be conducted in consultation with inter-
                                                         ested Native American tribes. All Native American human remains
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                         and associated grave goods shall be returned to their most likely
                                                         descendent and repatriated. The final disposition of artifacts not
                                                         directly associated with Native American graves shall be negoti-
                                                         ated during consultation with interested tribes; if the artifact is not
                                                         accepted by Native American tribes, it shall be offered to an institu-
                                                         tion staffed by qualified professionals, as may be determined by the
                                                         City Planner. Artifacts include material recovered from all phases of
                                                         work, including the initial survey, testing, indexing, data recovery,
                                                         and monitoring.	
                                                  7-P.10	 Require consultation with the appropriate organizations and
                                                          individuals (e.g., Information Centers of the California Histori-
                                                          cal Resources Information Systems [CHRIS], the Native American
                                                          Heritage Commission [NAHC], and Native American groups and indi-
                                                          viduals) to minimize potential impacts to cultural resources that may
                                                          occur as a result of a proposed project.
                                                  7-P.11	 Prior to occupancy of any buildings, a cultural resource monitoring
                                                          report identifying all materials recovered shall be submitted to the
                                                          City Planner.
                                                  Arts and Culture
                                                  7-P.12	 Explore opportunities and funding strategies for developing
                                                          dedicated arts-oriented gathering places and venues that ensure
                                                          wide availability and accessibility to arts and arts education oppor-
                                                          tunities. Where possible, provide interim spaces within other
                                                          facilities for arts and arts education opportunities.
                                                  7-P.13	 Explore the feasibility of a new multi-purpose venue(s) capable of
                                                          hosting large indoor and outdoor performances, and the provision
                                                          of affordable spaces for local artists to produce and display their art.
                                                  7-P.14	 Allocate funding for the acquisition, maintenance and conservation
                                                          of public art within or upon public facilities and land.
                                                  7-P.15	 Promote cooperative arrangements with other public and private
                                                          agencies that facilitate the temporary or permanent display of art
                                                          within or upon public or private facilities and land.
                                                  7-P.16	 	Provide funding, consistent with an approved arts master plan,
                                                          for the development of a broad range of high quality arts and arts
                                                          education programs that are accessible to all, respond appropriately
                                                          to the changing demographic needs of the community, and which
                                                          develop the skills of participants at all levels of creative expression.
                               7-26
                                                                                  General Plan
                                                                                             7
7-P.17	 Promote active community participation in arts and arts education
        programming through such means as sustained and creative com-
        munication initiatives and volunteer opportunities.
7-P.18	 Provide financial assistance through a variety of dedicated city and
        contributed sources to groups or individuals who provide public arts
                                                                                              Arts, History, Culture, and Education
        programming to residents.
7-P.19	 Foster and cultivate community partnerships to support high-qual-
        ity arts and cultural opportunities and experiences for residents and
        visitors.
7-P.20	 Encourage cooperation and communication in areas of mutual
        benefit and corresponding programs between the city and local,
        regional, state, and federal government agencies.
7-P.21	 Retain the Carlsbad Arts Commission as an active advisory body to
        the City Council on matters pertaining to cultural aspects of the city.
7-P.22	 Develop programs that invest in and contribute to the enhancement
        of arts and cultural programs, services, organizations, and artists to
        foster ongoing cultural tourism efforts and creative economic devel-
        opment in the city.
Library, Educational and Lifelong Learning Resources
7-P.23	 Ensure that Carlsbad library facilities and programs are expanded
        commensurate with the city’s population growth in order to
        maintain compliance with the Growth Management Plan.
7-P.24	 Provide adequate library facilities and programs that align with
        the community’s learning needs, abilities and demographics, and
        changes in technology, such as through facility design, services and
        service delivery methods, and partnerships with educational and
        learning institutions.
7-P.25	 Support innovations in learning methods through facilities and
        programs that offer opportunities for individual and collaborative
        learning, as well as areas for community gathering that foster the
        exchange of knowledge and ideas.
7-P.26	 Renovate or replace the Cole Library to provide a facility that effec-
        tively serves the community’s need for library services.
7-P.27	 Support educational resources that cater to an increasingly inter-
        national professional population, including adequate intellectual,
        development and research services for major businesses.
7-P.28	 Support efforts by the Carlsbad Unified School District, other
        school districts that serve Carlsbad residents, and childcare service
        providers to establish, maintain, and improve educational facilities
        and services.
7-P.29	 Coordinate with the school districts to ensure that school facili-
        ties have adequate capacity to accommodate projected enrollment
        resulting from the city’s population growth and development.
                                                                                           7-27

                               City of Carlsbad
7
                                                  7-P.30	 Continue to partner with local school districts to optimize the
                                                          joint-use of school facilities for community use.
                                                  7-P.31	 Facilitate student engagement and learning through expanded
                                                          programs and activities.
                                                  7-P.32	 Encourage a range of childcare facilities, including family day care
Arts, History, Culture, and Education
                                                          homes, public and private centers, preschool programs, and before
                                                          and after school programs.
                                                  7-P.33	 Continue efforts to locate an institute of higher education or a
                                                          research organization that capitalizes on the cluster of high-tech-
                                                          nology and bio-technology uses, and the community’s skilled
                                                          workforce. Explore tie-ins with institutions in the region such as the
                                                          University of California San Diego and the dozen plus medical and
                                                          technology institutes in the region.
                                                                                   Student art – Poinsettia Elementary School.
                               7-28

8 Economy, Business Diversity,
  and Tourism
                                                   General Plan
             Despite being a relatively young city incorporated
             in 1952, Carlsbad has grown into a major
             economic hub in north San Diego County. The
             city is home to internationally leading companies
             in biotechnology, action sports manufacturing,
             and information and communication
             technology, and is a visitor destination. The
             city’s economy is also very diverse, extending
             from manufacturing, research and development,
             to tourism, hospitality, and regional retail.
             Regional projections indicate that Carlsbad will
             continue to draw an increasing share of regional
             employment in the decades to come.
                                                             8-1

                                  City of Carlsbad
8                                                    While economic development activity occurs in
                                                     the private sector, the city’s economic success is
Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
                                                     partly a result of proactive city initiatives and
                                                     maintaining a balanced land use program. The
                                                     Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
                                                     Element (EBDT) is designed to ensure that the
                                                     city continues to maintain an environment that
                                                     is conducive to business retention, expansion,
                                                     attraction, and incubation, and supportive of
                                                     local economic vitality and business diversity.
                                                     This element is based on comprehensive
                                                     analysis of opportunities and growth trends; for
                                                     background analysis, please consult Envision
                                                     Carlsbad Working Paper #2: The Local
                                                     Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism.
                                                     In addition, the Envision Carlsbad Land Use
                                                     Concepts report, contains analysis of fiscal
                                                     impacts of alternative land use patterns.
                                  8-2

                                                                                  General Plan
8.1	 Introduction
Background and Purpose
This element outlines the city’s economic development objectives, serves to
                                                                                             8
                                                                                                 Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
ensure that economic decision-making is integrated with other aspects of
the city’s development, and provides a framework for detailed implementing
actions. Topics addressed include:
•	 Fiscal vibrancy;
•	 Business retention, expansion, attraction and incubation;
•	 Tourism; and
•	 City’s role in economic development.
Relationship to State Law
While the inclusion of economy, business diversity, and tourism is not required
in any of the seven mandated elements of a general plan, California Govern-
ment Code Section 65303 indicates that a general plan may include any other
elements that a community considers important to the physical development
and vitality of the city.
Relationship to Community Vision
The EBDT Element is most closely tied to the following core value of the
Carlsbad Community Vision:
Core Value 4: Strengthen the city’s strong and diverse economy and its position
as an employment hub in North San Diego County. Promote business diversity,
increased specialty retail and dining opportunities, and Carlsbad’s tourism.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
The EBDT Element is most closely correlated to the Land Use and Community
Design Element, which provides land use designations in appropriate locations
and a program to accommodate projected growth.
                                                                                            8-3

                                  City of Carlsbad
8                                                    8.2	 Historical Perspective and
                                                          Fiscal Base
                                                     Historical Perspective
Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
                                                     Much of Carlsbad’s economic growth can be traced back to the city’s proactive
                                                     planning efforts to attract and develop Plaza Camino Real and Car Country
                                                     Carlsbad in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Both have served as regional retail
                                                     centers for north San Diego County. The city’s reputation as a prime resort/ hotel
                                                     destination was established when plans for what is now the world famous La
                                                     Costa Resort and Spa were formulated in the mid-1960s and the La Costa area
                                                     annexed to the city in 1972. Carlsbad’s luxury resort/hotel reputation grew with
                                                     the opening of Four Seasons Aviara (now Park Hyatt Aviara) in 1997.
                                                     Carlsbad’s entry into the high-tech sector followed in the mid-1980s when devel-
                                                     opment of the 500-acre Carlsbad Research Center broke ground. The center’s
                                                     attractive location drew in desirable high-tech companies and fostered the city’s
                                                     job, population and housing growth. Today, the Carlsbad Research Center holds
                                                     more than 7.5 million square feet of office, research and light industrial space,
                                                     and is home to several of the city’s top employers (e.g., Callaway, Taylor-Made,
                                                     Genoptix). Biotechnology was established in Carlsbad with the opening of
                                                     major life science companies like Invitrogen in 1987. During the mid-1990s, the
                                                     city quickly earned widespread recognition as a major golf equipment develop-
                                                     ment center. Leisure and tourism in Carlsbad was significantly bolstered in 1999
                                                     with the opening of LEGOLAND California Resort, which today attracts more
                                                     than two-million visitors annually.
                                                     City Fiscal Base
                                                     The city draws General Fund revenues—which fund public safety, road main-
                                                     tenance, park operations and other municipal functions—from a variety of
                                                     sources, with tax revenues comprising 79 percent of the total. Property taxes
                                                     provided 45 percent of the city’s revenues, while sales taxes provided 24 percent.
                                                     A key source of revenue for the city is transient occupancy taxes (city taxes on
                                                     hotel stays), which provided 10 percent of the revenues. In terms of expenditures,
                                                     police, fire protection, administration, and parks and recreation are the largest
                                                     categories. Charts 8-1 and 8-2 show General Fund revenues and expenditures.
                                                     Carlsbad’s economy is aided by the presence of a well-educated population, and
                                                     the highest incomes of any community in north San Diego County. According
                                                     to the U.S. Census Bureau, 31 percent of households earned more than $100,000
                                                     in 2010, and this share is expected to reach (in constant 1999 dollars) 50 percent
                                                     of the households by 2040 (SANDAG, 2050 Regional Growth Forecast).
                                  8-4

                                                                                                                   General Plan
                                                                                                                               8
Chart 8-1:	 GENERAL FUND REVENUES AND EXPENDITURES (2012)
                                            Revenues                                          Expenditures
                    Busness Licenses
                                                                                                                                  Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
      Fines and       $3,453,000           Other
                                                                                                Public
     Forfeitures          3%             Revenues
                                                                                               Works
     $1,021,000                        $14,142,000                           Parks &
                                                                                             $16,329,000      Police
         1%                                13%                             Recreation
                                                                                                15%        $28,204,000
Franchise Fees                                                            $13,744,000
                                                                              12%                              25%
 $4,632,000                                            Property Taxes
     4%            Transient                            $ 49,583,000
                  Occupancy                                  45%        Community &                         Fire Protection
                    Taxes                                                 Economic                            $16,703,000
                 $11,296,000             Sales Taxes                    Development                               15%
                     10%                (1% Value)                       $7,712,000
                                       $27,058,000                           7%
                                            24%
                                                                        Community Services
                                                                           $10,489,000
                                                                               10%                Administration
                                                                                                   & Overhead
                                                                                                   $17,598,000
                                                                                                       16%
Looking Ahead
Based on land use development resulting from the General Plan, the city should
expect continued strengthening of its fiscal position in the coming years. Pro-
jections indicate:
•	 Strong Fiscal Outlook. The value of a long-term fiscal forecast, which
   utilizes conservative or normalized assumptions, is to illustrate where
   fiscal deficiencies or imbalances might exist or be exacerbated. In general,
   Carlsbad is in very good financial standing compared to many California
   communities due to conservative fiscal policies, good land use planning
   and cultivation of a healthy business community. Long-range trends fore-
   casts for Carlsbad’s primary job clusters also point to continued growth
   in key industries, even amidst economic undulations, further strength-
   ening the long-term fiscal health of the city.
•	 Balancing of Land Uses Results in Healthy Revenues. The General Plan
   provides for balanced land use development, with a similar proportion of
   land uses and population in the future as today. This would continue rein-
   forcement of the city’s strong position as an employment hub, and growth
   in retail and hotel uses, which provide “net revenue gains” for the city.
   As the city approaches buildout as outlined in its Growth Management
   Plan, there continues to be a balance of available land for the development
   of industrial and business uses to complement the remaining land that
   could be developed as residential. This industrially-designated land will
   help serve the local economy and strengthen Carlsbad’s position as a net
   importer of jobs.
                                                                                                                              8-5

                                  City of Carlsbad
8
                                                                                                                                           •	 Fiscal Impact Results. The General Plan provides a well-balanced build-
                                                                                                                                              out of Carlsbad from a fiscal standpoint. Over the next two decades,
                                                                                                                                              the city can expect the share of General Fund revenue from property
                                                                                                                                              taxes to decline from 45 percent to 37 percent. While the share of sales
                                                                                                                                              tax revenues would stay constant, the largest proportionate and abso-
Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
                                                                                                                                              lute increase is likely to result from transient occupancy taxes, with its
                                                                                                                                              share jumping from 10 percent currently to 19 percent (RSG, 2013). Chart
                                                                                                                                              8-2 shows projected annual net revenues for the General Plan compared
                                                                                                                                              to a hypothetical “no growth” scenario, demonstrating that continued
                                                                                                                                              development would provide fiscal benefits to the city, and is essential to
                                                                                                                                              maintain a positive revenue balance in the future. The fiscal forecast offers
                                                                                                                                              an illustrative picture of costs and revenues, provided all assumptions
                                                                                                                                              and existing service practices are maintained over the next 20 years; rev-
                                                                                                                                              enues and expenditures will be impacted by a variety of policy decisions,
                                                                                                                                              state mandates, and other budget adjustments made over time.
                                                                                                                                         Chart 8-2:	 ANNUAL NET REVENUES Annual	  Net	  Revenues	  
                                                                                                    	  40,000	  	  
                                                                                                    	  35,000	  	                                                     Annual	  Net	  Revenues	  
                                                                                                    	  30,000	  	  
                                                                                                     	  40,000	  	  
                                                                                                    	  25,000	  	  
                                                                    In	  $	  Thousands	  
                                                     In	  $	  Thousands	  
                                                                                                     	  35,000	  	  
                                                                                                    	  20,000	  	  
                                                                                                     	  30,000	  	  
                                                                                                    	  15,000	  	                                                                                                                                                                   No	  Growth	  
                                                                                                     	  25,000	  	  
                                                                                                    	  10,000	  	                                                                                                                                                                   General	  Plan	  	  
                                                                                                     	  20,000	  	  
                                                                                                            	  5,000	  	  
                                                                                                     	  15,000	  	                                                                                                                                                                  No	  Growth	  
                                                                                                                     	  -­‐	  	  
                                                                                                     	  10,000	  	                                                                                                                                                                  General	  Plan	  	  
                                                                                                      	  (5,000)	  
                                                                                                             	  5,000	  	  
                                                                                               	  (10,000)	  
                                                                                                                      	  -­‐	  	  
                                                                                                                                        2012	     2014	     2016	     2018	     2020	     2022	     2024	     2026	     2028	     2030	     2032	     2034	     2036	  
                                                                                                        	  (5,000)	  
                                                                                                	  (10,000)	  
                                                                                                                                        2012	     2014	     2016	     2018	     2020	     2022	     2024	     2026	     2028	     2030	     2032	     2034	     2036	  
                                                                                                                                         Source: RSG, 2013.
                                  8-6

                                                                                                 General Plan
8.3	 Role of Business Diversity in
     Economic Development
Carlsbad is notable for the proliferation of jobs within its local traded industry
clusters—businesses within an industry cluster typically share common needs
                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
for talent, human capital, technology, and infrastructure. Most traded industry
clusters are export-oriented – they create wealth by attracting customers and
revenue from outside the local area and region rather than being limited to local
customers. The importance of export-oriented clusters not only includes an
expanded universe of potential customers but also a broader opportunity for
growth and protection against local and regional economic decline when some
of the population-serving industries are negatively impacted. Industry clusters
also attract new start-up businesses – support services and spin-off businesses.
The growth in industry clusters will typically have a large multiplier effect,
increasing employment and business opportunities for all types of businesses
within a given community and/or region.
There are five industry clusters that have a relatively high concentration of
employment within Carlsbad or offer an industry that has the opportunity
for considerable growth within the next three to ten years. These key industry
clusters are: 1) action sports manufacturing, 2) cleantech, 3) entertainment
and hospitality, 4) information and communications technologies, and 5) life
sciences. Table 8-1 indicates the number of businesses, jobs and average salaries
within these industry clusters.
Carlsbad’s land use policies need to flexibly adapt to changing market condi-
tions and economic trends, allowing for a range of uses that support the growth
of industry clusters in Carlsbad (e.g., professional office, research and develop-
ment, biotechnology/biomedical, high-tech, manufacturing, and warehouse/
distribution uses).
 Table 8–1:	 CARLSBAD TRADED INDUSTRY CLUSTERS (2012)
                                                     CARLSBAD
 INDUSTRY CLUSTER NO. OF BUSINESSES                     NO. OF JOBS        ANNUAL SALARY
 Action Sports                             47                   2,773                $91,020
 Manufacturing
 Cleantech                                 90                   4,882               $112,672
 Entertainment                            153                  11,941                $25,567
 and Hospitality
 Information and                          254                   9,203               $114,561
 Communications
 Technologies
 Life Sciences                            131                   7,033               $128,722
 Source: 	 EMSI Complete Employment, 2012; City of Carlsbad Business Survey Report, 2013; SAN-
           DAG Traded Industry Clusters in the San Diego Region, 2012.
                                                                                                           8-7

                                  City of Carlsbad
8
                                                     Action Sports Manufacturing
                                                     The action sports manufacturing cluster includes businesses that design and
                                                     produce golf club, surfboard, diving, and other recreational goods, as well as
                                                     related apparel and accessories. This industry cluster has seen considerable
                                                     growth over the last 10 years (2003-2013), but is also expected to slightly decline
Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
                                                     in employment over the next three years (2013-2016).
                                                     Cleantech
                                                     The cleantech industry cluster includes businesses that are engaged in renewable
                                                     energy, energy efficiency, and energy storage. Carlsbad’s cleantech businesses
                                                     are expected to increase employment over 10 percent by 2016 and continue to
                                                     grow in importance within the local and regional economy.
                                                     Entertainment and Hospitality
                                                     The entertainment and hospitality industry cluster includes hotels, transporta-
                                                     tion services, and restaurants, as well as entertainment attractions such as theme
                                                     parks, golf courses, and country clubs. This industry cluster provides the largest
                                                     number of jobs of the five key industry clusters in Carlsbad.
                                                     Information and Communications Technologies (ICT)
                                                     The ICT industry cluster includes communications, computer and electron-
                                                     ics, and software businesses. Within this cluster, Carlsbad has a strong robotics
                                                     industry, and is recognized in the region as a hub for the research and design,
                                                     vendors and suppliers that serve this sub-industry. As of 2013, nearly 1,000
                                                     employees in Carlsbad are working on robotics, 3-D movie conversion, and
                                                     other advanced manufacturing and design technologies. The ICT industry
                                                     cluster represents a valuable employer in Carlsbad, with strong growth expecta-
                                                     tions and high wages.
                                                     Life Sciences
                                                     The life sciences industry cluster includes biomedical and biotechnology busi-
                                                     nesses. Biomedical businesses conduct research, design, and production of
                                                     medical devices, and biotechnology businesses conduct research and develop-
                                                     ment related to biological technologies as well as the manufacturing of medicinal
                                                     and diagnostic substances (pharmaceuticals). These two industry clusters are
                                                     expected to see strong employment growth through 2016. Carlsbad is well-posi-
                                                     tioned to capture growth in the life sciences industry due to the existence of
                                                     major biomedical and biotechnology companies in Carlsbad.
                                                     Carlsbad’s proximity to universities offering advanced degrees in related bio-
                                                     medical and biotechnology fields provides a highly skilled workforce, including
                                                     new entrepreneurs seeking startup opportunities, including incubator space.
                                  8-8

                                                                                                        General Plan
                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                       Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
Carlsbad has grown into a major economic hub in north San Diego County. Tourism, hospitality, regional retail,
and technology, life sciences, and action sports manufacturing are some of the key economic sectors and industry
clusters.
                                                                                                                   8-9
                                  City of Carlsbad
8
                                                     Incubator Space
                                                     In February 2013, the city leased - for $1 a year for five years - the 6,000-square-
                                                     foot building at 2351 Faraday Ave. to Bio, Tech and Beyond, which manages
                                                     a start-up incubator and science education center. The facility provides a
                                                     community laboratory for scientists to cultivate their research ideas with the
Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
                                                     goal to spawn new products and launch new companies. The goals of the Bio,
                                                     Tech, and Beyond incubator are to:
                                                     1.	 Create new life sciences companies and new jobs in Carlsbad;
                                                     2.	 Become a national leader in the citizen science movement, strengthening
                                                         the city’s life sciences industry cluster;
                                                     3.	 Add to Carlsbad’s core technology base, resulting in new products and
                                                         new patents; and
                                                     4.	 Serve as a base for regional science education outreach efforts.
                                                     Other Industries
                                                     In addition to the key industry clusters described above, financial services and
                                                     retail businesses also contribute to Carlsbad’s economy.
                                                     Financial Services
                                                     Carlsbad (as of 2010) is home to about 690 companies providing different forms
                                                     of financial services, including banking, lending and investment services.
                                                     Top employers include companies such as Wells Fargo Home Mortgage Inc.,
                                                     Advanced Commercial Corporation, Pacific Western National Bank, and
                                                     Countrywide Home Loans, Inc. Carlsbad’s employment growth and reputation
                                                     as a major employment center will allow the financial services industry cluster
                                                     to remain steady as other industries grow and expand, contributing to the con-
                                                     tinuing demand for office space in the city.
                                                     Retail
                                                     The city’s retail strength is evident in its high capture of taxable sales in the
                                                     sub-regional market across major retail categories. While recent developments
                                                     will help the city plug retail sales leakage in home building and related goods,
                                                     as of 2013 Carlsbad continues to experience lost sales in categories such as auto
                                                     parts/accessories/tires, home furnishings and appliances and grocery stores.
                                                     Addressing leakage in these areas will ensure the city will capture a greater
                                                     share of taxable sales in the market area in the future as the region’s customer
                                                     base grows.
                                  8-10

                                                                                                     General Plan
                                                                                                                        8
The greatest retail opportunities in the near-term involve Carlsbad’s existing
regional assets, particularly Westfield Plaza Camino Real and Car Country
Carlsbad. Redesign of regional-serving retail properties requires a willing-
ness to take on risk and heavy reinvestment into the physical infrastructure of
the properties, but the return on investment to the community would be sig-
                                                                                                                        Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
nificant. The Carlsbad community will continue to seek upscale shopping
and dining experiences in walkable environments that provide community
gathering spaces and opportunities for connectivity. Carlsbad Village and the
Barrio present ongoing opportunities to provide residents pedestrian-oriented
retail and shopping. Bressi Ranch and the upcoming La Costa Town Square
development areas provide greater connectivity between retail and residential
uses. As household incomes continue to increase, configuration of retail spaces
should support stores in walkable centers.
Examples of job and revenue generators in Carlsbad: tourist-attractors like Agua Hedionda Lagoon (top) and the Flower
Fields (bottom), as well as hospitality like Grand Pacific Palisades (bottom).
                                                                                                                   8-11

                                  City of Carlsbad
8                                                    8.4	 Direct Economic Impacts of
                                                          Tourism and Hotels
                                                     Carlsbad has emerged as a major visitor destination, with beaches, lagoons,
                                                     golf courses, and LEGOLAND California Resort as principal attractors. As
Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
                                                     indicated in Section 8.3, the entertainment and hospitality industry cluster
                                                     provides the largest number of jobs (11,941 jobs in 2010) of the five key industry
                                                     clusters in Carlsbad. More than 2,200 workers (as of 2010) are employed in the
                                                     entertainment and recreation sectors, including the 1,200 employees (as of 2013)
                                                     of LEGOLAND California Resort. Other major attractions include the city’s
                                                     two public golf courses (The Crossings and Rancho Carlsbad) and two private
                                                     golf courses (La Costa and Aviara). Three lagoons, over 40 miles of trails and
                                                     almost seven miles of coastline are additional recreational assets that draw
                                                     visitors to the city.
                                                     As of 2013, Carlsbad offered lodging for visitors at 37 hotels in over 4,000 rooms.
                                                     Carlsbad’s natural amenities provide opportunities that support future resort
                                                     development trends, including an increased focus on green development and
                                                     ecotourism, multi-generational resorts that cater to the interests of multiple
                                                     generations of family members, and niche resorts that attract a narrow segment
                                                     of enthusiasts of a particular activity, such as golf or surfing. Monitoring and
                                                     adapting to shifting consumer behaviors and preferences across different demo-
                                                     graphic market segments allows Carlsbad to leverage its competitive advantages
                                                     (e.g., location, climate, topography) and attract a broad range of visitors seeking
                                                     a broad palate of recreational opportunities.
                                                     The city (as of 2012-2013) derived approximately $13.5 million from transient
                                                     occupancy taxes, growing a strong 8 percent from the previous year. Addi-
                                                     tionally, hotels pay property taxes and visitors spend money in restaurants and
                                                     shopping, which also results in sales tax benefits to the community, as well as
                                                     revenues for businesses of all sizes.
                                                     While future hotel demand is challenging to forecast, there is already current
                                                     activity to expand the city’s inventory of upper priced hotels and resorts. There
                                                     are approximately 340 new hotel rooms approved or under construction. The
                                                     General Plan provides for about 1,900 additional hotel rooms in new hotels at
                                                     several locations, including the power plant site and the Ponto area. This would
                                                     result in approximately 5,960 hotel rooms at buildout, enabling Carlsbad’s
                                                     continued capture of future hotel demand in the local and regional markets.
                                                     The number of additional hotel rooms that are ultimately built in Carlsbad will
                                                     depend on future market conditions.
                                  8-12

                                                                                     General Plan
8.5 Economic Development and
    the City’s Role
With vacant land increasingly in short supply, a resurgent regional and national
economy, and strong long-term employment growth projections, Carlsbad must
                                                                                                8
                                                                                                    Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
prioritize the type and the location of developments that provide the greatest
economic benefit. While a significant level of economic development activity
occurs in the private sector, the city can work to: ensure city policies do not
impede the needs of businesses to move or expand; facilitate and act as a catalyst
for development in strategic market segments; be a liaison to connect busi-
nesses with resources and problem-solvers to address barriers to entry/growth/
expansion; market Carlsbad’s competitive advantages to attract new businesses
to the area; and coordinate and provide for infrastructure improvements.
A coordinated economic development strategy is also essential for the city to
support its community development objectives – such as providing and main-
taining parks, protecting open space, and maintaining high levels of municipal
services. While this EBDT Element sets goals and policies for economic growth
and sustainability, a separate economic development strategy tied to the city’s
annual budget process is appropriate to implement the goals and policies
contained in this element through an action-oriented work program with
annual objectives and measurements of success. A managed program of fiscal
development, strategic public improvements, and balanced land use will help
maximize resultant community benefits. The EBDT Element envisions five
central roles for the city:
1.   Promoting development that results in fiscal benefits to the city. The
     relative benefit or burden a use places on the city is an important consid-
     eration in the allocation and prioritization of future development. For
     uses that provide particularly high net fiscal benefits—such as hotels—
     the city needs to preserve an adequate inventory of sites. This is balanced
     with the need to create and maintain community character and seek to
     achieve a jobs-housing balance.
2. Maintaining and enhancing infrastructure and the public realm. While
   new growth pays for public improvements generated by that growth, the
   city needs to continue to maintain and enhance existing infrastructure
   and the public realm, for example roads, bikeways, and parks and open
   spaces to remain an attractive location for new private investment. Since
   the city’s ability to pay for public works is in part determined by its fiscal
   health, these roles are closely intertwined. Improvements can also be
   targeted to facilitate or expedite certain developments, or to ensure that
   infrastructure capacity does not become an impediment to growth
                                                                                              8-13

                                           City of Carlsbad
                                                                               3. Promoting Community Character through Land Use Balance.
8                                                                                 Maintaining a balanced supply of different land uses—based on eco-
                                                                                  nomic and community development objectives—is critical to the city’s
                                                                                  financial health. Land use balance is also central to business attraction.
                                                                                  Carlsbad’s quality housing stock, retail offering and community ameni-
Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
                                                                                  ties provide an attractive package for businesses to locate their corporate
                                                                                  headquarters and operations in the community. This land use balance
                                                                                  is also necessary to ensure that existing transportation capacity can be
                                                                                  used more effectively.
                                                                               4. Attracting and Retaining Businesses. While some uses may provide
                                                                                  immediate tangible fiscal benefits, others—such as education and those
                                                                                  within the city’s key industry clusters—provide longer term benefits.
                                                                                  Attraction and retention of these uses enrich the community, provide
                                                                                  job opportunities for the city’s highly educated job force, and bolster the
                                                                                  city’s position in a leading sector such as life sciences, information and
                                                                                  communications technologies, and entertainment and hospitality.
                                                                               5.   Developing Strong Partnerships. Partnerships with local organizations
                                                                                    and businesses, and neighboring communities can help to strengthen the
                                                                                    north county “brand”, foster public/private partnerships, promote asso-
                                                                                    ciations with research and higher educational institutions and regional
                                                                                    organizations in industries that will attract businesses to Carlsbad’s
                                                                                    clusters.
                                    Examples of establishments that assist and benefit from the city’s economic strategy: commercial uses, like Norte’s Restau-
                                    rant in the Village (left), and action sports manufacturing, like SKLZ (right).
                                           8-14

                                                                               General Plan
8.6	 Goals and Policies
Goals
8-G.1	 In partnership with business and community groups, proactively
       engage in the city’s economic development.
                                                                                          8
                                                                                              Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
8-G.2	 Facilitate retention, expansion, attraction and incubation of busi-
       nesses that meet the city’s economic development objectives.
8-G.3	 Maintain and enhance a world class climate for conducting business
       in Carlsbad.
8-G.4	 Establish land use priorities based on economic criteria and long
       term community needs; reserve sites for designated uses rather than
       accepting any development.
8-G.5	 Attract a center of higher education—a new university, branch, or
       a research institution—that offers synergies with the city’s increas-
       ingly technologically sophisticated businesses and workforce.
8-G.6	 Establish a strong talent pipeline that can serve the needs of local
       businesses in the short and long term, as well as serve regionally
       important industry clusters.
Policies
Programs
Monitor and Sustain Fiscal Health
8-P.1	 Establish and maintain a consistent database of long-range
       economic data factors and update trend forecasts on an ongoing
       basis, to enable city policies and strategies to be proactive and
       timed to market changes.
8-P.2	 Establish a user-friendly computerized central information system
       to be linked with development permitting and the Geographic
       Information System (GIS) to provide prospective businesses and
       developers with easy access to information, such as potential devel-
       opment sites and city requirements.
Support Business Retention, Expansion, Attraction and Incubation
Activities
8-P.3	 Lead and promote business outreach and collaborative initiatives
       among business leaders and economic stakeholders. Such outreach
       and collaboration shall include partnering with local businesses and
       economic development and employment organizations to identify
       strategies for local business retention and expansion, talent attrac-
       tion and regional branding.
8-P.4	 Collaborate with property owners to develop a financing strategy
       and public improvement program to redevelop Westfield Plaza
       Camino Real and promote re-investment in Car Country Carlsbad
                                                                                        8-15

                                  City of Carlsbad
8
                                                            for renewed economic success and relevance. These sites present the
                                                            greatest near-term opportunities to expand upon Carlsbad’s already
                                                            strong retail base.
                                                     8-P.5	 Encourage increased year-round tourism through such means as
                                                            working with the Carlsbad Tourism Business Improvement District
Economy, Business Diversity, and Tourism
                                                            to help market Carlsbad as a complete multi-day, year-round des-
                                                            tination, and by working with other organizations to promote and
                                                            develop Carlsbad as an ecotourism destination.
                                                     8-P.6	 Collaborate with workforce development partners (academic/
                                                            research institutions) to identify joint opportunities to spur regional
                                                            growth of new and emerging job clusters and promote regional
                                                            entrepreneurialism, leveraging available city land where available.
                                                     8-P.7	 Actively seek to locate at least one center of higher education—
                                                            university or research institute—that offers synergies with the
                                                            city’s strong life science industry cluster or other high-technology
                                                            industries.
                                                     8-P.8	 Seek public-private partnership to foster incubators, especially in
                                                            locally-strong sectors such as life sciences and technology.
                                                     Strategic Development of Sites
                                                     8-P.9	 Continually monitor land use in the city to ensure a balanced
                                                            inventory of sufficient land in strategic locations for all uses, espe-
                                                            cially those uses that are critical to the city’s fiscal position.
                                                     8-P.10	 As part of the Encina Power Station reuse, ensure development of
                                                             a balanced cluster of visitor serving commercial uses, such as hotel
                                                             and retail uses and restaurants, with flexibility to adapt to changing
                                                             economic circumstances. Ensure this area has a pedestrian-oriented
                                                             ambiance, is welcoming and accessible to the broader community
                                                             (not just hotel guests), and provides for restaurants and open spaces
                                                             that capitalize on ocean views.
                                                            See policies in the Land Use and Community Design Element for
                                                            more on development of this site.
                                                     8-P.11	 Encourage strategic land assembly and infrastructure improvements
                                                             to provide sites adequate in size and at appropriate locations to
                                                             meet the needs of businesses the city wishes to attract.
                                                     8-P.12	 Actively invest in infrastructure and engage with property owners,
                                                             developers and business owners to encourage the revitalization of
                                                             the Village and Barrio as a walkable, connected and complete neigh-
                                                             borhood with high quality restaurant and retail offerings, attractive
                                                             to the corporate business, residential and tourism communities.
                                                     8-P.13	 Within the Carlsbad Boulevard coastal corridor, encourage devel-
                                                             opment that promotes tourism and economic vitality through a
                                                             combination of visitor and local-serving commercial, civic, and recre-
                                                             ational uses and services. Ensure that this corridor provides vibrant
                                                             coastal spaces where residents and visitors can gather to enjoy the
                                                             natural beauty of the coastline, as well as recreational amenities and
                                                             supporting commercial uses.
                                  8-16

9 Sustainability
                                                     General Plan
              Sustainability is a core value of the Community
              Vision, and an intrinsic component of all
              elements of the Carlsbad General Plan. The
              very same policies that further sustainable
              development also enhance quality-of-life and
              public health; increase energy efficiency and
              eliminate waste; enhance biological resources;
              and further other initiatives central to this plan.
              The purpose of sustainability in Carlsbad—
              and its incorporation throughout the
              General Plan—is to take responsibility for
              development and projected population
              growth and their potential impact on the
                                                               9-1

            City of Carlsbad
9                              environment. By implementing sustainable
                               design measures and policies, Carlsbad can
Sustainability
                               reduce its contribution to global climate
                               change, minimize its reliance on fossil-fuel
                               sources, decrease consumption of natural
                               resources, while promoting active living and
                               access to healthy food and demonstrating its
                               commitment and leadership on sustainability.
                               Because policies more directly related to topics
                               such as mobility and land use are addressed
                               in other elements, those elements should
                               be consulted along with the Sustainability
                               Element for a full understanding of General
                               Plan sustainability initiatives.
                               This element, like others in the General Plan,
                               is policy and action-oriented, with limited
                               background material. A comprehensive
                               analysis of sustainability in Carlsbad was
                               performed in 2010 as part of the work effort
                               leading to this General Plan, and is presented
                               in Working Paper #1: Sustainability.
            9-2
                                                                                     General Plan
9.1	 Introduction
Background and Purpose
Sustainability can be defined as “development that meets the needs of the
                                                                                              9
                                                                                               Sustainability
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs.” Since sustainability is an integral part of the Carlsbad General Plan,
sustainability policies are included within each of the elements as appropriate.
The Sustainability Element provides the overarching framework, and includes
policies focused on topics central to sustainability not covered elsewhere. This
element provides the overarching framework for sustainability in Carlsbad and
outlines policies focused on:
•	 Climate change and greenhouse gases (GHG) reduction;
•	 Water conservation, recycling, and supply;
•	 Green building;
•	 Sustainable energy and energy security; and
•	 Sustainable food.
Relationship to State Law
Sustainability is not a state-mandated general plan element. However, state
law permits general plans to include any element pertinent to a city’s planning.
Since sustainability is a core value of the Carlsbad Community Vision and a
high priority of the community, the General Plan includes this Sustainability
Element. In accordance with the Government Code, this element is consistent
with and carries the same weight as the other elements.
Relationship to Community Vision
The Sustainability Element is most closely tied to the following objective in the
Carlsbad Community Vision:
Core Value 6: Sustainability. Build on the city’s sustainability initiatives to
emerge as a leader in green development and sustainability. Pursue public/
private partnerships, particularly on sustainable water, energy, recycling, and
foods.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
The theme of sustainability resonates throughout the General Plan, but in par-
ticular in the Land Use and Community Design; Mobility; and the Open Space,
Conservation, and Recreation elements. The Land Use and Community Design
Element establishes sustainable development patterns that seek to decrease
dependency on the automobile; this theme is furthered through the Mobility
                                                                                             9-3

            City of Carlsbad
9
                               Element that includes policies to promote pedestrian and bicycle movement. The
                               Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation Element includes policies address-
                               ing air quality, biological resources conservation, and stormwater management
                               and flooding, all of which are closely tied to sustainability.
Sustainability
                               Relationship to Climate Action Plan
                               Concurrently with this General Plan, the city developed a Climate Action Plan
                               (CAP) that proactively outlines the city’s strategy for reducing greenhouse gas
                               (GHG) emissions and climate change impacts. While the General Plan outlines
                               broad strategies and underscores the city’s commitment to GHG reduction, the
                               CAP includes specific GHG reduction targets and programs, correlated with the
                               GHG analysis in the Environmental Impact Report for the General Plan.
                               Relationship to City of Carlsbad Sustainability
                               and Environmental Guiding Principles
                               In 2007, the Carlsbad City Council adopted a set of sustainability and environ-
                               mental guiding principles (Resolution No. 2007-187) in order to help guide city
                               investments, activities, and programs. These principles were taken into account
                               in the development of the General Plan and are reflected in the plan’s goals and
                               policies.
            9-4

                                                                                                   General Plan
9.2	 Organizing Frameworks
Sustainability Framework
A cohesive framework for sustainability needs to incorporate not only environ-
                                                                                                            9
                                                                                                             Sustainability
mental, but also social and economic considerations, as diagrammed in Table
9-1, and described as follows:
•	 Environment. Ecological or environmental conservation—including
   the issue of climate change—is what many people think of first when
   they hear the term sustainability today. This approach to sustainability
   involves reducing dependence on fossil fuels, and protecting, enhancing
   and monitoring the health of the natural environment.
•	 Economy. Successful conservation efforts often depend on economic
   motivation; communities protect a natural resource if they know that
   in the sustainable management of the resource lies their own economic
   security. Economic sustainability encompasses the ability of an organi-
   zation, community, or government to improve economic stability and
   vitality on a local, regional, and even national scale.
•	 Social. The social element of sustainability typically refers to the distri-
   bution of costs and benefits across all segments of society, and speaks
   to the basic needs of humans for fulfillment as individuals—including
   safety and security as well as access to a community where people feel
   they belong and can participate.
                                         Distribution
                                          Social
                                   Political & Social Systems
                             Justice                            Health
                                        
                                       
                Economy                                         Environment
                 Economic &                                        Natural Systems
                Business Systems          Efficiency
 Production                                                                           Resource
                                                                                     Stewardship
                                                                                                           9-5

            City of Carlsbad
9
                               In Carlsbad, sustainability is based on achieving a long-term balance among the
                               environmental, economic, and social needs of the community.
                               Sustainability as General Plan Framework
                               Although sustainability is only one of the Carlsbad Community Vision core
Sustainability
                               values, in a certain sense it underlies almost all of the core values, and provides a
                               conceptual framework for the city’s long-range planning. For instance, one core
                               value urges the city to “prioritize protection and enhancement of open space
                               and the natural environment”, while another seeks to “promote active lifestyles
                               and community health by furthering access to trails, parks, beaches, and other
                               recreational opportunities.” These core values are environmental and social sus-
                               tainability priorities.
                               Another core value seeks to “increase travel options through enhanced walking,
                               bicycling, and public transportation systems,” and to “enhance mobility
                               through increased connectivity and transportation management.” This
                               core value supports social sustainability by increasing access for people of all
                               incomes and physical abilities, and it supports environmental sustainability by
                               helping Carlsbad to reduce car trips and their associated emissions, and increase
                               trips on foot, by bicycle, and by public transportation. Other core values support
                               economic and social sustainability, for example by striving to “build on the city’s
                               culture of civic engagement, volunteerism, and philanthropy” and “strengthen
                               the city’s strong and diverse economy and its position as an employment hub in
                               San Diego County”.
                               Thus, sustainability can be seen as a key organizing framework, or prism
                               through which policies in different elements of the General Plan can be viewed.
                               As described in the General Plan Introduction, the General Plan is organized
                               into elements structured around the core values of the Carlsbad Community
                               Vision; and Table 1-1 shows the relationship of each General Plan element to the
                               core values. Table 9-1 shows the relationship of each General Plan element to
                               sustainability.
                                Table 9–1:	 GENERAL PLAN ELEMENT AND SUSTAINABILITY
                                            RELATIONSHIP
                                                                                    GENERAL PLAN ELEMENT
                               Land Use and
                                                                 Open Space,                                                 Economy, Business
                                                                                                                                                 Sustainability
                                                                                                            Arts, History,
                                                                                            Public Safety
                                                                 Conservation and                                            Diversity, and
                               Community Design
                                                                                                            Culture, and
                                                  Mobility       Recreation         Noise                   Education        Tourism                              Housing
                                                             Most Closely Related                                    Closely Related
                                                             to Sustainability                                       to Sustainability
            9-6

                                                                                             General Plan
                                                                                                      9
Sustainability as a Guiding Principle of City
Operations
The concept of sustainability in Carlsbad precedes the development of this
General Plan, and the city has implemented several cost-effective and efficient
programs to promote sustainability, including1:
                                                                                                       Sustainability
•	 Energy and Clean Air. The city has replaced some 7,000 sodium
   streetlights with high efficiency induction lights, and is pursuing a hydro-
   electric power project, solar energy for city pools, and hybrid vehicles for
   the city’s fleet.
•	 Solar Power for Commercial Facilities. The city is a participant in
   CaliforniaFIRST, which finances energy and water improvements for
   commercial properties.
•	 Clean Creeks, Lagoons and the Ocean. Carlsbad’s Storm Water
   Protection Program works to keep creeks, lagoons and oceans clean
   and free from pollutants. Storm drains are not connected to the sanitary
   sewer system or treatment facilities.  Urban runoff and the pollutants it
   carries flow directly into the city’s creeks, lagoons, and the ocean.
•	 Water Conservation. The Carlsbad Municipal Water District  contin-
   ues to implement conservation programs that reduce water demand and
   lessen dependency on imported water supplies.
•	 Water Supply and Recycling. Carlsbad’s future quality of life depends on
   having a reliable and affordable supply of water. Prolonged drought, envi-
   ronmental problems and legal restrictions on use of water from the Colorado
   River and the Bay-Delta in Northern California have necessitated develop-
   ment of new water supplies. The Carlsbad Desalination Project and the city’s
   recycling efforts are described in Section 9.4: Water Conservation, Recycling,
   and Supply. supplies. The Carlsbad Desalination Project and the city’s recy-
   cling efforts are described in Section 9.4: Water Conservation, Recycling, and
   Supply.
1	 More details on these can be found at http://www.carlsbadca.gov/services/environmental/
   pages/sustainable-city.aspx
Natural drainage and sustainable landscaping.
                                                                                                     9-7

            City of Carlsbad
9                              9.3	 Climate Change and
                                    Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
                                    Reduction
Sustainability
                               Climate change refers to any significant change in measures of climate, such
                               as temperature, precipitation, or wind, lasting for an extended period (decades
                               or longer). Gases that trap heat in the atmosphere are often called GHGs. The
                               greenhouse effect traps heat in the troposphere through a threefold process as
                               follows: short-wave radiation emitted by the sun is absorbed by the earth; the
                               earth emits a portion of this energy in the form of long-wave radiation; and
                               GHGs in the upper atmosphere absorb this long-wave radiation, emitting
                               some of it into space and the rest back toward the earth. This “trapping” of the
                               long-wave (thermal) radiation emitted back toward the earth is the underlying
                               process of the greenhouse effect. Principal GHGs include carbon dioxide (CO2),
                               methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), ozone (O3), and water vapor (H2O). Some
                               GHGs, such as CO2, CH4, and N2O, occur naturally and are emitted to the
                               atmosphere through natural processes and human activities. Since different
                               gases contribute to the greenhouse effect in different proportions, the term
                               CO2E (carbon dioxide equivalent) provides the reference frame based on com-
                               parison to CO2’s contribution.
                               The greenhouse effect is a natural process that contributes to regulating the
                               earth’s temperature. Without it, the temperature of the earth would be about
                               0°F (−18°C) instead of its present 57°F (14°C) and unlikely to support human life
                               in current form. Global climate change concerns are focused on the potential
                               effects of climate change and how communities can mitigate effects and adapt
                               to change in the short and long term.
                               Greenhouse Gas Emissions
                               Contributors
                               In 2010, the United States produced 6,822 million metric tons of CO2E (MMT
                               CO2E) (EPA 2012). The primary GHG emitted by human activities in the United
                               States is CO2, representing approximately 84 percent of total GHG emissions.
                               The largest source of CO2, and of overall GHG emissions, is fossil-fuel combus-
                               tion, which accounted for approximately 94 percent of the CO2 emissions and
                               78 percent of overall GHG emissions in 2010.
                               According to the 2009 GHG inventory data compiled by the California Air
                               Resources Board (CARB) for the 2000-2009 California Greenhouse Gas
                               Inventory, California emitted 457 MMT CO2E of GHGs, including emissions
                               resulting from out-of-state electrical generation (CARB 2011). The primary con-
                               tributors to GHG emissions in California are transportation, electric power
                               production from both in-state and out-of-state sources, industry, agriculture and
                               forestry, and other sources, which include commercial and residential activities.
            9-8

                                                                                                         General Plan
                                                                                                                        9
According to the report titled, “Indicators of Climate Change in California
(August 2013; Cal/EPA)”, climate change is having a significant and measurable
impact on California’s environment. Climate change is occurring throughout
California, from the Pacific Coast to the Central Valley to the Sierra Nevada
Mountains. Impacts of a warmer climate include decreasing spring snowmelt
                                                                                                                             Sustainability
runoff, rising sea levels along the California coast, shrinking glaciers, increasing
wildfires, and warming lakes and ocean waters. Terrestrial, marine and freshwa-
ter biological systems are strongly influenced by climate, particularly warming.
Plants and animals reproduce, grow and survive within specific habitat ranges
defined by climatic and environmental conditions. Changes in these conditions
may threaten the ability of species to survive or thrive.
City of Carlsbad GHG Emissions	
Table 9-2 and Chart 9-1 show GHG emissions in Carlsbad, based on a green-
house gas emissions inventory initially conducted by the city in 2009 (for
calendar year 2005 emissions), and updated in 2013 (for CY 2011 emissions).
According to the analysis, the Carlsbad community emitted approximately
705,744 metric tons of CO2E in 2011. The transportation sector was the largest
source of emissions, generating approximately 273,745 metric tons of CO2E, or
39 percent of total 2011 emissions. Transportation sector emissions are the result
of diesel and gasoline combustion in vehicles traveling with trips either entirely
within the boundaries of Carlsbad, or with one trip-end in the city. Electric-
ity and natural gas consumption within the commercial/industrial sector, the
second greatest source of 2011 emissions, generated 224,960 metric tons of CO2E,
or 32 percent of the total. Similarly, electricity and natural gas use in Carlsbad’s
residential sector produced 176,405 metric tons of CO2E, or 25 percent of total
community emissions. The remaining 4 percent of emissions are estimated
methane emissions from the solid waste, and wastewater sectors.                        Chart 9-1:	 CARLSBAD 2011
                                                                                       GHG EMISSIONS BY SECTOR
 Table 9–2:	 CARLSBAD 2011 GHG EMISSIONS BY SECTOR (METRIC                             Solid Waste             Wastewater
                                                                                           3%                     1%
             TONS CO2e)
 SECTOR                      GHG EMISSIONS (MTCO2e)                   % OF TOTAL
 Transportation                               273,745                        39%
 Commercial / Industrial                      224,960                        32%
                                                                                           Residential
 Residential                                  176,405                        25%              25%           Transportation
 Solid Waste                                   24,317                         3%                                39%
 Wastewater                                      6,317                         1%
 TOTAL                                         705,744                                        Commercial/
                                                                                               Industrial
                                                                                                 32%
                                                                                                                       9-9

            City of Carlsbad
9
                               GHG Reduction Regulatory Framework
                               There are a multitude of laws and regulations pertaining to GHG reduction
                               at the federal and state level, regulating measures from vehicle fuel efficiency
                               to building and appliance energy efficiency. From a planning perspective, the
                               chief statutes at the state level are: Assembly Bill (AB) 32 or the California Global
Sustainability
                               Warming Solutions Act of 2006, which establishes state emissions limits equiv-
                               alent to the 1990 levels, which are to be achieved by 2020; and Senate Bill (SB)
                               375 (2008) which addresses GHG emissions associated with the transporta-
                               tion sector through development of regional transportation and sustainability
                               plans. Additionally, the Governor’s Executive Order S-3-05 (EO S-3-05) estab-
                               lishes a target to reduce GHG emissions to 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050.
                               Climate Change and Planning
                               As previously defined, climate change refers to a change in the average global
                               climate that may be measured by wind patterns, storms, precipitation, and tem-
                               perature over a long period of time. The United States Environmental Protection
                               Agency’s (U.S. EPA) indicators of climate change include GHGs; weather and
                               climate changes; changes in ocean levels and currents; snow and ice melt and
                               accumulation; and society and ecosystems, including changing seasons. In Cal-
                               ifornia, some of the potential impacts of global warming may include loss in
                               snow pack with accompanying decrease in water supply, sea level rise, more
                               extreme heat days per year, more high ozone level days, more frequent large
                               forest fires, and more drought years.
                               Climate Action Planning
                               The City of Carlsbad has taken a proactive approach to creating a sustainable
                               and healthy quality of life in balancing social, economic, and environmen-
                               tal needs of the community. The city’s efforts toward sustainability related to
                               climate change and GHG reductions include efficient use of non-renewable
                               resources through use of hybrid vehicles, energy efficient streetlights, and devel-
                               opment of renewable energy sources (such as the hydroelectric power project at
                               Maerkle Reservoir); development of drought resistant water supplies; reduction
                               in the city’s waste stream; and measures to promote clean air and water.
                               The City of Carlsbad Climate Action Plan (CAP) presents a proactive city
                               strategy toward reducing greenhouse gas emissions and climate change impacts.
                               Analysis conducted for the CAP shows that General Plan strategies and policies
                               will help Carlsbad achieve its year 2020 GHG reduction targets (consistent with
                               state target of 1990 levels by 2020). However, additional measures are needed for
                               the city to achieve 80 percent reduction below 1990 levels consistent with (EO
                               S-3-05); the CAP outlines strategies and programs to achieve the 2050 target.
            9-10

                                                                                       General Plan
                                                                                                9
Climate Adaptation Planning
Adaptation refers to change to minimize consequences of adversity. Three
primary effects of a changing climate that are particular threats to the City of
Carlsbad: drought, fire, and rising sea level. Some of the city’s current efforts to
adapt to these effects of climate change include actively pursuing water desal-
                                                                                                 Sustainability
ination opportunities, investing in a recycled water system that provides 20
percent of the city’s water supply, requiring Class I fire-resistant roofs for new
construction, enforcing a strict fire code and 60-foot setbacks on fire breaks,
and restricting development within the 100-year floodplain. Efforts are also
underway by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to better
delineate coastal flooding threats, as part of the California Coastal Analysis
and Mapping Project / Open Pacific Coast Study. The Safety Element provides
details and policies to mitigate hazards, including fire, rising sea levels, and
flooding.
                                                                                              9-11

            City of Carlsbad
9                                               9.4	 Water Conservation,
                                                     Recycling and Supply
                                                Water Conservation and Recycling
Sustainability
                                                Water is one of the most basic and critical resources for life. Water provides sus-
                                                tenance for humans, and plants and animals; habitats for many species; and is
                                                necessary for agriculture and many aspects of everyday living.
                                                In California, as in many other parts of the world, fresh water is becoming
                                                scarce as a growing population demands more of it, and new buildings and
                                                roads simultaneously reduce its quality (through run-off) and availability
                                                (through reduced groundwater infiltration and decreasing snow packs). Water
                                                rights and access have been a source of concern in the western United States
                                                for centuries. At the same time, the practice of importing drinking water has
                                                become less politically acceptable because of equity impacts, and energy used
                                                in transporting water—water-related energy use consumes 19 percent of Cali-
                                                fornia’s electricity, 30 percent of its natural gas, and 88 billion gallons of diesel
                                                fuel every year. This is especially true of the San Diego region, which relies on
                                                imported water transported hundreds of miles to meet 80 percent of its water
                                                needs. A sustainable water supply for Carlsbad is one that can meet the needs of
                                                the community without jeopardizing regional wildlife, habitats, agriculture, or
                                                other ecosystem functions, or the energy supply, now and in the future.
                                                A few specific sustainable water approaches of particular interest to Carlsbad
                                                are:
                                                •	 Water conservation. Beneficial reduction in water loss, use, or waste. A
                                                   water conservation measure is an action, behavioral change, device, tech-
                                                   nology, or improved design or process implemented to reduce water loss,
                                                   use, or waste.
                                                •	 Water recycling. Reusing treated wastewater for beneficial purposes
                                                   such as irrigation, industrial processes, toilet flushing, and replenishing
                                                   groundwater basins (referred to as groundwater recharge).
                                                •	 Gray water reuse. Untreated household wastewater that comes from
                                                   bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines,
                                                   and even kitchen sinks, and which is re-used for non-potable water appli-
                                                   cations such as sub-surface irrigation and toilet flushing. As such, it is
                                                   another form of water recycling, but one without an intermediate treat-
                                                   ment process.
            “ Examples of recycled water use:
            golf courses (top) and the Flower
            Fields (bottom).
            9-12

                                                                                     General Plan
                                                                                              9
Water Supply and Diversification
The Carlsbad Municipal Water District (CMWD) water service area covers
approximately 85 percent of the City of Carlsbad and includes an area of about 32
square miles. Water service to the southeast corner of the city is provided by the
Olivenhain Municipal Water District (OMWD). The Vallecitos Water District
                                                                                               Sustainability
(VWD) provides service to the Meadowlark area along the eastern city boundary.
CMWD imports water through the San Diego County Water Authority
(SDCWA) for its potable water needs. SDCWA gets approximately 50 percent of
its water from the Colorado River, 30 percent from the State Water Project (Bay-
Delta), and about 20 percent from local supplies. The imported water supply
(representing 80 percent of the San Diego region’s water supply) is vulnerable to
drought and water supply shortages. Therefore, SDCWA has been working with
its 24 local member retail agencies to develop local supplies. Efforts to increase
local supplies in Carlsbad are described below.
Carlsbad Desalination Project
The desalination project in Carlsbad is a 50-million gallon a day seawater desal-
ination plant intended to supply the San Diego region with approximately
7 percent of its drinking water needs. The project will be the first large-scale
desalination plant on the west coast and the largest of its kind in the western
hemisphere. It will be located next to the Encina Power Plant at the corner of
Carlsbad Boulevard and Cannon Road. The project has received final approvals
from every required regulatory and permitting agency in the state, including
the California Coastal Commission, State Lands Commission and Regional
Water Quality Control Board. A 30-year Water Purchase Agreement is in place
between SDCWA and project developers for the entire output of the plant.
CMWD has an option to purchase desalinated water directly from the operator,
which could comprise up to approximately 9 percent of the district’s water
portfolio. Construction on the plant and pipeline is under way and the project
will be delivering water by 2016.
Groundwater
CMWD currently does not use any local groundwater and surface water
supplies, although in the past both types of water sources have been used. Prior
to 1957, the Carlsbad Mutual Water Company supplied local surface water from
Lake Calavera and groundwater from the San Luis Rey River Mission Ground-
water Basin to the City of Carlsbad.
Of the groundwater basins available to CMWD, the San Luis Rey River Mission
Groundwater Basin has the most potential for a viable water resource. For
CMWD’s use, the water would need to be treated by a low-pressure membrane,
reverse osmosis process to achieve treated water quality. When last evaluated,
this process was not cost effective. However, the CMWD is currently re-evaluat-
ing groundwater extraction feasibility as technology continues to improve and
imported water costs continue to increase.
                                                                                            9-13

            City of Carlsbad
9
                                                      State, Regional, and Local Programs
                                                      California Gray Water Regulations
                                                      The 2007 California Plumbing Code, Chapter 16A: Nonpotable Water Reuse
                                                      Systems, establishes minimum requirements for the installation of gray water
Sustainability
                                                      systems in residential occupancies that are regulated by the California Depart-
                                                      ment of Housing and Community Development. The standards provide
                                                      flexibility designed to encourage the use of gray water and allow small gray
                                                      water systems to be installed in homes without a construction permit, substan-
                                                      tially reducing the barriers to installing small residential gray water systems in
                                                      California.
                                                      California Urban Water Conservation Council
                                                      All three water districts that serve the City of Carlsbad—CMWD, OMWD, and
                                                      VWD—are signatories to the California Urban Water Conservation Council
                                                      (CUWCC) Memorandum of Understanding Regarding Urban Water Con-
                                                      servation in California (MOU). Those signing the MOU pledge to develop and
                                                      implement 14 comprehensive conservation best management practices (BMPs).
                                                      Integrated Regional Water Management
                                                      The Integrated Regional Water Management (IRWM) program is a local water
                                                      resources management approach aimed at securing long-term water supply
                                                      reliability within California by first recognizing the inter-connectivity of water
                                                      supplies and the environment, and then pursuing projects yielding multiple
                                                      benefits for water supplies, water quality, and natural resources. The San Diego
                                                      IRWM program is an interdisciplinary effort by water retailers, wastewa-
                                                      ter agencies, stormwater and flood managers, watershed groups, the business
                                                      community, Native American tribes, agriculture, and regulatory agencies to
                                                      coordinate water resource management efforts and to enable the San Diego
                                                      region to apply for grants tied to the Department of Water Resources IRWM
                                                      program. The City of Carlsbad has participated in the organization of the
                                                      program locally, and in planning, coordination, and supporting watershed
                                                      activities related to the IRWM.
                                                      Local Programs and Projects
                                                      Recycled Water
                                                      Under the recycled water retrofit project, the city installs recycled water lines to
                                                      serve existing development in areas of the city where recycled water is available.
                                                      On a voluntary basis, water customers may pay to upgrade their irrigation
          Example of water use reduction:             systems to use recycled water. The recycled water delivered within the CMWD
          artificial turf on athletic fields (top);   service area has received an advanced level of treatment known as tertiary
          example of water loss reduction:            treatment, which creates a finished product that is safe for landscape irrigation
          parking lot with porous paving              and other non-drinking uses. However, because it is only used for non-drinking
          (bottom).
            9-14

                                                                                       General Plan
                                                                                                9
purposes, recycled water must be delivered through a pipeline system separate
from the regular water system.
Water Supply
CMWD’s 2012 Water Supply Master Plan provides a comprehensive assessment
                                                                                                 Sustainability
of water system facilities and demands, and identifies required improvements to
2035. It identifies deficiencies in the system, confirms facility sizing, and recom-
mends a future capital improvement program based on updated water demand
projections.
Carlsbad Power Plant and site of the Carlsbad Desalination Plant.
                                                                                              9-15

            City of Carlsbad
9                              9.5	 Green Building
                               Definition
                               According to the U.S. EPA, in the United States, buildings account for 39 percent
Sustainability
                               of total energy use, 12 percent of the water consumption, 68 percent of electricity
                               consumption, and 38 percent of the CO2 emissions. Green building is a concept
                               centered on the role of the built environment in reducing energy use during
                               construction and operation; because of the interconnected nature of sustain-
                               ability, green building intersects with many different sustainability issues. “The
                               built environment has a vast impact on the natural environment, human health,
                               and the economy. By adopting green building strategies, we can maximize both
                               economic and environmental performance. Green construction methods can
                               be integrated into buildings at any stage, from design and construction, to ren-
                               ovation and deconstruction. However, the most significant benefits can be
                               obtained if the design and construction team takes an integrated approach from
                               the earliest stages of a building project.”2
                               Furthermore, green building may also target improvements in occupant health
                               and productivity through mechanisms including higher air quality, daylight-
                               ing, and other benefits. As the Carlsbad community expressed in the Carlsbad
                               Community Vision, green building is a multifaceted way the city can make
                               progress toward numerous sustainability objectives.
                               Key Regulatory Context
                               Building development is highly regulated in the United States, and particu-
                               larly in California. There are environmental regulations such as the Clean Air
                               Act and Clean Water Act that impose standards regarding how development
                               interfaces with these environmental resources. But more specifically, there
                               are also building codes and standards adopted locally that govern the design
                               and construction of structures. Some of these standards are mandatory, others
                               voluntary. A few key examples are described below, drawn from the national,
                               state, and regional context.
                               California Green Building Standards Code (Title 24, Part 11)
                               In January 2010, the California Building Standards Commission adopted the
                               first-in-the-nation mandatory Green Building Standards Code (CALGREEN).
                               The purpose of the code is to improve public health, safety and general welfare
                               by enhancing the design and construction of buildings in the following cat-
                               egories: 1) planning and design, 2) energy efficiency, 3) water efficiency and
                               conservation, 4) material conservation and resource efficiency, and 5) environ-
                               mental air quality.
                               2	http://www.epa.gov/greenbuilding/pubs/whybuild.htm
            9-16

                                                                                    General Plan
                                                                                             9
The provisions of this code apply to the planning, design, operation, con-
struction, replacement, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal,
and demolition of every new building or structure throughout California.
CALGREEN requires that every new building constructed in California reduce
indoor water use by 20 percent compared to existing standards (with voluntary
                                                                                              Sustainability
goal standards for 30, 35 and 40 percent reductions), divert 50 percent of con-
struction waste from landfills, and install low pollutant-emitting materials.
Optional standards that can be adopted, at the city’s discretion, include
CALGREEN Tier 1 and Tier 2 standards; these each include a series of measures
that go beyond the basic CALGREEN code.
CALGREEN also requires separate water meters for nonresidential buildings’
indoor and outdoor water use, with a requirement for moisture-sensing irriga-
tion systems for larger landscape projects and mandatory inspections of energy
systems (e.g., heat furnace, air conditioner, and mechanical equipment) for
nonresidential buildings of more than 10,000 square feet to ensure that all are
working at their maximum capacity and according to their design efficiencies.
The California Air Resources Board estimates that the mandatory provisions
will reduce GHG emissions (CO2 equivalent) by three million metric tons in
2020.
The city uses the California Building Code and the new CALGREEN Code to
review proposed development and renovations.
LEEDTM
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) is an internation-
ally-recognized rating system for certifying the design, construction, and
operation of high performance buildings; one of several in use across the globe,
but probably the most popular in the United States. LEED building certifica-
tion is available for all building types, including new construction and major
renovations, core and shell, educational buildings, retail, commercial interiors,
existing buildings, and homes.
The LEED program is a point-based system. Building projects earn points for
satisfying green building criteria within specific credit areas. Projects also
may earn regional priority bonus points for implementing green building
strategies that address important local environment issues. Each certifica-
tion rating system is organized into five environmental categories: sustainable
sites, water efficiency, energy and atmosphere, materials and resources, and
indoor environmental quality. An additional category—innovation in design
(or operation)— focuses on sustainable building expertise as well as design
measures not covered in the other categories.
                                                                                           9-17

            City of Carlsbad
9
                                                     Build It Green
                                                     Build It Green is a membership supported non-profit organization whose
                                                     mission is to promote healthy, energy and resource-efficient homes in Califor-
                                                     nia. Build It Green has three strategic objectives: 1) drive policy development
                                                     by partnering with government to establish credible and accessible green
Sustainability
                                                     building policies that promote private sector innovation and provide consis-
                                                     tent guidelines statewide; 2) increase supply of green homes by training building
                                                     professionals on the latest best practices and connecting green product suppliers
                                                     with consumers; and 3) stimulate consumer demand by increasing awareness of
                                                     the benefits of green building and making “GreenPoint Rated” a trustworthy,
                                                     recognized brand for green homes.
                 Capstone Advisors Corporate Headquarters, LEED Gold      Example of green design feature: parking lot designed to
                 Certification for Existing Buildings.                    drain into a natural turf area that filters and treats pollut-
                                                                          ants with organic materials.
            9-18

                                                                                                                  General Plan
9.6	 Sustainable Energy
Use of fossil fuels for energy is the primary contributor to GHG emissions.
The United States, with less than 5 percent of the world population, consumes
about 20 percent of global energy. Among states, California is the second largest
                                                                                                                           9
                                                                                                                            Sustainability
consumer of energy, second only to Texas. However, California’s per capita
energy consumption is relatively low, in part due to mild weather that reduces
energy demand for heating and cooling, and in part due to the government’s
energy-efficiency programs and standards. Petroleum and natural gas currently
supply most of the energy consumed in California.
The concept of energy security is based on sensitivity to limited supplies, uneven
distribution, and rising costs of fossil fuels such as petroleum. Energy insecurity
is most frequently described, usually in terms of United States vulnerability to
the political or social upheaval in energy-producing countries, as well as United
States vulnerability to attacks on energy distribution infrastructure, accidents,
and natural disasters. Increasing energy security usually means efforts to
decrease demand for energy overall, decrease demand for energy that is supplied
by less politically stable countries, increase the resiliency of our national infra-
structure, and increase supply of more sustainable and stable energy sources.
Sustainable energy sources usually include all renewable sources, such as plant
matter, solar power, wind power, wave power, geothermal power, and tidal
power. It usually also includes technologies that improve energy efficiency.
Energy conservation refers to efforts made to reduce energy consumption in
order to preserve resources for the future and reduce pollution. Energy con-
servation can be achieved through increases in efficiency in conjunction with
decreased energy consumption and/or reduced consumption from conven-
tional energy sources. A few specific sustainable energy approaches of particular
interest to Carlsbad are: renewable resources, conservation, and technological
and business partnerships that would contribute to greater energy self-suffi-
ciency in the region.
Examples of ways to reduce the city’s energy use: solar technology (left) and energy efficient street lights (right).
                                                                                                                         9-19

            City of Carlsbad
9                                                        9.7	 Sustainable Food
                                                         Definition and Overview
                                                         Much like green development, the concept of a sustainable food system crosses
Sustainability
                                                         over many different sustainability issues. For example, in the United States,
                                                         obesity and diet-related chronic disease rates are escalating; public health is
                                                         threatened by rising antibiotic resistance; chemicals and pathogens contaminate
                                                         food, air, soil, and water; and natural resources such as fresh water and prime
                                                         farmland are being depleted. These threats have human, social and economic
                                                         costs that are growing, cumulative and unequally distributed. These issues all
                                                         relate to the food system—what we eat and how it is produced and distributed.3
                                                         In some communities, healthy food access is a big issue, particularly where
                                                         there are challenges to both physical proximity and affordability. Residents in
                                                         communities with a more imbalanced food environment (where fast food res-
                                                         taurants and corner stores are more convenient than grocery stores) have more
                                                         health problems and higher mortality than residents of areas with a higher pro-
                                                         portion of grocery stores, other factors held constant. In addition, the presence
                                                         of a supermarket in a neighborhood is linked to higher fruit and vegetable con-
                                                         sumption and a reduced prevalence of overweight and obese individuals.
                                                         In terms of local nutrition, the San Diego countywide average percentage of
                                                         children overweight for their age was only 8.8 percent in 2010, compared to a
                                                         California average of 11.2 percent. In other similar indicators (e.g. adult over-
                                                         weight, prevalence of breastfeeding), San Diego County generally performs
                                                         better than the state overall, though local Carlsbad data are not always available.
                                                         The Carlsbad Community Vision core value for sustainable food supports
                                                         local agriculture, farmers’ markets, and eating locally-grown food. These
                                                         objectives touch on community concerns about other issues such as environ-
                                                         mental quality, local economic development, neighborhood revitalization, and
                                                         community connectedness. A sustainable food system perspective is particu-
                                                         larly suited to approach “food” from all these perspectives, by looking at the
                                                         broader picture and targeting several areas of influence, encompassing direct
                                                         food access and quality, but also touching on production (farms and gardens),
                                                         procurement (markets, stores, and city policies), transport (shipping methods
                                                         and fuels, packaging, and other factors), and both consumer and business
                                                         decision-making.
                 Examples of Carlsbad resources
                 that support a healthy, sustainable
                 food system: local agricultural busi-
                 nesses (top), and a community garden    3	 American Public Health Association Policy Statement,” Toward a Healthy, Sustainable Food
                 (bottom).                                  System”, 2007, paraphrased.
            9-20

                                                                                                         General Plan
                                                                                                                     9
Local Actions
The city’s current (2013) sustainable food efforts include:
•	 A weekly farmers’ market sponsored by the Carlsbad Village Business
   Association.
                                                                                                                      Sustainability
•	 Operating a community garden near downtown, and developing a second
   one in Calavera Hills.
•	 The Agricultural Conversion Mitigation Fee Grant Program which pro-
   vides funding to support local agriculture.
•	 City leasing of underutilized city-owned land to farmers.
•	 Municipal Code inclusion of agricultural road side-stands as an allowed
   use.
•	 Proposition D (see the Land Use and Community Design Element), and
   various other policies and programs that support local agriculture.
Example of Carlsbad resources that support a healthy, sustainable food system: Carlsbad Village Farmers’ Market.
                                                                                                                   9-21

            City of Carlsbad
9                              9.8	 Goals and Policies
                               Goals
                               9-G.1	 Through implementation of the policies and programs in the
                                      General Plan, maintain a long-term balance among the three dimen-
Sustainability
                                      sions of sustainability—environmental, economic, and social—to
                                      ensure a vibrant, healthy, and prosperous community.
                               9-G.2	 Undertake initiatives to enhance sustainability by reducing the
                                      community’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and fostering green
                                      development patterns—including buildings, sites, and landscapes.
                               9-G.3	 Promote energy efficiency and conservation in the community.
                               9-G.4	 Reduce the city’s reliance on imported water.
                               9-G.5	 Create a healthy, balanced, functional, and equitable food system
                                      for the entire Carlsbad community by:
                                      •	 Reducing barriers and increasing access to locally-grown fruits
                                         and vegetables;
                                      •	 Increasing communitywide knowledge of healthy food choices
                                         and behaviors.
                               9-G.6	 Support the creation of community gardens throughout the
                                      community.
                               Policies
                               Climate Change and GHG
                               For policies related to flooding and sea level rise, see Safety Element.
                               9-P.1	 Enforce the Climate Action Plan as the city’s strategy to reduce
                                      greenhouse gas emissions.
                               9-P.2	 Continue efforts to decrease use of energy and fossil fuel con-
                                      sumption in municipal operations, including transportation, waste
                                      reduction and recycling, and efficient building design and use.
                               Water Conservation, Recycling and Supply
                               9-P.3	 Develop and implement a water sub-metering ordinance for new
                                      multi-family rental and mixed-use buildings.
                               9-P.4	 Utilize irrigation and landscape design measures for the municipal
                                      golf course (Crossings at Carlsbad) that will result in decreased water
                                      consumption.
                               9-P.5	 Undertake measures to expand the use of recycled water for
                                      landscape irrigation and commercial and industrial process water.
                                      Encourage potential future customers identified in the latest
                                      Recycled Water Master Plan to retrofit their water systems to utilize
                                      recycled water as it becomes available and cost-effective to do so.
            9-22

                                                                                                   General Plan
                                                                                                                 9
9-P.6	 Promote the use of on-site gray water and rainwater collection
       systems through education, expedited permitting review, fee
       exemptions and other measures.
9-P.7	 Investigate the feasibility of developing full-functioning groundwa-
       ter and sub-groundwater systems in the San Luis Rey River Mission
                                                                                                                  Sustainability
       Groundwater Basin and Cannon Well Field within or near Rancho
       Carlsbad in order to reduce the city’s reliance on imported water.
Green Building
9-P.8	 Promote energy conservation and retrofitting of existing buildings.
       Measures the city should consider for improving energy perfor-
       mance of existing buildings include, but are not limited to:
      •	 Developing and implementing point-of-sale residential energy
         and water efficiency audits or upgrade requirements and/or
         incentives if necessary;
      •	 Providing financial incentives and low-cost financing products
         and programs that encourage investment in energy efficiency
         and renewable energy within existing residential buildings; and
      •	 Educating residents about the availability of free home energy
         audit programs and encourage implementation of audit
         findings.
9-P.9	 Adopt a construction and demolition waste recycling ordinance that
       requires, except in unusual circumstances, all construction, demoli-
       tion and renovation projects meeting a certain size or dollar value,
       to divert from landfills 100 percent of all Portland cement concrete
       and asphalt concrete and an average of at least 50 percent of all
       remaining non-hazardous debris from construction, demolition, and
       renovation projects.
9-P.10	 Decrease the need for artificial cooling, heating and lighting, and
        promote outdoor lifestyles in Carlsbad’s sunny and moderate
        climate by:
      •	 Ensuring that the Zoning Ordinance provides for adequate
         private and common open spaces as part of multifamily
         developments.
      •	 Encouraging residential and office buildings to have windows
         that open to the outside in all habitable rooms, and maximize
         the use of daylight.
9-P.11	 Implement the city’s Landscape Manual to mitigate urban heat
        island effects through maximum tree canopy coverage and
        minimum asphalt and paving coverage, particularly for denser areas
        like the Village and the Barrio, shopping centers, and industrial and
        other area with expansive surface parking.
                                                                                Trees in parking lot can help combat
                                                                                urban heat island effects, help energy
                                                                                conservation, and enhance pedestrian
                                                                                comfort.
                                                                                                              9-23

            City of Carlsbad
9
                               Sustainable Energy
                               9-P.12	 Continue pursuit of sustainable energy sources—such as hydro-
                                       electricity, geothermal, solar, and wind power—to meet the
                                       community’s needs.
                               9-P.13	 Use the city’s Climate Action Plan as the platform for delineating
Sustainability
                                       and implementing measures to improve energy conservation, and
                                       increase renewable energy use (such as solar) in existing and new
                                       development.
                               9-P.14	 Support a regional approach to study the feasibility of establish-
                                       ing Community Choice Aggregation (CCA) or another program that
                                       increases the renewable energy supply and maintains the reliability
                                       and sustainability of the electrical grid.
                               Sustainable Food
                               9-P.15	 Use zoning to establish incentives for locating healthy food grocery
                                       stores in neighborhood centers, and to increase communitywide
                                       healthy food access.
                               9-P.16	 Seek ways to partner with regional community supported agricul-
                                       ture (CSA) programs as an alternative source of fresh and healthy
                                       fruits and vegetables for Carlsbad residents, particularly those with
                                       limited mobility, limited income, or those furthest from existing
                                       grocery stores.
                               9-P.17	 Support home gardening and small-scale urban farming efforts by
                                       considering adoption of a home gardening and urban agriculture
                                       ordinance; or by otherwise ensuring that zoning allows for home
                                       gardens and small-scale urban farming; and provide residents with
                                       opportunities (e.g., online and library resources and workshops) to
                                       learn gardening basics and how to cook easy, healthy meals with
                                       fresh produce.
            9-24

                                                                              General Plan
                                                                                       9
9-P.18	 Incorporate community gardens as part of city parks and recreation
        planning, and work with the Carlsbad Community Gardens Col-
        laborative and other organizations to facilitate the development,
        administration and operation of additional community gardens
        throughout the city.
                                                                                        Sustainability
9-P.19	 Develop and implement a healthy food purchasing and vending
        policy for city facilities and operations that commits to selecting
        healthy, well-balanced meals and snacks for city-sponsored activi-
        ties, meetings, and facilities.
                                                                                     9-25
            City of Carlsbad
9
                               This page intentionally left blank.
Sustainability
            9-26
4 Open Space, Conservation,
  and Recreation
                                                   General Plan
             Carlsbad is endowed with a rich array of
             natural resources, including the ocean, three
             lagoons (Agua Hedionda, Batiquitos and
             Buena Vista, California’s first ecological
             reserve), as well as other waterways and
             natural habitat areas. These resources are vital
             components of the city’s setting, provide habitat
             for wildlife and recreation opportunities, and
             are engines of tourism. Protecting these natural
             resources is a high priority for residents.
             Carlsbad is an active community with valuable
             recreation resources, such as beaches, numerous
             parks and sports fields, and proximate hillsides.
                                                             4-1

                                  City of Carlsbad
4                                                    The city has a high proportion of dedicated
                                                     open space land available for passive and
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     active recreational uses, and as its population
                                                     continues to grow, age, and diversify, Carlsbad
                                                     must continue to meet its residents’ changing
                                                     outdoor and recreational needs. This element
                                                     is intended to enhance resource conservation,
                                                     ensure adequate open space for conservation
                                                     and recreation, and promote accessibility to
                                                     recreation areas for all residents and visitors.
                                                     Water supply, conservation, and recycling,
                                                     including desalination, are addressed in
                                                     Chapter 7: Sustainability Element.
                                  4-2

                                                                                      General Plan
4.1	 Introduction
Background and Purpose
Open space is one of Carlsbad’s principal defining features and serves several
                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                  Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
different purposes. Many open spaces are conserved as natural habitat. Other
open spaces fulfill both habitat conservation and recreational needs, or are spe-
cifically designated for recreational use. The Open Space, Conservation, and
Recreation (OSCR) Element addresses open space for resource conservation
and recreation, as well as environmental quality topics such as air and water
quality.
The OSCR Element accomplishes this, first, by establishing an overall classifi-
cation system for open space, which provides the framework for more detailed
discussion of open space needs for habitat and resource conservation, and
parkland needs of a growing and changing population. Open space and park
standards are consistent with those in the Carlsbad Growth Management Plan,
and future demand for open space and parks is identified based on projected
population growth considering the distribution of new residences.
The OSCR Element also addresses beaches, trails, and agricultural resources,
followed lastly by discussion of air quality and water quality.
The OSCR Element consists of narrative and goals and policies, which provide
direction to modify existing programs or establish new ones, and seek to
preserve and enhance Carlsbad’s natural and recreational resources such that
they:
•	 Sustain and improve the social, economic, aesthetic, and environmental
   health of the city;
•	 Are accessible for all residents;
•	 Offer a balance of active and passive recreation opportunities;
•	 Enhance the community’s environmental quality; and
•	 Provide learning opportunities about nature for Carlsbad residents and
   visitors.
Relationship to State Law
California state law (Government Code sections 65302(d)(1) and (e)) requires
cities to adopt open space and conservation elements as part of their general
plan. Open-space land is defined by California Government Code Section
65560(b) as any parcel or area of land or water that is essentially unimproved
and devoted to open-space use, and that is designated on a local, regional or state
open-space plan, including open space for the preservation of natural resources,
and open space for outdoor recreation. Along with the housing element, the
open space element has the most detailed statutory intent and, next to land use,
is the broadest in scope.
                                                                                                4-3

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     Conservation elements are required to provide direction regarding the con-
                                                     servation, development, and utilization of natural resources. Because of the
                                                     considerable overlap between requirements related to open space for conserva-
                                                     tion and the conservation element, these two are combined into one element in
                                                     this General Plan.
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     Relationship to Community Vision
                                                     The OSCR Element is most closely tied to the following core values in the
                                                     Carlsbad Community Vision:
                                                     Core Value 2: Prioritize protection and enhancement of open space and the
                                                     natural environment. Support and protect Carlsbad’s unique open space and
                                                     agricultural heritage.
                                                     Core Value 3: Promote active lifestyles and community health by furthering
                                                     access to trails, parks, beaches and other recreation opportunities.
                                                     Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
                                                     The OSCR Element bears a strong relationship to the Land Use and Community
                                                     Design Element, since open space, conservation lands, and park facilities are
                                                     essential components of a balanced land use pattern. Each open space, conser-
                                                     vation area, or park facility has been located within a compatible land use area.
                                                     The intent of the OSCR Element, however, is not to establish land use policies
                                                     for these areas, but rather to outline conservation and recreational strategies in
                                                     harmony with land use policies.
                                                     Open space for public safety is addressed in the Public Safety Element. The
                                                     classification of open space and parks relates to the amount and location of
                                                     the population, and in this respect the OSCR Element is closely related to the
                                                     Land Use and Community Design and Housing elements. The OSCR Element
                                                     is also related to the Mobility Element in that designated bicycle routes, trails
                                                     and pedestrian routes provide crucial access to and through open space and
                                                     parklands.
                                                     Finally, the Sustainability Element outlines the broad framework to minimize
                                                     Carlsbad’s reliance on fossil-fuel sources and decrease consumption of natural
                                                     resources, and includes specific goals and policies pertaining to water conserva-
                                                     tion and recycling.
                                  4-4

                                                                                      General Plan
4.2	 Open Space Framework
Carlsbad is situated along the Pacific Coast. Elevations range from sea level along
the coast to about 1,000 feet above mean sea level at the southeastern border of
the city. Land within the city’s jurisdiction covers about 39 square miles (25,021
                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                  Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
acres), about 38 percent of which is currently (2013) classified as open space.
About 78 percent of this open space is comprised of natural open space such as
native habitats, lagoons, and streams. The city’s open space network boasts three
lagoons, nearly 40 miles of hiking trails, and almost seven miles of coastline, as
well as unique agricultural and horticultural resources such as the strawberry
fields and the Flower Fields.
Open Space Classification
For purposes of the OSCR Element, open space is defined as: Any area of land or
water that is devoted to an open space use and designated on the city’s Land Use
Map as open space, or dedicated in fee title or easement for open space purposes.
The open space may be in its natural state or modified. This General Plan classi-
fies open space into four categories (Figure 4-1):
•	 Category 1: Open Space for Preservation of Natural Resources (plant and
   animal habitat; nature preserves; beaches and bluffs; wetland and ripar-
   ian areas; canyons and hillsides; and water features such as lagoons and
   streams)
•	 Category 2: Open Space for Managed Production of Resources (forestry;
   agriculture; aquaculture; water management; commercial fisheries; and
   major mineral resources)
•	 Category 3: Open Space for Outdoor Recreation (school recreation areas;
   public parks and recreation areas; greenways; trails; campgrounds; golf
   courses; and equestrian facilities)
•	 Category 4: Open Space for Aesthetic, Cultural and Educational Purposes
   (lands with scenic, historical and cultural value; land use buffers; open
   space that marks entries to the city from surrounding communities and
   to major developments and neighborhoods within the city; greenbelts
   providing separation from surrounding communities; and museums,
   arboreta, zoos, and botanical gardens)
Table 4-1 quantifies the existing amount of land that is designated on the Land
Use Map as “open space” and/or dedicated in some other manner (e.g., easement,
use agreement) as one of the open space categories described above. The amount
of existing open space identified in Table 4-1 will increase as future additional
open space is added to the city’s open space system through implementation of
the Growth Management Plan and Habitat Management Plan as lands subject
to those plans develop over time, and through opportunistic acquisitions.
                                                                                                4-5

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                           Table 4–1:	 EXISTING OPEN SPACE
                                           DESCRIPTION                                                                               ACRES    % OF OPEN     % OF CITY
                                                                                                                                                  SPACE
                                           Open Space for Preservation of Natural Resources                                           7,344          78%         29%
                                           Open Space for Managed Production of Resources                                               329           3%           1%
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                           Open Space for Outdoor Recreation (programmed and unprogrammed)                            1,191          13%           5%
                                           Open Space for Aesthetic Cultural and Educational Purposes                                   582           6%           2%
                                           TOTAL OPEN SPACE                                                                           9,446        100%          38%
                                           CITY OF CARLSBAD                                                                         25,021
                                           Sums may not equal totals due to rounding.
                                                                                  Open Space, Active Lifestyles, and Quality of Life
                                                                                  Regular exercise has been proven to promote many health benefits. The Carlsbad
                                                                                  community values access to parks and recreation resources, including the ocean
                                                                                  and beaches, because active lifestyles lead to better physical and mental health
                                                                                  outcomes, but also because outdoor recreation and an active lifestyle support
                                                                                  community connectedness and a higher quality of life overall. In most com-
                                                                                  munities, walking is the most common form of physical activity, is accessible
                                                                                  across socioeconomic groups, and can be promoted in both urban and rural
                                                                                  areas. In addition to health benefits, the City of Carlsbad Pedestrian Master
                                                                                  Plan (2008) recognizes that walking also has the potential to address several
                                                                                  other interrelated challenges in the city, including traffic congestion, air quality,
                                                                                  and community-building. Smart planning for access to recreation and active,
                                                                                  healthy lifestyles means taking a balanced approach to the provision of parks
                                                                                  and recreation spaces, as well as creating safe and attractive pedestrian and
                                                                                  bicycle connections that bring community members out to play and enjoy the
                                                                                  city’s various natural assets.
                                                                                  Growth Management
                                                                                  The creation and preservation of open space in the city is, in large part, due to
                                                                                  the city’s Growth Management Plan, which through the Citywide Facilities and
                                                                                  Improvements Plan, establishes the following facility standards for open space
                                                                                  and park facilities:
                                                                                  Open Space
                                                                                  Fifteen percent of the total land area in specified Local Facility Management
                                                                                  Zones (LFMZ), exclusive of environmentally constrained non-developable
                                                                                  land, must be set aside for permanent open space (public or private) and must be
                                                                                  available concurrent with development.
                                                                                  The city is divided into 25 LFMZs. At the time the open space facility standard
                                                                                  was established (1986), the city determined the standard should be applicable to
                                                                                  LFMZs 11-15 and 17-25, but not to LFMZs 1-10 and 16 because those LFMZs were
                                                                                  already developed or met/exceeded the open space standard.
                                  4-6

                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 4-1
             OCEANSIDE
                City of
                Oceanside                                                                                                                                         Figure 4-1:	 Open Space
                            Buena
                            Vista
                            Lagoon
                                                                                                Calavera                                                            1
                                                                                                Lake
                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                    City of
                                                                                                                   Oceanside
                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                               Maerkle
                                                                                                                               Reservoir
                                     Agua
                                        H ed io nda                                                                                                  SAN MARCOS
                                               La goo n
                                                                                                                                           City of
                                                                                                                                            Vista
P a c i f i c
 O c e a n
                                                                                                                                                       City of
                                                                                                                                                     San Marcos
                                                                             Ba tiquitos      Lago o n
                                                          SAN                               City of
                                                                                           Encinitas
                                                           DI E G
                                                             O NO
                                                                        RR
                                                                    ERN
                                                                RTH
                                                                                                           ENCINITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                            4-7

                                                                                     General Plan
                                                                                                4
Facility management plans have been approved for all LFMZs and, in zones
where the open space standard is applicable, include requirements that ensure a
minimum of 15 percent of the land in the zone is set aside as open space.
Parks
                                                                                                 Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
The Growth Management park facility standard is three acres of community
parks or special use areas per 1,000 population within the park district. There
are four park districts within Carlsbad, which correspond to the city’s four
quadrants. Parks and special use areas must be scheduled for construction
within a five-year period beginning at the time the need is first identified, but
beginning no sooner than August 22, 2017.1 According to City Council Reso-
lution No. 97-435, “scheduled for construction” means that the improvements
have been designed, a park site has been selected, and a financing plan for con-
struction of the facility has been approved.
The city’s Growth Management Ordinance (Carlsbad Municipal Code Chapter
21.90) authorizes special facility fees to pay for improvements or facilities that
are related to new industrial development. Since there is a substantial impact
on existing recreation facilities from an increasing industrial employment base,
the city recognized a need to impose and implement a park mitigation fee for
industrial development. In November 1987, the City Council adopted its first
park mitigation fee for the Zone 5 Local Facilities Management Plan. Addition-
ally, a park mitigation fee was required as part of the Zone 13 and Zone 16 Local
Facilities Management Plans. The purpose of this fee is to ensure adequate rec-
reational facilities to accommodate the demand created by the daily influx of
the industrial work force and population as industrial development grows.
Section 4.5 provides information regarding compliance with the park facility
standard.
1	 Amended by City Council Resolution No. 2017-170 (GPA 2017-0002/OAJ 17-0004)
                                                                                               4-9

                                  City of Carlsbad
4                                                    4.3	 Biological Resources and
                                                          Open Space for Conservation
                                                     Habitats and Sensitive Biological Resources
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     The western edge of the city is characterized by sandy beaches and three
                                                     low-lying river estuaries or lagoons – the Batiquitos, Agua Hedionda, and
                                                     Buena Vista lagoons. The coastal portions of the city are largely developed;
                                                     however, natural vegetation communities remain in and around the three
                                                     coastal lagoons and on some of the higher, steeper-sloped, inland portions of
                                                     the city. The lagoons dominate the city’s coastal landscape and provide habitat
                                                     for a variety of resident and migratory bird species, fish, and invertebrates as a
                                                     part of the city’s overall open space network.
                                                     Habitats and Natural Vegetation
                                                     Habitat types within the city include grassland, coastal sage scrub, chaparral,
                                                     woodland, riparian, marsh and other wetlands, and open water. Of these habitat
                                                     types, natural habitats and vegetation communities, including open water, cover
                                                     approximately 7,574 acres, or 30 percent, of land within the city’s jurisdiction.
                                                     The majority of the natural vegetation communities in the city are comprised
                                                     of coastal sage scrub (37 percent) and grassland (18 percent). The remainder of
                                                     the city is made up of agricultural lands, disturbed lands, or developed lands.
                                                     A summary description of the natural vegetation communities found within
                                                     the city is provided below; a much more detailed description is provided in the
                                                     Environmental Impact Report.
                                                     Upland Habitat
                                                     Coastal Sage Scrub
                                                     Three types of coastal sage scrub exist within the city, representing approxi-
                                                     mately 38 percent of the natural vegetation in the city: Diegan coastal sage scrub,
                                                     maritime succulent scrub and coastal sage scrub- chaparral scrub. Coastal sage
                                                     scrub is home to the federally-threatened coastal California gnatcatcher, as well
                                                     as the orange-throated whiptail (a California Species of Special Concern) and
                                                     the federally listed plant species, San Diego ambrosia. Coastal sage scrub is con-
                                                     sidered sensitive habitat under California regulations, but Diegan coastal sage
                                                     scrub in particular is identified in the California Natural Diversity Database as a
                                                     priority for monitoring and restoration. Within Carlsbad, the largest remaining
                                                     areas of Diegan coastal sage scrub are in Calavera Hills, near the intersection of
                                                     College Boulevard and Carlsbad Village Drive, and in the Villages of La Costa.
                                  4-10

                                                                                        General Plan
                                                                                                   4
Chaparral
There are two categories of chaparral habitat located in Carlsbad: undifferenti-
ated (including southern mixed and chamise chaparral) and southern maritime
chaparral. Both these vegetation communities occur in a patchy distribution
throughout the city and are located on wetter north- and west-facing slopes,
                                                                                                    Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
alternating with coastal sage scrub, grasslands and oak woodlands. Southern
maritime chaparral is the most limited type of chaparral in the city and is con-
sidered a sensitive habitat. Sensitive plant and animal species that may be found
in chaparral habitat are the wart-stemmed ceanothus (designated as sensitive
by the California Native Plant Society), the federally and state listed endangered
Orcutt’s spineflower, the California endangered short-leaved Dudleya, and the
California Watch List species, Southern California rufous-crowned sparrow.
Grassland
There are approximately 1,807 acres of native and non-native grasslands within
Carlsbad. Native grasslands are considered a sensitive habitat under California
regulations and are identified in the California Natural Diversity Database as
priority areas for monitoring and restoration. Within the city, native grassland
vegetation is extremely limited. Non-native grassland is not considered a
sensitive habitat; however, it may be a significant foraging habitat for raptors
and the California fully protected white-tailed kite. Non-native grassland may
also support sensitive animal and plant species such as the federally endangered
Stephens’ kangaroo rat and federal and state listed San Diego thorn-mint, and
may serve as a habitat linkage for a number of wildlife species such as mule deer
and scrub species such as California gnatcatcher.
Woodland
There are two types of woodlands that occur within Carlsbad: oak woodland
(approximately 29 acres) and eucalyptus woodland (approximately 257 acres).
Sensitive species that may occur in oak woodlands include the Cooper’s hawk
(a California Watch List species), regionally sensitive Harbison’s Dunn skipper,
and Nuthalls’ scrub oak and Engelmann oak (designated as sensitive by the Cal-
ifornia Native Plant Society). Although eucalyptus woodland is a non-native
community that does not support sensitive plant or wildlife species, it is often
used for nesting by raptors and other birds or roosting by bats.
Riparian and Wetland Habitat
Riparian
Riparian habitats are found along drainages and streams, where soils tend to
be moist during all or part of the year. Within Carlsbad, riparian communi-
ties may also be the result of agricultural runoff. There are approximately 572
acres of riparian habitat located in the city, consisting of riparian scrub, riparian
woodland and riparian forest. Riparian habitats are all considered sensitive
                                                                                                 4-11

4
                                           under federal and state regulations and policies. Sensitive species that may
                                           occur in riparian habitats include the federally and state listed endangered
                                           Least Bell’s vireo and willowy monardella. Sycamore-alder woodland supports
                                           nesting for a number of raptor species, including nesting of the white-tailed kite
                                           and Cooper’s hawk.
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                           Marsh, Estuarine, and Freshwater
                                           Marsh and wetland habitats within Carlsbad consist of southern coastal salt
                                           marsh, freshwater marsh and cismontane alkali marsh, in addition to other
                                           wetland and aquatic habitat types, such as estuaries, freshwater/open water and
                                           vernal pools. There are approximately 1,466 acres of marsh habitats in the city,
                                           all of which are considered sensitive and are regulated under federal and state
                                           regulations and policies.
                                           Sensitive species that may occur in salt marsh include the state listed California
                                           black rail and Belding’s savannah sparrow, as well as the federally listed light-
                                           footed clapper rail. Plant species found in freshwater marsh include the state
                                           listed Spreading Navarretia.
                                           Other wetland habitats include estuaries, freshwater/open water and vernal
                                           pools. Lake Calavera is the largest open water area in the city, apart from the
                                           three major coastal lagoons, and provides foraging habitat for the osprey (a
                                           California Watch List species). Vernal pools are highly restricted wetlands
                                           that contain high numbers of endangered, sensitive and endemic plant and
                                           animal species. Sensitive species found in vernal pool habitats include state and
                                           federally listed endangered California Orcutt grass and San Diego button-cel-
                                           ery, as well as the federally listed San Diego fairy shrimp.
                                  4-12

                                                                                        General Plan
                                                                                                   4
Special-Status Species
A total of 51 sensitive plant and animal species have been recorded as occurring
or potentially occurring within the city. Of these, 20 are state and federally listed
as threatened or endangered. Fifteen of the 51 sensitive species are considered
to be narrow endemics, which are native species that have a highly restricted
                                                                                                    Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
distribution, soil affinity, and/or habitat. The federal, state, and local laws and
regulations that protect these species are discussed below.
Habitats and Resource Conservation Regulatory
Context, and Plans and Programs
Regulatory Context
Federal Endangered Species Act
Under the Federal Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973, the Secretary of the
Interior and the Secretary of Commerce jointly have the authority to list a species
as threatened or endangered (16 USC 1533[c]). The ESA protects endangered and
threatened species and their habitats by prohibiting the “take” of listed animals
and the interstate or international trade in listed plants and animals, including
their parts and products, except under federal permit.
Migratory Bird Treaty Act
The Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) (16 U.S.C. 703 et seq.) is a federal statute
that makes it unlawful “by any means or in any manner, to pursue, hunt,
take, capture, [or] kill” any migratory bird or attempt such actions, except as
permitted by regulation.
California Fish and Wildlife Code
Under the California Fish and Wildlife Code, the California Department of Fish
and Wildlife (CDFW) provides protection from “take” for a variety of species,
including Fully Protected species. The Native Plant Protection Act of 1977 (Fish
and Wildlife Code Sections 1900 et seq.) gives the CDFW authority to designate
state endangered, threatened, and rare plants and provides specific protection
measures for identified populations. The CDFW also protects streams, water
bodies and riparian corridors through the streambed alteration agreement
process under Section 1601 to 1606 of the California Fish and Wildlife Code.
California Native Plant Society
The California Native Plant Society (CNPS) maintains a list of special-status
plant species based on collected scientific information. Designation of these
species by the CNPS has no legal status or protection under federal or state
endangered species legislation.
                                                                                                 4-13

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     California Coastal Act of 1976
                                                     As noted above, the CDFW identifies areas for the protection of environmen-
                                                     tally sensitive habitats; under the California Coastal Act (CCA) protection is
                                                     provided for these areas in the coastal zone. The CCA identifies environmen-
                                                     tally sensitive habitats as areas in which plant or animal life and or their habitats
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     are rare or vulnerable due to the special nature or role in an ecosystem that can
                                                     be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments.
                                                     California Natural Community Conservation Planning (NCCP) Act of
                                                     1991
                                                     The NCCP Act of 1991 provides a framework for state and local government, as
                                                     well as private interest efforts plans for protection of regional biodiversity and
                                                     the ecosystems upon which they depend. NCCP’s allow for the appropriate,
                                                     compatible economic activity to occur while ensuring the long-term conserva-
                                                     tion of multiple species. As a result of this act the Carlsbad Habitat Management
                                                     Plan (HMP) was prepared under the Multiple Habitat Conservation Program
                                                     (MHCP) (see below).
                                                     Local Plans and Programs
                                                     Multiple Habitat Conservation Program
                                                     Under the NCCP, Carlsbad and the cities of Encinitas, Escondido, Oceanside,
                                                     San Marcos, Solana Beach and Vista participated in the preparation of the
                                                     MHCP, which was adopted and certified by the San Diego Association of Gov-
                                                     ernments (SANDAG) in 2003. The MHCP is a comprehensive sub-regional plan
                                                     that addresses the needs of multiple plant and animal species in northwestern
                                                     San Diego County, enabling cities to implement their portions of the MHCP
                                                     through citywide subarea plans.
                                                     Habitat Management Plan for Natural Communities in the City of
                                                     Carlsbad
                                                     The City of Carlsbad prepared a subarea plan as a part of the MHCP, called the
                                                     Habitat Management Plan for Natural Communities in the City of Carlsbad
                                                     or the HMP, which was adopted by the Carlsbad City Council in November
                                                     2004. The HMP outlines specific conservation, management, facility siting,
                                                     land use, and other measures that the city will take to preserve the diversity of
                                                     habitat and protect sensitive biological resources in the city while also allowing
                                                     for additional development and growth as anticipated under the city’s General
                                                     Plan. Formal approval and adoption of the HMP occurred through issuance of
                                                     a permit by wildlife agencies, namely United States Fish and Wildlife Service
                                                     (USFWS) and CDFW, as well as execution of an implementation agreement
                                                     between the city and the wildlife agencies. The HMP preserve contains natural
                                                     habitats that are necessary to sustain threatened, listed or sensitive species, and
                                                     to maintain biological value.
                                  4-14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 4-3
                                                  78
             OCEANSIDE
                City of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN
                Oceanside                       RO
                                            M AR N               RD                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 4-2:	 HMP Preserve Areas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                HMP Preserve Areas
                            Buena                                DR
                                                          AG                                                                                                                                                                                                         78
                            Vista
                            Lagoon                    IL
                                                             E              EL                                                                                                                                                                                                            Existing Hardline
                                                         L                                                                                                         Calavera
                                                      V
                                                 AD                                                                                                                Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Proposed Hardline
                                            SB
                                          RL                                 C AM
                                     CA
                                                                                                                                                  VD
                                                                                                                                              E BL
                                                                                  INO                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                  City of                                                                                 Outside-Conserved
                                                                                                                                            EG
                                                                                                                AV
                                                                                                                                         LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oceanside
                                                                                                            ACK                                                                                                                                                                           Standards Area
                                                                                    R EA
                                                                                        L             AR                               CO
                                                                    E                                   M
                                                            K    AV                                TA
                                                         AC                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Highways
                                                       AR
                                                 TA
                                                   M                                                                                              RD
                                                                                                                                      ON
                                                                                                                                    NN                                                                                                                                                    Major Street
                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                  EL
                                                                                                                                          CA
                                                                                                                                               MIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Maerkle                                                                      Planned Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                                             RE                                                                                                                           Railroad
                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                             Agu a                                                                                                 L
                                     CA                          Hed ion d a                                                                                                                                                                                       SAN MARCOS             Lagoons\Water
                                     RLS                               L agoon
                                        D                                                                                               FARA                                                                                                  City of
                                      BA                                                                                                      DA Y                                                                                                                                        City Limits
                                                                                                                                                        AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Vista
                                                                        C AN N                                                                             E
P a c i f i c                               BLV                               ON           RD
                                             D
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                        PALO M A
                                                                                                                                                                                                           R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T RD
                                                                                                                                                                   MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                    -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                     AIRPORT                                                                                         City of
                                                                                                         ORT                RD                                                                                                                                     San Marcos
                                                                                                   A I RP
                                                                                       PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                           BLE
                                                                                                                                                                       C           VIDA R O                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                           A M INO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ETT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IA    LN                            LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INS                                    ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                          L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                                              ETT
                                                                                                                                  IA                                                                                                          A R
                                                                                                                            NS                                                                                                          ALG
                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                   PO                           AV
                                                                                 CAR
                                                                                                                                                   IA   RA
                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                      AD
                                                                                  LSB
                                                                                                                                                                  Y
                                                                                                                                                               KW
                                                                                           D
                                                                                       BLV
                                                                                                                                       Ba tiq uitos            Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                           AVE
                                                                                                                                               LA        C O STA                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA
                                                                                                                                                                                           EL
                                                                                                                                                                                               MIN O                                        FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D
                                                                                                   S AN                                                    City of
                                                                                                                                                          Encinitas                               RE                                       N TA
                                                                                                                   ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                   AL
                                                                                                               RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SA                                                                                100
                                                                                                           O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O                                                                               ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                     D IE G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0            0.5          1                          2
                                                                                                               N RR                                                                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Source: City of Carlsbad, 2012; SANDAG, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                 ENCINITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4-15

                                                                                       General Plan
                                                                                                  4
One of the HMP management goals is to conserve a full range of vegetation
community types, with an emphasis on sensitive habitat types. As part of the
permit issued by the wildlife agencies, the city is required to preserve 6,478
acres of land within the city’s jurisdictional boundaries and an additional 308
acres of habitat for the coastal California gnatcatcher outside of the city’s juris-
                                                                                                   Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
diction (i.e., “gnatcatcher core”). As of December 2012, the city had preserved
5,877 acres within the city’s boundaries, or 91 percent of the HMP target, leaving
a remaining 601 acres within the city’s boundaries to be preserved in hardline
conservation or standards areas in order to meet the HMP permit requirements,
as shown in Table 4-2. In addition, as of December 2012, the city had preserved
280 acres outside the city’s boundaries, or 91 percent of the HMP target for the
gnatcatcher core, leaving 28 acres outside the city’s boundaries to be preserved
as gnatcatcher habitat. The HMP preserves fall into one of three classifications,
based upon the status of preservation: Existing Hardline Preserve, Proposed
Hardline Preserves, and Standards Areas. The Existing Hardline Preserves
include established private and city-owned preserves, CDFW Ecological
Reserves, and pre-existing natural open space preserves. Preserve locations are
shown in Figure 4-2. Table 4-3 shows actively managed preserves over 100 acres
in size.
Open Space Management Plan
As a framework plan to assist in the implementation of the MHCP and HMP, the
city’s Open Space Management Plan establishes procedures, standards, guide-
lines and conditions for long-term conservation and management of sensitive
species and habitat.
Community Forest Management Plan
The Community Forest Management Plan (2002) provides guidance to
conserve forest areas through proper design, maintenance and education.
The document includes guidelines and procedures for planting, maintaining,
removing, replacing and preserving trees within public areas; some of the most
visible landscape features include trees within the city’s rights-of-way and other
public areas.
Proposition C Open Space and Trails
In 2002, Proposition C was passed by Carlsbad voters, which authorized the City
Council to exceed the $1 million capital spending limit for specified projects,
one of which was the acquisition of open space and trail linkages. The Proposi-
tion C Open Space and Trails Ad Hoc Citizens’ Committee was formed by the
City Council in October 2005 to establish a prioritized list of potential property
acquisitions associated with the open space and trails linkage component of
Proposition C. The committee solicited nominations of potential open space
acquisitions and received proposals for 13 properties. These properties were
ranked using the committee’s criteria and presented to the City Council in the
                                                                                                4-17

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                           Table 4–2:	 HMP CONSERVATION TARGETS AND GAINS
                                           VEGETATION TYPE                                                         CONSERVATION TARGET                HABITAT GAINS (AS OF
                                                                                                                                (ACRES)              DECEMBER 2012; ACRES)
                                           Grassland                                                                                     707                                   637
                                           Coastal Sage Scrub                                                                          2,139                              1,777
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                           Chaparral (Undifferentiated Types)                                                            676                                   605
                                           Southern Maritime Chaparral                                                                   342                                   346
                                           Oak Woodland                                                                                   24                                    13
                                           Eucalyptus Woodland                                                                            99                                    95
                                           Riparian Scrub, Woodland and Forest                                                           494                                   452
                                           Marsh, Estuarine, Freshwater and Other Wetlands                                             1,252                              1,184
                                           Disturbed Lands                                                                               745                                   768
                                           TOTAL TARGET CONSERVATION WITHIN CARLSBAD                                                   6,478                              5,877
                                           Gnatcatcher Core Area Contribution                                                            308                                   280
                                           TOTAL HMP TARGET CONSERVATION                                                               6,786                              6,157
                                           Sources: 	 Habitat Management Plan for Natural Communities in the City of Carlsbad, November 2004; Annual Report for the Carlsbad
                                                      Habitat Management Plan, Year 8 (April 13, 2013).
                                           Table 4–3:	 ACTIVELY MANAGED HMP PRESERVES OVER 100 ACRES IN SIZE, AS OF JULY 25, 2013
                                           PRESERVE NAME                                                      SIZE (AC) PRESERVE MANAGER
                                           Rancho La Costa                                                         831 Center for Natural Lands Management
                                           Batiquitos Lagoon Ecological Reserve                                    564 California Department of Fish and Wildlife
                                           Carlsbad Highlands Ecological Reserve                                   472 California Department of Fish and Wildlife
                                           Lake Calavera (city owned)                                              257 Center for Natural Lands Management
                                           Calavera Hills II/Robertson Ranch                                       256 Center for Natural Lands Management
                                           Carlsbad Oaks North                                                     220 Center for Natural Lands Management
                                           Agua Hedionda Ecological Reserve                                        197 California Department of Fish and Wildlife
                                           Buena Vista Creek Ecological Reserve                                    142 California Department of Fish and Wildlife
                                           Buena Vista Lagoon Ecological Reserve                                   140 California Department of Fish and Wildlife
                                           Macario Canyon (city owned)                                             129 Center for Natural Lands Management
                                           La Costa Glen                                                           108 Center for Natural Lands Management
                                  4-18

                                                                                      General Plan
                                                                                                 4
committee’s final report in February 2007. Subsequent to the preparation of the
final report, the City Council recommended three additional areas of the city be
evaluated and included in the ranking.
Using the committee’s report and other resources, the city works with non-
profit organizations and state and federal wildlife agencies in exploring potential
                                                                                                  Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
native habitat areas for open space conservation. Several conservation acquisi-
tions have occurred to-date, including the Sherman property (now the CDFW’s
Buena Vista Creek Ecological Reserve), the Mitsuuchi property near Batiquitos
Lagoon, and two Caltrans properties near Agua Hedionda Lagoon. Whether
or not the city acquires open space lands itself, or another agency acquires and
conserves the land, the Proposition C committee recommendations and evalu-
ation guidelines provide detailed criteria for the evaluation of future potential
conservation sites.
                                                                                               4-19

                                  City of Carlsbad
4                                                    4.4	 Beaches
                                                     An important component of the Carlsbad General Plan is the enhancement and
                                                     maintenance of the city’s beach community character and connectedness. The
                                                     city has seven miles of beach and coastline divided into three main sections:
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     North Carlsbad beaches, Carlsbad State Beach, and South Carlsbad State Beach.
                                                     The beaches are mostly owned and managed by the California State Parks and
                                                     Recreation Department, which provides lifeguard/public safety service, main-
                                                     tenance of public restrooms, picnic areas, operation of the South Carlsbad
                                                     Campground, and various beach parking lots. Beaches in the city are described
                                                     briefly below.
                                                     North Carlsbad Beaches
                                                     Beaches north of Pine Avenue to the Oceanside border are jointly owned by the
                                                     state and the coastal property owners along that stretch. All North Carlsbad
                                                     beaches are open to the public, and the City of Carlsbad provides public access
                                                     to the beach at Rue des Chateaux, Beech Avenue, Christiansen Way, Grand
                                                     Avenue, and Carlsbad Village Drive.
                                                     Carlsbad State Beach
                                                     Carlsbad State Beach, from Pine Avenue south to Cannon Road includes the
                                                     Frazee State Beach, Tamarack Surf State Beach and Warm Water Jetty (in front
                                                     of the power plant). This stretch of Carlsbad’s shoreline is one of San Diego
                                                     County’s most popular beaches. The City of Carlsbad provides beach access
                                                     at Pine Avenue, Sycamore Avenue, Maple Avenue, Cherry Avenue, Hemlock
                                                     Avenue, and Tamarack Avenue. Two seawalls and a pedestrian walkway
                                                     connect Pine Avenue to Cannon Road. The seawall south of Tamarack Avenue
                                                     provides additional beach accessways and provides a pedestrian connection
                                                     along this entire stretch of beach.
                                                     South Carlsbad State Beach
                                                     South Carlsbad State Beach stretches from La Costa Avenue to just north of
                                                     Terramar Point and includes the popular 220-site South Carlsbad Campground
                                                     and two day use areas. Beach areas within the South Carlsbad State Beach
                                                     include the North Ponto and South Ponto beaches and Terramar Beach.
                                  4-20

                                                                                        General Plan
4.5	 Parks and Recreation
Park Classification
The General Plan establishes three park classifications, as described below and
                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                    Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
depicted on Figure 4-3.
Community Parks
Community parks are typically 20-50 acres in size (though there are several
smaller parks “grandfathered” into this classification), and designed to serve the
recreational needs of several neighborhoods, with a focus on serving families
from the vicinity with daily frequency. Community parks generally provide
active and passive use amenities; however, they are not limited to the exclusive
use of either. Minimum facilities should include:
•	 Family-oriented picnic areas
•	 Group picnic areas
•	 Turfed open space areas for free play
•	 Multi-purpose playfield(s) (lighted when appropriate)
•	 Tot lot areas
•	 Structures for lectures, meetings, skills, instructions, etc.
•	 Buffer areas
•	 Special use facilities such as community gardens, swimming pools, tennis
   courts, horseshoes, handball and racquetball courts, bicycle paths, skate
   parks, dog parks, etc. as per specific community demand may be located
   within these parks if appropriate to the interests and needs of the com-
   munity in which the park is located.
Special Use Areas
Special use areas are typically between one and five acres in size, with only one
or two basic uses, which can be either active or passive in orientation. Examples
include, but are not limited to, swim facilities, skate parks, dog parks, tennis
courts or picnic areas. School sites that operate under a joint-use facility
agreement between the City of Carlsbad and a school district are also included
in the inventory. Adequate access should be a primary siting criteria utilized in
determining the location of special use areas.
Special Resource Areas
Special resource areas have citywide and potentially regional significance
related to the quality of the site or service that it provides. This quality may be a
natural feature (geological, ecological, hydrological), historical resource (archi-
tectural, archaeological), or some combination thereof. Special resource areas
are typically larger than community parks.
                                                                                                 4-21

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     Active and Passive Recreation. In addition to a park’s primary classification,
                                                     the city may describe a park as containing active and/or passive areas. Parks can
                                                     be developed with either active or passive park amenities or a combination of
                                                     both. Active park areas typically provide a form of organized and/or supervised
                                                     recreation, such as gymnasiums, swim complexes, multi-use ball fields, tot lots,
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     hard court play surfaces, volleyball, horseshoe areas, BMX bike courses, and
                                                     skate parks or a combination thereof. Passive park areas often provide minimal
                                                     or no amenities associated with active use. The very nature of passive use implies
                                                     quiet, contemplative, low impact activity, such as nature trails, walkways, picnic
                                                     tables, benches, and small turf and/or landscaped areas.
                                                     Regional Recreation. Three of the city’s special resource areas (Lake Calavera,
                                                     Agua Hedionda Lagoon and Batiquitos Lagoon) and one community park
                                                     (Veterans Memorial), as well as the beaches, serve a regional recreation need;
                                                     however, they will continue to function pursuant to their primary park classifi-
                                                     cation as identified above.
                                                     Existing Park and Recreation Areas
                                                     Carlsbad currently has 13 community parks (254.6 acres), 27 special use areas
                                                     (81.1 acres), and five special resource areas (more than 1,300 acres). Table 4-4
                                                     provides a list of existing parks in the city, the quadrants in which they are
                                                     located, and approximate acreages by park. Special resource areas do not count
                                                     toward the Growth Management Plan. Although golf courses are a source of
                                                     recreation, these park acreage numbers and ratios do not include land dedicated
                                                     to golf courses (golf courses are not classified as parks). Golf courses are included
                                                     in the calculation of the overall supply of open space in the city.
                                                     Future Park and Recreation Areas
                                                     The city’s Parks and Recreation Needs Assessment and Comprehensive Action
                                                     Plan, which was completed in Fall 2013, indicates the current trends and rec-
                                                     reational needs identified by the Carlsbad community. The plan is based upon
                                                     extensive community participation, and Table 4-5 identifies some of the antici-
                                                     pated future park development projects based upon input received.
                                                     In addition to the future parks identified in Table 4-5, an area referred to as Hub
                                                     Park may provide an opportunity for a future park; however, the park is not
                                                     planned at this time. In 1975, as a result of the approval of the Encina Power plant,
                                                     SDG&E and the city entered into a lease that allows the city to use a portion of
                                                     the SDG&E owned property on the south shore of Agua Hedionda Lagoon for
                                                     park and recreational purposes. The term of the lease is for 60 years and can be
                                                     extended to 99 years or 2074. The potential future park area is approximately
                                                     91 acres. Because this park is not a planned park, it is not included in the future
                                                     park inventory.
                                  4-22

                                                   Lagoon
                                                Observation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 4-3
                                                      Area                       78                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 4-3:	 Parks
             OCEANSIDE
                City of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                                                            Hidden Canyon
                     Oceanside                                                  RO              RD
                                                                            M AR N                                          Community Park
                                                                        Hosp Grove                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Parks & Recreation
                                                          Buena Vista      Park &
                                                           Elem. Field Trailhead
                                             Buena               Pio Pico                  DR                                                               Hope
                                                                                      AG                                                                    Elementary                                       Calavera                                                                                                        78
                                             Vista               Park                                                                                       Field
                                                                  Harold E. Smerdu
                                                                                        E                 EL                                                                                                 Lake                                                                                                                                Existing Community Park
                                             Lagoon                              IL
                                                                  Community         L                                                                                         Calavera Hills
                                                                  Garden          V
                                                                              D                                                                                               Trailhead
                                                                           BA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Future Community Park
                                                                                                               INO
                                             Maxton Brown                 S
                                                                       RL
                                                                                             Monroe St.
                                                                                                           C AM
                                             Park                              Carlsbad
                                                                   CA
                                                                                             Swim
                                                  Harding                      High School Complex                                                                       CO                                                              City of
                                                  Community         Oak        Tennis Courts                                                           E                       E                                                                                                                                                                 Existing Special Use Areas
                            Magee                 Center            Park                                                                           AV       Calavera Hills  EG                                                          Oceanside
                            House                                                                                                                           Community ParkLL
                            & Park                                     Holiday                    Magnolia                                       ACK                                                                                                                                                                                             Future Special Use Areas
                                                        Senior                                                    R EA                                                            D
                                                                                                                                                                              BLV
                                                                       Park                       Elementary
                                                       Center                          Valley     Field              L                       AR
                                                                                       Junior                                                                Robertson
                                                       Pine Ave                                   E                                          M                                                                                                                                                                                                   Existing Special Resource Areas
                                                           Park Chase                  High
                                                                                           K    AV                                      TA                      Ranch
                                                                 Field                  AC                                                                    (Future)
                                                                                M     AR                                                                                               RD
                Frazee/Tamarack State
                                                                  Jefferson
                                                                              TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Existing Golf Courses
                                                                Elem. Field                                                                                            ON
                 Beach Facilities - Bluffs                                                                                                                           NN
                                                                                                                                                                CA
                                                                                                                                                                   EL
                                                                                                                                                                                       The Rancho
                                                                                                                                                                                        Carlsbad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Other Open Space
                                                                                                          Kelly                                                            CA                                                                            Maerkle
                                                                                                       Elementary                                                            MIN Golf Course                                                             Reservoir
                                                                                                          Field                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                    Veterans                     Zone 5       RE                                                                                                                                                 Highways
                                                                                                                                                                                                A
                                                                                        Agua                                                        Memorial                      Park              L
                                                                       BA
                                                                                                                               Laguna                              Zone 5
                                                                                                                                                      Park                      (Future)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SAN MARCOS              Major Street
                                                                   R LS
                                                                                           H ed io nda                         Rivera                               Park
                                                                                                                                                    (Future)                                                                                    Skate
                                                                 CA
                                                                                                  La goo n                     Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Park
                                                                                                                                                                         FARA                                                                                                                    City of                                         Planned Street
                                                                       D                                                                                                      DA   Y                                                                                                              Vista
                                                                                                      CANN                                                                               AV
                                                                             D                                                                                                             E
P a c i f i c                                                                                                  ON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Railroad
                                                                         BLV                                            RD
                                                         Cannon
                                                            Park                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City Limits
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                     The Crossing                                                                              PALOM A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T               RD
                                                                                                                                               Golf Course
                                                                                                       Car Country                                                                                 MCCLELLAN                                                                                           Leo Carrillo
                                                                     Cannon Lake
                                                                                                       Park                                                                                         -PALOMAR                                                                                             Ranch
                                                                     Park (Future)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     AIRPORT                                                                                             Historic           City of
                                                                                                                                             PORT            RD                                                                            Alga Norte                                                     Park            San Marcos
                                                                                                                                        AI R
                                                                                                                    PALOM A R                                                                                                              Community
                                                                                                                                        Poinsettia                                                                                             Park
                                                                                                                                        Community                                                                                  LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ROB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DR
                                                                                                                                        Park                                                            C           VIDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            A M INO                                                    IA     LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ETT                                          SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                      Aviara
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ME
                                                                                                                                                                                   Community
                                                                                                                                                                                        Park
                                                                                                                                                                         LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                                                                                 TTIA                                                                                                                         A R
                                                                                                                                                               SE                                                                                                                         A LG
                                                                                                                                                            IN                                                                                                                                   El Fuerte Park/
                                                                                                                                                     PO                          AV                                                                                                              La Costa Meadows
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Aviara Oaks
                                                                                                                 L SB
                                                                                                                                                                                    IA   RA                             School Field
                                                                                                             C AR                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Y
                                                                                                                 AD                                                                            KW
                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                    BLV                                                                                                                                                         La Costa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Canyon Park                  Cadencia
                                                                                                                                                                                      Four Seasons                                                                                                            Park
                                                                                                                                                                                   Aviara Golf Course
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 La Costa
                                                                                                                                                                        Ba tiquitos             Lago o n                                          Resort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Golf Course
                                                                                                                                                                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                LA          C O STA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CO              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MINO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  La Costa Heights
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Park                                             Stagecoach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Community                                               500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D                     Park
                                                                                                                                         SAN                                                 City of
                                                                                                                                                                                            Encinitas                                     RE                                                  N TA
                                                                                                                                          DI E G                                                                                               AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SA                                                                                    100
                                                                                                                                             O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O                                                                                   ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C
                                                                                                                                                       RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                   ERN
                                                                                                                                               RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0            0.5           1                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; SANDAG, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ENCINITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4-23

                                                                                          General Plan
                                                                                                     4
Table 4–4:	 EXISTING COMMUNITY PARKS, SPECIAL USE AREAS, AND SPECIAL RESOURCE
            AREAS (2013)
FACILITY NAME                                                                  QUADRANT    ACRES
Existing Community Parks
Alga Norte Community Park                                                      SE           32.1
                                                                                                      Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
Aviara Community Park                                                          SW           24.3
Calavera Hills Community Park                                                  NE           16.8
Hidden Canyon Community Park (includes 12.7 acres of Carlsbad Village Drive    NE            22
open space)
Holiday Park                                                                   NW            6.0
Hosp Grove Park                                                                NW           27.1
La Costa Canyon Community Park (includes 8.9 acres of La Costa Canyon open     SE           14.7
space)
Laguna Riviera Park                                                            NW            4.2
Leo Carrillo Ranch Historic Park (includes 16.5 acres of Carrillo Ranch open   SE           27.4
space)
Magee House and Park                                                           NW            2.1
Pine Avenue Park (includes Madison Street parcels)                             NW            8.2
Poinsettia Community Park (includes 11.1 acres of Poinsettia open space)       SW           41.2
Stagecoach Community Park                                                      SE           28.5
Subtotal Community Parks                                                                   254.6
Existing Special Use Areas
Aviara Oaks School Field                                                       SW            4.7
Buena Vista Elementary School Field                                            NW            2.6
Business Park Recreational Facility (Zone 5 Park)                              NW            3.0
Cadencia Park                                                                  SE            4.0
Calavera Hills Trailhead                                                       NE             .3
Cannon Park                                                                    NW            1.7
Car Country                                                                    NW            1.0
Carlsbad High School Tennis Courts                                             NW            1.7
Chase Field                                                                    NW            2.7
Frazee/Tamarack State Beach Facilities Bluff                                   NW            8.8
Harding Community Center                                                       NW            1.0
Harold E. Smerdu Community Garden                                              NW            1.3
Hope Elemntary School Field                                                    NE            2.8
Hosp Grove Trailheads                                                          NW            7.6
Kelly Elementary School Field                                                  NW            2.9
Jefferson Elementary School Field                                              NW            2.2
La Costa Meadows Elementary/El Fuerte Park                                     SE            4.7
Lagoon Observation Area                                                        NW            1.4
La Costa Heights Park                                                          SE            3.5
Magnolia Elementary School Field                                               NW            4.0
Maxton Brown Park                                                              NW            0.9
                                                                                                   4-25

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                           Table 4–4:	 EXISTING COMMUNITY PARKS, SPECIAL USE AREAS, AND SPECIAL RESOURCE
                                                       AREAS (2013)
                                           FACILITY NAME                                                                               QUADRANT          ACRES
                                           Monroe Street Swim Complex                                                                  NW                   2.0
                                           Oak Park                                                                                    NW                   0.2
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                           Pio Pico Park                                                                               NW                   0.8
                                           Senior Center Complex                                                                       NW                   3.4
                                           Skate Park                                                                                  NE                   3.4
                                           Valley Junior High School Field                                                             NW                   8.5
                                           Subtotal Special Use Areas                                                                                      81.1
                                           Existing Special Resource Areas
                                           Agua Hedionda Lagoon                                                                                          254.0
                                           Batiquitos Lagoon                                                                                             484.0
                                           Beaches                                                                                                        113.2
                                           Buena Vista Lagoon                                                                                            202.0
                                           Lake Calavera                                                                                                 256.5
                                           Subtotal Special Resource Areas                                                                             1,309.7
                                           TOTAL EXISTING PARKLAND                                                                                      1,645.4
                                           Source: City of Carlsbad Parks and Recreation Department, 2013.
                                           Table 4–5:	 ANTICIPATED FUTURE PARK DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
                                           QUAD            PARK DEVELOPMENT PROJECT                              PARK CLASSIFICATION                 ESTIMATED
                                                                                                                                                  PARK ACREAGE
                                           NW              Cannon Lake Park                                      Special Use Area                          6.8
                                           NW              Business Park Recreational Facility                   Special Use Area                          9.3
                                                           (Zone 5 Park) Expansion
                                           NE              Robertson Ranch Park                                  Special Use Area                         11.2
                                           SW              Poinsettia Community Park- Phase IIb                  Community Park                            NA1
                                           SE              Leo Carrillo Ranch Park-Phase III                     Community Park                            NA1
                                           CITYWIDE        Veteran’s Memorial Park                               Community Park                           91.5
                                           1	 Improvements within existing park acreage; no additional park acreage to be added.
                                  4-26

                                                                                                            General Plan
                                                                                                                        4
Parkland and Open Space Standards
Growth Management
The city’s Growth Management Plan facility standard for parks is described in
Section 4.2 and summarized below in Table 4.6. The city annually monitors the
                                                                                                                         Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
status of compliance with all Growth Management Plan facilities standards. As
of 2013, the city’s park facilities are consistent with the Growth Management
Plan park facilities standard and citywide there is a ratio of three acres per 1,000
population. See below for information regarding future park demand.
Quimby Act
The 1975 Quimby Act (California Government Code Section 66477) authorizes
cities to require developers to set aside land or pay fees for park improvements.
The goal of the act is to require developers to help provide for parkland needs of
new development. The act allows cities to require dedication or in lieu fees for
community and neighborhood parkland contributions up to three acres per 1,000
population, or up to five acres per 1,000 population to match the existing ratio if it
is higher than three acres per 1,000 population. Under the Quimby Act, fees must
be paid and/or land conveyed directly to the local public agencies that provide
park and recreation services communitywide; however, revenues generated
through the Quimby Act cannot be used for the operation and maintenance of
park facilities. The city’s parkland standards are consistent with the Quimby Act.
Table 4–6:	 PARK FACILITY STANDARDS
CLASSIFICATION           SIZE                      LEVEL OF SERVICE ACCESS        OWNERSHIP          STANDARD
Special Resource 100 acres        Citywide                           Vehicular,   Public             N/A
Area             + unique                                            bicycle,
                 character and/or                                    pedestrian
                 use not found
                 in community
                 parks
Community                20-50 acres as            Community         Vehicular,   Public             3 acres of
Park                     a guideline,                                bicycle,                        community park
                         where                                       pedestrian                      or special use
                         acquisition                                                                 area per1,000
                         of sufficient                                                               population
                         acreage is
                         possible
Special Use Area 1-5 acres                         Neighborhood      Vehicular,   Public, private
                                                   and community     bicycle,     and quasi-public
                                                                     pedestrian
Recreational             Negotiable                In proximity to   Vehicular,   Public/private     _1
Facilities for                                     employees         bicycle,
Industrial Areas                                                     pedestrian
1	 There is a fee based on square feet of industrial floor area.
                                                                                                                      4-27

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     Future Demand and Parkland Distribution
                                                     Carlsbad will have an estimated 51,821 dwelling units and 129,901 residents at
                                                     buildout. Based on this projection and applying the current park standards from
                                                     the Growth Management Plan, future demand for park land will be 389.7 acres
                                                     citywide. Assuming completion of currently planned parks, including Veteran’s
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     Memorial Park and Robertson Ranch Park, the city will at buildout have a
                                                     parkland surplus in each of the four quadrants, and a 64.9 acre surplus citywide.
                                                     Table 4-7 summarizes the city’s projected park needs and the estimated amount
                                                     of future park acreage.
                                                      Table 4–7:	 PARK NEEDS PROJECTED FOR BUILDOUT
                                                      QUADRANT                                                                      BUILDOUT ESTIMATE
                                                      Northwest
                                                      Population Estimate                                                                            37,904
                                                      Park Acres Needed                                                                                113.7
                                                      Future Park Acres      1
                                                                                                                                                      144.3
                                                      Future Surplus or (Deficit)                                                                       30.6
                                                      Northeast
                                                      Population Estimate                                                                            22,423
                                                      Park Acres Needed                                                                                 67.3
                                                      Future Park Acres      1
                                                                                                                                                        79.4
                                                     Future Surplus or (Deficit)                                                                         12.1
                                                     Southwest
                                                     Population Estimate                                                                             27,795
                                                     Park Acres Needed                                                                                  83.4
                                                     Future Park Acres       1
                                                                                                                                                        93.1
                                                      Future Surplus or (Deficit)                                                                         9.7
                                                      Southeast
                                                      Population Estimate                                                                            41,780
                                                      Park Acres Needed                                                                                125.3
                                                      Future Park Acres      1
                                                                                                                                                       137.8
                                                      Future Surplus or (Deficit)                                                                       12.5
                                                      Citywide
                                                      Population Estimate                                                                           129,901
                                                      Park Acres Needed                                                                                389.7
                                                      Future Park Acres1                                                                              454.6
                                                     Future Surplus or (Deficit)                                                                        64.9
                                                      1	Future park acres include the acreage of existing and future planned parks per Tables 4-4 and 4-5. In
                                                        regard to Veteran’s Memorial Park, because of the park’s central location in the city, and pursuant to
                                                        the city’s Citywide Facilities and Improvement Plan, the 91.5 acre park will count toward satisfying
                                                        the park needs of each quadrant (22.9 acres per quadrant).
                                  4-28

                                                                   Lagoon
                                                                Observation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 4-4
                                        OCEANSIDE
                                                                      Area                     78                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 4-4:	 Existing and Planned Future 		
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   	GENERAL Recreational
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PLAN
                                           City of
                                              Oceanside                                        RO             RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Trails
                                                                                           M AR N
                                                                                  Hosp                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Existing and Planned Future Trails
                                                                                  Grove                                        Hidden
                                                                Buena
                                                                                  Park                       DR                Canyon                               Hope
                                                                                                      AG                        Park                                Elementary                                                                                                                                            78
                                                                Vista                                                                                               Field                                     Calavera
                                                                Lagoon                             IL
                                                                                                        E                 EL                                                                                  Lake                                                                                                                           1, Existing Bike Lanes and
                                       Maxton                                                 V
                                                                                                      L                                                                                      Calavera                                                                                                                                        Sidewalk Connection
                                                                               Pio Pico
                                       Brown                                               AD                                                                                                Hills
                                                                                                                               INO
                                        Park
                                                                               Park     SB
                                                                                      RL                                                                                                     Trailhead
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1, Future Bike Lanes and
                                                                                                                           C AM
                                                                                                                                                                             Calavera
                                                                                 CA                                                                                            Hills   CO
                                                                                                          Carlsbad
                                                                                                            High
                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                            Community         E                                                 City of                                                                                      Sidewalk Connection
                                                                                                                                                                    AV                     EG
                                                                                                           School                                                              Park      LL                                                    Oceanside
                                                     Magee                             Holiday                                                                   ACK
                                                    House &
                                                                         Senior
                                                                                                                                    R EA                                                         D                                                                                                                                           2, Existing Paved Trail
                                                                                                                                                                                             BLV
                                                                         Center        Park
                                                      Park                                                                            L                     AR                                              Sage Creek
                                                                         Pine Ave                       E                                                                                                   High School
                                                                           Park Chase                 AV                                               TA
                                                                                                                                                             M                                                                                                                                                                               3, Existing Unpaved Trail
                                                                                                  ACK
                                                                                  Field          R
                                                                                              MA                                                                                                      RD                                                                                                                                     3, Future Unpaved Trail
                                    Frazee/Tamarack State                                     TA                                                              Robertson Ranch
                                    Beach Facilities - Bluffs                                                                                                     (Future) NNON
                                                                                                                                                 Kelly                         CA
                                                                                                                                              Elementary                          EL                                                                                                                                                         4, Existing Paved Open Space Trail
                                                                                                                                                 Field                                    CA                                                               Maerkle
                                                                                                                                                                                            MIN                                                            Reservoir
                                                                                                                                          Laguna                                               O                                                                                                                                             5, Existing Unpaved Open Space Trail
                                                                                                                                           Rivera                                                           RE
                                                                                                                                             Park                                                             A
                                                                                                          Agua                                                                                                    L                                                                                                                          5, Future Unpaved Open Space Trail
                                                                                      BA
                                                                                                                                                              Veterans                      Zone 5 Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SAN MARCOS
                                                                                  R LS
                                                                                                             H ed io nda                                      Memorial                        (Future)
                                                                                CA
                                                                                                                    La goo n                                     Park
                                                                                                                                                               (Future)                 FARA                                                                                                  City of                                        6, Existing Regional Coastal Rail Trail & Sea Wall
                                                                                      D                                                                                                     DA    Y                                                                                            Vista
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Skate
                                                                                                                     CANN                                                                              AV                                         Park                                                                                       6, Future Regional Coastal Rail Trail & Sea Wall
                                                                                           D                                   ON                                                                        E
                      P a c i f i c                                                    BLV                                                 RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7, Future South Carlsbad Coastal
                                                                                                                  Car Country
                        O c e a n                                                                                 Park                                                                                                                           PALOM A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T     RD
                                                                              Cannon
                                                                               Park                                                                                                                               MCCLELLAN
                                                                                           Cannon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City of              Public Schools
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AIRPORT
                                                                                             Lake                                                              RT           RD                                                                                                                                        San Marcos
                                                                                             Park                                                      A   IRPO                                                                                                                                                                              Existing Parks
                                                                                           (Future)                                   PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ROB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LE                                                                                               Future Parks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C           VIDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A M INO                                      IA    LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ETT                                       SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LRO
                                                                                                                                                 Poinsettia                                                    Aviara                                                                       Leo Carrillo                                     Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Alga Norte         PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Community                                                                         Ranch
                                                                                                                                                Community                                                                                Community                                          Historic Park
                                                                                                                                                   Park                                                         Park                        Park
                                                                                                                                                                                       LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Highways
                                                                                                                                                                              ETT
                                                                                                                                                                                  IA                                                                                                       A R
                                                                                                                                                                            NS                                                                                                         A LG
                                                                                                                                                                        I                                                                                                                                                                    Major Street
                                                                                                                                                                     PO                        AV
                                                                                                                                   L SB
                                                                                                                                                                                                  IA                                                                      El Fuerte Park/
                                                                                                                                                                                                       RA                                                               La Costa Meadows                                                     Planned Street
                                                                                                                               C AR                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Y
                                                                                                                                   AD                                                                         KW                                                                                                                             Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Aviara Oaks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   School
                                                                                                                                          D                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Limits
                                                                                                                                      BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Field
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        La Costa Canyon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Community Park            Cadencia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Park
                                                                                                                                                                                       Ba tiquitos            Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                               LA          C O STA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CO           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA
The conceptual alignments shown on this exhibit are intended to be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MINO
flexible and should not be interpreted to be rigid alignments. It is                                                                                                                                                                                                         La Costa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Stagecoach
anticipated that the alignments and public easements for open space                                                                                                                                                                                                           Heights                       Community
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Park                             Park                                                         500 ACRES
multi-use trials will be adjusted as warranted by environmental analysis                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
and detailed planning when future developments occurs for the future                                                                                   SAN                                                  City of
exhibited alignments. However, the points where a trail passes from                                                                                                                                        Encinitas                             RE                                        N TA
                                                                                                                                                           DI E G                                                                                     AL
one zone to an adjacent zone or from one property ownership to                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SA                     La Costa                                                      100
                                                                                                                                                             O NO
another should remain consistent with the conceptual alignments                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O                      Canyon                                                      ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H                     High School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C
as shown unless an agreement has been reached with the adjacent
                                                                                                                                                                       RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                   ERN
zone or property ownership to shift the alignment.
                                                                                                                                                               RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0            0.5           1                         2
A General Plan amendment will not be required in the future to
specifically site the conceptual alignments shown on this plan. A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Miles
General Plan amendment wil be required if any trail segment shown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; SANDAG, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
on this conceptual plan is deleted.                                                                                                                                                                                             ENCINITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4-29

                                                                                        General Plan
4.6	 Trails and Greenway System
Trails and greenways offer community benefits as places for exercise and
solitude, and also play a key role in physically connecting the community and
creating a network of open spaces. The City of Carlsbad has been working for
                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                    Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
many years to develop and implement a comprehensive trails system. Beginning
in 1990, a Trails Feasibility Study laid the groundwork for planning trails in the
city. The city’s Open Space and Conservation Resource Management Plan (1992)
expanded upon the study and provided conceptual trail alignments used to plan
the city’s trail network; this plan continues to be consulted for improvements to
the city’s trail network. In 2001 the City Council approved the Citywide Trails
Report, which outlined the future vision and immediate steps to be taken to
implement the Citywide Trails Plan.
Currently there are approximately 38 miles of unpaved recreational trails located
in a variety of open space areas of the city; current plans call for another 23 miles
to be built in the future. Existing trails are listed in Table 4-8, and existing and
planned future recreational trails are indicated on Figure 4-4.
Carlsbad community members who participated in the Envision Carlsbad
Phase 1 visioning process indicated that a major challenge to trails develop-
ment and maintenance is the proper design and designation of trails by user
group. Community members indicated that different user groups (walkers,
bicyclists, equestrians) have different trail needs and that the network should
provide different kinds of resources for each group. An important consideration
for future trails development will be connectivity between off-road trails and
major on-road pedestrian and bicycle routes, such that future improvements in
the trail system also contribute to linkages between important sites (beaches,
lagoons, schools, and others).
                                                                                                 4-31

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     Table 4–8:	 EXISTING TRAILS
                                                     OPEN SPACE TRAILS                                          TRAIL SURFACE        LENGTH
                                                                                                                                     (MILES)
                                                     Aviara                                                     Unpaved                  6.0
                                                     Legoland                                                   Paved                    0.5
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     Hosp Grove                                                 Unpaved                  3.0
                                                     Cove Drive/Agua Hedionda                                   Unpaved                  0.3
                                                     San Pacifico                                               Unpaved                  1.0
                                                     Rancho Carrillo                                            Paved/unpaved            4.0
                                                     La Costa Valley                                            Paved/unpaved            1.3
                                                     La Costa Glen                                              Unpaved                  1.2
                                                     Villagio                                                   Unpaved                  0.4
                                                     Arroyo Vista                                               Unpaved                  0.7
                                                     Hidden Canyon Park                                         Unpaved                  0.3
                                                     Villages of La Costa: The Oaks-South                       Paved/old RSF Road       1.5
                                                     Villages of La Costa: The Ridge                            Unpaved                  1.5
                                                     Villages of La Costa: The Oaks-North                       Unpaved                  2.0
                                                     Villages of La Costa: Melrose 55 - Fioli Circle            Unpaved                  0.3
                                                     The Crossings/Veteran's Park                               Unpaved/paved            3.0
                                                     24 Hour Fitness to Hidden Valley Road                      Unpaved                  1.0
                                                     Village H-North of CBVD                                    Unpaved                  0.4
                                                     Palomar Forum-Melrose/PAR                                  Unpaved                  0.3
                                                     Robertson Ranch                                            Unpaved                  1.5
                                                     Carlsbad Oaks North Business Park                          Unpaved                  1.3
                                                     Lake Calavera                                              Unpaved                  6.2
                                                     The Ranch                                                  Unpaved                  0.7
                                                     Agua Hedionda Discovery Center                             Unpaved                  0.3
                                                     Subtotal Open Space Trails                                                        38.7
                                                     Mobility Element Trails
                                                     Calle Barcelona                                            Paved                    1.3
                                                     College/Cannon Avenue - Calavera Hills II/RR               Unpaved                  1.5
                                                     El Fuerte - Bressi Ranch                                   Unpaved                  1.0
                                                     Alicante Road - VLC- The Greens                            Unpaved/paved            1.0
                                                     Poinsettia Lane - El Fuerte to Brigantine                  Unpaved                  2.1
                                                     Subtotal Circulation Element Trails                                                 6.9
                                                     Special Coastal Regional Trails
                                                     Sea Wall                                                   Paved                    0.7
                                                     Coastal Rail Trail                                         Paved                    0.7
                                                     Subtotal Special Coastal Regional Trails                                            1.4
                                                     TOTAL TRAIL MILES                                                                  47.0
                                                     Totals may not add due to rounding.
                                                     Source: City of Carlsbad Parks and Recreation Department, 2014.
                                  4-32

                                                                                       General Plan
4.7	 Agricultural Resources
Existing Agricultural Lands
The City of Carlsbad’s agricultural and horticultural resources are considered
                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                   Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
a valuable part of the city’s open space heritage. Various levels of farming and
cultivation of agricultural crops have occurred in the city. In the late 1880s agri-
culture development consisted of citrus fruits, avocados and olives and by the
early 1900s dry farming was the town’s principle industry. By 1914 farming was
expanded to include flowers.
The Flower Fields and strawberry fields constitute a large portion of the existing
agricultural uses in the city. The Flower Fields are a result of more than 85 years
of floral cultivation, and today, comprise more than 50 acres of Giant Tecolote
Ranunculus flowers, as well as approximately five acres of other specialty
flowers, located at Carlsbad Ranch, east of Interstate 5 and north of Palomar
Airport Road (see Figure 4-5). An additional 45 acres of agricultural land is
located north of the Flower Fields along the south side of Cannon Road, and
approximately 26 acres located to the east of that site (these sites are part of the
Carlsbad Ranch Specific Plan and are lands affected by Proposition D; see dis-
cussion below). The land north of Cannon Road along the south shore of Agua
Hedionda Lagoon is currently used for agriculture purposes, including: 1) an
approximately 49 acre parcel located adjacent to the east side of Interstate 5 and
north of Cannon Road that is currently used for the growing of strawberries
(this area is not subject to Proposition D described below); and 2) approximately
172 acres that is also used for growing strawberries and other agricultural fields
(this area is affected by Proposition D; see discussion below).
In recognition of this history, an agricultural conversion mitigation fee program
was instituted as an incentive to retain agricultural land, and to support agri-
cultural uses in the future. Under the program, $10,000 per acre is paid to the
city when agricultural lands in identified areas within the Coastal Zone are
developed; the funds are used to enhance the natural and agricultural environ-
ment, including the development of farmworker housing.
Cannon Road Open Space, Farming and Public
Use Corridor
The Cannon Road Open Space, Farming and Public Use Corridor is shown on
Figure 4-5. This area presents a unique opportunity for the city to create a sus-
tainable, community-oriented open space area that balances social, economic
and environmental values important to the community. In 2006, Carlsbad
voters approved “Proposition D – Preserve the Flower and Strawberry Fields
and Save Carlsbad Taxpayers’ Money”, which applies to land located within
the Cannon Road Open Space, Farming and Public Use Corridor. Proposition
D encourages the continuation of agriculture on lands within the corridor for
                                                                                                4-33

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                                            as long as such use is economically feasible for the landowner. Following voter
                                                                            approval of Proposition D, the City Council adopted the Cannon Road
                                                                            Agricultural and Open Space Zone to implement the proposition. The new zone
                                                                            will become effective when the California Coastal Commission approves the
                                                                            associated LCP amendment. Once effective, the new zone will specify that if the
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                                            landowners choose to discontinue agricultural use of the land, only open space
                                                                            uses are allowed, as well as limited commercial development that is developed
                                                                            in conjunction with and/or in support of a permitted agricultural or open space
                                                                            use.
                                           The strawberry fields (top), and Flower Fields, (bottom), are existing agricultural businesses in Carlsbad, as well
                                           as iconic open spaces for many community members.
                                  4-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 4-5
                                                     78
             OCEANSIDE
                City of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GENERAL PLAN
                Oceanside                           RO
                                                M AR N           RD                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 4-5:	 Existing Agricultural Lands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Existing Agricultural Lands
                            Buena                               DR
                                                          AG                                                                                                                                                                                                      78
                            Vista
                            Lagoon                   IL
                                                            E               EL                                                                                                                                                                                               Agricultural Land
                                                        L                                                                                                     Calavera
                                                      V
                                                 D                                                                                                            Lake
                                               BA
                                                                                 INO
                                             LS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Intensive Agriculture
                                         R
                                                                             C AM
                                      CA                                                                                           CO
                                                                                                                 E                        E                                                City of                                                                                     Extensive Agriculture
                                                                                                               AV                      EG
                                                                                                                                     LL                                                   Oceanside
                                                                                                           ACK
                                                                                      R EA                                                   D
                                                                                        L              AR                                BLV                                                                                                                                           Cannon Road Open Space, Farming,
                                                                  VE                                   M                                                                                                                                                                               and Public Use Corridor
                                                            C   KA                                  TA
                                                          RA
                                                   MA                                                                                             RD
                                                 TA                                                                               ON
                                                                                                                                NN                                                                                                                                                     Highways
                                                                                                                           CA
                                                                                                                              EL
                                                                                                                                      CA                                                               Maerkle                                                                         Major Street
                                                                                                                                        MIN                                                            Reservoir
                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                        RE
                                                                                                                                                          A                                                                                                                            Planned Street
                                                            Agua                                                                                              L
                                           BA                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SAN MARCOS
                                       R LS
                                                               H ed io nda
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Railroad
                                     CA
                                                                      La goo n
                                                                                                                                    FARA                                                                                                City of
                                          D                                                                                             DA    Y                                                                                          Vista                                         City Limits
                                                                       CANN                                                                        AV
                                                 D                               ON                                                                  E
P a c i f i c                                BLV                                            RD
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                   PALOM A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                              T    RD
                                                                                                                                                              MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                               -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                AIRPORT                                                                                           City of
                                                                                                         PORT           RD                                                                                                                                      San Marcos
                                                                                                    AI R
                                                                                        PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                        LE
                                                                                                                                                                                     ROB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DR
                                                                                                                                                                  C           VIDA
                                                                                                                                                                      A M INO                                    IA    LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ETT                                       SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           INS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PO                                           LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ME
                                                                                                                                   LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                            TTIA                                                                                                     A R
                                                                                                                          SE                                                                                                     A LG
                                                                                                                       IN
                                                                                                                PO                         AV
                                                                                     L SB
                                                                                                                                              IA   RA
                                                                                 C AR                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                     AD                                                                   KW
                                                                                            D
                                                                                        BLV
                                                                                                                                   Ba tiquitos            Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                      AVE
                                                                                                                                           LA          C O STA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LA
                                                                                                                                                                                           MINO
                                                                                                                                                                                         CA                                           FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                      EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                    SAN                                                 City of
                                                                                                                                                       Encinitas                             RE                                      N TA
                                                                                                      DI E G                                                                                      AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SA                                                                                   100
                                                                                                        O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O                                                                                  ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                  RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                              ERN
                                                                                                          RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0            0.5           1                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; SANDAG, 2012; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                            ENCINITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4-35

                                                                                      General Plan
4.8	 Air Quality
Carlsbad’s weather is influenced by the Pacific Ocean and its semi-permanent
high-pressure systems that result in dry, warm summers and mild, occasion-
ally wet winters. Carlsbad is located within the San Diego Air Basin (SDAB) and
                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                  Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
is subject to the San Diego Air Pollution Control District guidelines and regu-
lations. The SDAB is one of 15 air basins that geographically divide the State of
California. The SDAB experiences frequent temperature inversions, trapping
pollutions and creating smog. Subsidence inversions occur during the warmer
months as descending air associated with the Pacific High pressure zone meets
cool marine air. Radiation inversions develop on winter nights when air near
the ground cools by heat radiation and air aloft remains warm.
Sensitive Receptors
Reduced visibility, eye irritation, and adverse health impacts are the most
serious hazards of existing air quality conditions in the area. Some land uses
are considered more sensitive to changes in air quality than others, depending
on the population groups and the activities involved. People most likely to be
affected by air pollution, as identified by the California Air Resources Board
(CARB), include children, the elderly, athletes, and people with cardiovascu-
lar and chronic respiratory diseases. Sensitive receptors include residences,
schools, playgrounds, childcare centers, athletic facilities, long-term health care
facilities, rehabilitation centers, convalescent centers, and retirement homes.
Air Quality Standards
Federal Clean Air Act
The federal Clean Air Act, passed in 1970 and last amended in 1990, forms the
basis for the national air pollution control effort. The U.S. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency (EPA) is responsible for implementing most aspects of the Clean
Air Act, including the setting of National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS) for “criteria pollutants” under the Clean Air Act. States with areas
that exceed the NAAQS must prepare a state implementation plan that demon-
strates how those areas will attain the standards within mandated time frames.
State Regulations
The federal Clean Air Act delegates the regulation of air pollution control and
the enforcement of the NAAQS to the states. In California, the task of air quality
management and regulation has been legislatively granted to the CARB, with
subsidiary responsibilities assigned to air quality management districts and
air pollution control districts at the regional and county levels. The CARB has
established California Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS), which are
generally more restrictive than the NAAQS.
The NAAQS and CAAQS are presented in Table 4-9, Ambient Air Quality
Standards.
                                                                                               4-37

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                           Table 4–9:	 AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS
                                                                                          CALIFORNIA STANDARDS1                               NATIONAL STANDARDS2
                                           POLLUTANT                AVERAGE TIME          CONCENTRATION3                  PRIMARY3,4                        SECONDARY3,5
                                           Ozone (O3)               1 hour                0.09 ppm (180 μg/m3)            —                                 Same as Primary
                                                                                                                                                            Standard
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                                    8 hour                0.070 ppm (137 μg/m3)           0.075 ppm (147 μg/
                                                                                                                          m3)
                                           Carbon Monoxide          1 hour                20 ppm (23 mg/m3)               35 ppm (40 mg/m3)                 —
                                           (CO)                     8 hour                9.0 ppm (10 mg/m3)              9 ppm (10 mg/m3)
                                           Nitrogen Dioxide         1 hour                0.18 ppm (339 μg/m3)            0.100 ppm (188 μg/                Same as Primary
                                           (NO2)6                                                                         m3)                               Standard
                                                                    Annual                0.030 ppm (57 μg/m3)            0.053 ppm (100 μg/
                                                                    Arithmetic                                            m3)
                                                                    Mean
                                           Sulfur Dioxide           1 hour                0.25 ppm (655 μg/m3)            0.75 ppm (196 μg/m3)              —
                                           (SO2)7                   3 hour                —                               —                                 0.5 ppm (1300 μg/m3)
                                                                    24 hour               0.04 ppm (105 μg/m3)            0.14 ppm (for certain
                                                                                                                          areas)7
                                                                    Annual                —                               0.030 ppm (for                    —
                                                                    Arithmetic                                            certain areas)7
                                                                    Mean
                                           PM108                    24 hour               50 μg/m3                        150 μg/m3
                                                                                                                                                            Same as Primary
                                                                                                                                                            Standard
                                                                    Annual                20 μg/m3
                                                                                                                          —
                                                                    Arithmetic
                                                                    Mean
                                           PM2.58                   24 hour               —                               35 μg/m3
                                                                                                                                                            Same as Primary
                                                                                                                                                            Standard
                                                                    Annual                12 μg/m3                        12.0 μg/m3
                                                                                                                                                            15.0 μg/m3
                                                                    Arithmetic
                                                                    Mean
                                           Lead9,10                 30-day                1.5 μg/m3                       —                                 —
                                                                    Average
                                                                    Calendar              —                               1.5 μg/m3 (for certain areas)10
                                                                                                                                                            Same as Primary
                                                                    Quarter                                                                                 Standard
                                                                    Rolling               —                               0.15 μg/m3
                                                                    3-Month
                                                                    Average
                                           Hydrogen Sulfide         1 hour                0.03 ppm (42 μg/m3)             —                                 —
                                           Vinyl Chloride9          24 hour               0.01 ppm (26 μg/m3)             —                                 —
                                           Sulfates                 24 hour               25 µg/m3
                                                                                                                          —                                 —
                                           Visibility reducing      8 hour                See footnote 11                 —                                 —
                                           particles11              (10:00 a.m. to
                                                                    6:00 p.m. PST)
                                           ppm= parts per million by volume μg/m3 = micrograms per cubic meter mg/m3= milligrams per cubic meter
                                  4-38

                                                                                                                                            General Plan
                                                                                                                                                          4
 Table 4–9:	 AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS
 1	 California standards for ozone, carbon monoxide (except 8-hour Lake Tahoe), sulfur dioxide (1 and 24 hour), nitrogen dioxide, and particulate
    matter (PM10, PM2.5, and visibility reducing particles), are values that are not to be exceeded. All others are not to be equaled or exceeded.
    CAAQS are listed in the Table of Standards in Section 70200 of Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations.
 2	 National standards (other than O3, NO2, SO2, particulate matter, and those based on annual averages or annual arithmetic mean) are not to be
    exceeded more than once a year. The O3 standard is attained when the fourth highest 8-hour concentration in a year, averaged over 3 years, is
                                                                                                                                                           Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
    equal to or less than the standard. For NO2 and SO2, the standard is attained when the 3-year average of the 98th and 99th percentile, respec-
    tively, of the daily maximum 1-hour average at each monitor within an area does not exceed the standard. For PM10, the 24-hour standard is
    attained when the expected number of days per calendar year with a 24-hour average concentration above 150 μg/m3 is equal to or less than
    one. For PM2.5, the 24-hour standard is attained when 98% of the daily concentrations, averaged over 3 years, are equal to or less than the
    standard.
 3	 Concentration expressed first in units in which it was promulgated. Equivalent units given in parentheses are based upon a reference tempera-
    ture of 25°C and a reference pressure of 760 torr. Most measurements of air quality are to be corrected to a reference temperature of 25°C and
    a reference pressure of 760 torr; ppm in this table refers to ppm by volume, or micromoles of pollutant per mole of gas.
 4	 National Primary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary, with an adequate margin of safety to protect the public health.
 5	 National Secondary Standards: The levels of air quality necessary to protect the public welfare from any known or anticipated adverse effects of
    a pollutant.
 6	 To attain the 1-hour national standard, the 3-year average of the annual 98th percentile of the 1-hour daily maximum concentrations at each
    site must not exceed 100 ppb. Note that the national 1-hour standard is in units of parts per billion (ppb). California standards are in units of
    parts per million (ppm). To directly compare the national 1-hour standard to the California standards, the units can be converted from ppb to
    ppm. In this case, the national standard of 100 ppb is identical to 0.100 ppm.
 7	 On June 2, 2010, a new 1-hour SO2 standard was established, and the existing 24-hour and annual primary standards were revoked. To attain
    the 1-hour national standard, the 3-year average of the annual 99th percentile of the 1-hour daily maximum concentrations at each site must
    not exceed 75 ppb. The 1971 SO2 national standards (24-hour and annual) remain in effect until 1 year after an area is designated for the 2010
    standard, except that in areas designated nonattainment for the 1971 standards, the 1971 standards remain in effect until implementation plans
    to attain or maintain the 2010 standards are approved.
 8	 On December 14, 2012, the national annual PM2.5 primary standard was lowered from 15 μg/m3 to 12 μg/m3. The existing national 24-hour
    PM2.5 standards (primary and secondary) were retained at 35 μg/m3, as was the annual secondary standard of 15 μg/m3. The existing 24-hour
    PM10 standards (primary and secondary) of 150 μg/m3 also were retained. The form of the annual primary and secondary standards is the an-
    nual mean, averaged over 3 years.
 9	 CARB has identified lead and vinyl chloride as ‘toxic air contaminants’ with no threshold level of exposure for adverse health effects deter-
    mined. These actions allow for the implementation of control measures at levels below the ambient concentrations specified for these pollut-
    ants.
 10	The national standard for lead was revised on October 15, 2008, to a rolling 3-month average. The 1978 lead standard (1.5 μg/m3 as a quarterly
    average) remains in effect until 1 year after an area is designated for the 2008 standard, except that in areas designated nonattainment for the
    1978 standard, the 1978 standard remains in effect until implementation plans to attain or maintain the 2008 standard are approved.
 11	In 1989, the ARB converted both the general statewide 10-mile visibility standard and the Lake Tahoe 30-mile visibility standard to instrumental
    equivalents, which are “extinction of 0.23 per kilometer” and “extinction of 0.07 per kilometer” for the statewide and Lake Tahoe Air Basin
    standards, respectively.
 Source: CARB 2013d.
San Diego Air Pollution Control District (SDAPCD)
While the CARB is responsible for the regulation of mobile emission sources
within the state, local air quality management districts and air pollution control
districts are responsible for enforcing standards and regulating stationary sources.
In San Diego County, O3 and particulate matter are the pollutants of main concern,
since the CAAQS for those pollutants are exceeded here in most years. For this
reason, the SDAB has been designated as a nonattainment area for the state’s
PM10, PM2.5, and O3 (1-hour and 8-hour) standards. The SDAB is also a federal O3
marginal nonattainment area for the 2008 8-hour NAAQS for O3 and a CO attain-
ment (maintenance) area.
The SDAPCD and SANDAG are responsible for developing and implementing
the clean air plan for attainment and maintenance of the ambient air quality
standards in the SDAB, and the SDAPCD has developed rules and regulations
that apply to construction in the region and several stationary sources.
                                                                                                                                                        4-39

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     Criteria Air Pollutants
                                                     Criteria air pollutants are defined as pollutants for which the federal and state
                                                     governments have established ambient air quality standards, or criteria, for
                                                     outdoor concentrations to protect public health.
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     Ozone. O3 is a colorless gas that is formed in the atmosphere when volatile
                                                     organic compounds (VOCs), sometimes referred to as reactive organic gases,
                                                     and nitrogen oxides react in the presence of ultraviolet sunlight. The primary
                                                     sources of VOCs and NOx, the precursors of O3, are automobile exhaust and
                                                     industrial sources. Ideal conditions for O3 formation occur during summer and
                                                     early autumn, on days with low wind speeds or stagnant air, warm tempera-
                                                     tures, and cloudless skies. Short-term exposures (lasting for a few hours) to O3 at
                                                     levels typically observed in Southern California can result in breathing pattern
                                                     changes, reduction of breathing capacity, increased susceptibility to infections,
                                                     inflammation of the lung tissue, and some immunological changes.
                                                     Nitrogen Dioxide. Most NO2, like O3, is not directly emitted into the atmo-
                                                     sphere but is formed by an atmospheric chemical reaction between nitric oxide
                                                     (NO) and atmospheric oxygen. NO and NO2 are collectively referred to as NOx
                                                     and are major contributors to O3 formation. High concentrations of NO2 can
                                                     cause breathing difficulties and result in a brownish-red cast to the atmosphere
                                                     with reduced visibility.
                                                     Carbon Monoxide. CO is a colorless and odorless gas formed by the incom-
                                                     plete combustion of fossil fuels. CO is emitted almost exclusively from motor
                                                     vehicles, power plants, refineries, industrial boilers, ships, aircraft, and trains.
                                                     In urban areas, automobile exhaust accounts for the majority of CO emissions.
                                                     CO is a non-reactive air pollutant that dissipates relatively quickly; therefore,
                                                     ambient CO concentrations generally follow the spatial and temporal distribu-
                                                     tions of vehicular traffic. The highest levels of CO in Carlsbad typically occur
                                                     during the colder months of the year—November to February—when inversion
                                                     conditions are more frequent.
                                                     Sulfur Dioxide. SO2 is a colorless, pungent gas formed primarily by the combus-
                                                     tion of sulfur-containing fossil fuels. Main sources of SO2 are coal and oil used
                                                     in power plants and industries; as such, the highest levels of SO2 are generally
                                                     found near large industrial complexes. In recent years, SO2 concentrations have
                                                     been reduced by the increasingly stringent controls placed on stationary source
                                                     emissions of SO2 and limits on the sulfur content of fuels.
                                                     Particulate Matter. Particulate matter pollution consists of very small liquid
                                                     and solid particles floating in the air, which can include smoke, soot, dust, salts,
                                                     acids, and metals, from sources such as automobiles, fireplaces, and industrial
                                                     sources. PM2.5 and PM10 represent fractions of particulate matter (in microns)
                                                     and pose a greater health risk than larger-size particles.
                                  4-40

                                                                                                                                        General Plan
                                                                                                                                                      4
Lead. Lead in the atmosphere occurs as particulate matter. Sources of lead
include leaded gasoline, the manufacturing of batteries, paint, ink, ceramics,
and ammunition and secondary lead smelters. Prior to 1978, mobile emissions
were the primary source of atmospheric lead. Between 1978 and 1987, the
phase-out of leaded gasoline reduced the overall inventory of airborne lead by
                                                                                                                                                       Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
nearly 95%. With the phase-out of leaded gasoline, secondary lead smelters,
battery recycling, and manufacturing facilities are becoming lead-emission
sources of greater concern.
Toxic Air Contaminants. A substance is considered toxic if it has the potential
to cause adverse health effects in humans, including increasing the risk of
cancer upon exposure, or acute and/or chronic non-cancer health effects. A
toxic substance released into the air is considered a toxic air contaminant (TAC).
Examples include certain aromatic and chlorinated hydrocarbons, certain
metals, and asbestos. TACs are generated by a number of sources, including
stationary sources such as dry cleaners, gas stations, combustion sources, and lab-
oratories; mobile sources such as automobiles; and area sources such as landfills.
Local Air Quality
SDAB Attainment Designation
An area is designated in attainment when it is in compliance with the NAAQS
and/or CAAQS. These standards establish the maximum level of a given air
pollutant that can exist in the outdoor air without unacceptable effects on
human health or the public welfare.
 Table 4–10:	SDAB ATTAINMENT CLASSIFICATION
 POLLUTANT                                         FEDERAL DESIGNATION                               STATE DESIGNATION
 Ozone (O3) (1 hour)                               Attainment     1
                                                                                                     Nonattainment
 Ozone (O3) (8 hour)                               Nonattainment (Former Subpart I/                  Nonattainment
                                                   Basic)
 Carbon Monoxide (CO)                              Attainment (Maintenance Area)                     Attainment
 PM10                                              Unclassifiable2                                   Nonattainment
 PM2.5                                             Attainment                                        Nonattainment
 Nitrogen Oxide (NO2)                              Attainment                                        Attainment
 Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)                              Attainment                                        Attainment
 Lead                                              Attainment                                        Attainment
 Sulfates                                          (no federal standard)                             Attainment
 Hydrogen Sulfide                                  (no federal standard)                             Unclassified
 Visibility-Reducing Particles                     (no federal standard)                             Unclassified
 1	 The federal 1-hour standard of 0.12 ppm was in effect from 1979 through June 15, 2005. The revoked standard is referenced here because it was
    employed for such a long period and because this benchmark is addressed in State Implementation Plans.
 2	 At the time of designation, if the available data does not support a designation of attainment or nonattainment, the area is designated as
    unclassifiable.
 Sources: EPA 2012a; CARB 2012c.
                                                                                                                                                    4-41

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     The criteria pollutants of primary concern that are considered in this air quality
                                                     assessment include O3, NO2, CO, SO2, PM10, and PM2.5. Although there are no
                                                     ambient standards for VOCs or NOx, they are important as precursors to O3.
                                                     The SDAB is designated by EPA as an attainment (maintenance) area for the
                                                     1997 8-hour NAAQS for O3 and as a marginal nonattainment area for the 2008
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     8-hour NAAQS for O3. The SDAB was designated in attainment for all other
                                                     criteria pollutants under the NAAQS with the exception of PM10, which was
                                                     determined to be unclassifiable. The SDAB is currently designated nonattain-
                                                     ment for O3 and particulate matter, PM10 and PM2.5, under the CAAQS. It is
                                                     designated attainment for the CAAQS for CO, NO2, SO2, lead, and sulfates.
                                                     Table 4-10, SDAB Attainment Classification, summarizes San Diego County’s
                                                     federal and state attainment designations for each of the criteria pollutants.
                                                     Air Quality Monitoring Data
                                                     The SDAPCD operates a network of ambient air monitoring stations through-
                                                     out San Diego County, which measure ambient concentrations of pollutants and
                                                     determine whether the ambient air quality meets the CAAQS and the NAAQS.
                                                     Ambient concentrations of pollutants from 2009 through 2011 collected at three
                                                     stations closest to Carlsbad are presented in Table 4-11. The number of days
                                                     exceeding the NAAQS and CAAQS is shown in Table 4-12. The state 8 hour O3
                                                     standards were exceeded in 2009, 2010 and 2011; the state 1 hour standards were
                                                     exceeded in 2009, while the federal 8-hour O3 standard was exceeded in 2009.
                                                     The state 24-hour PM10 standard was exceeded in 2009; the state annual PM10
                                                     standard was exceeded in 2009 and 2010; and the federal 24-hour PM2.5 standard
                                                     was exceeded in 2009, 2010 and 2011. Air quality in the Carlsbad region was in
                                                     compliance with both CAAQS and NAAQS for NO2, CO, and SO2 during this
                                                     monitoring period.
                                  4-42

                                                                                                                                 General Plan
                                                                                                                                                  4
Table 4–11:	AMBIENT AIR QUALITY DATA (PPM UNLESS OTHERWISE INDICATED)
POLLUTANT                AVERAGE                 2009               2010              2011     MOST STRINGENT MONITORING
                         TIME                                                                      AMBIENT AIR STATION
                                                                                             QUALITY STANDARD
Ozone (O3)               8-hour                 0.084             0.072              0.075                   0.070 Del Mar – Mira
                                                                                                             0.090 Costa College
                                                                                                                                                   Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                         1-hour                   0.97              0.85             0.091
PM10                     Annual          24.6 µg/m     3
                                                            21.0 µg/m    3
                                                                             18.8 µg/m3                  20 µg/m3 Escondido – East
                         24-hour         74.0 µg/m     3
                                                           43.0 µg/m     3
                                                                             40.0 µg/m   3
                                                                                                         50 µg/m3 Valley Parkway
PM2.5                    Annual     1
                                         13.4 µg/m     3
                                                           12.2 µg/m     3
                                                                             10.4 µg/m3                  12 µg/m3 Escondido – East
                         24-hour         78.4 µg/m3        52.2 µg/m3        27.4 µg/m3                  35 µg/m3 Valley Parkway
NO2                      Annual                  0.016             0.014             0.013                    0.030 Escondido – East
                         1-hour                 0.073             0.064              0.062                    0.180 Valley Parkway
Carbon                   8-hour                   3.54              2.46              2.30                       9.0 Escondido – East
Monoxide (CO)            1-hour2                  4.40              3.90              3.50                        20 Valley Parkway
Sulfur Dioxide           Annual                 0.001             0.000                 —                    0.030 San Diego – 1110
(SO2)                    24-hour                0.006             0.002              0.003                   0.040 Beardsley Street
Data represent maximum values
1	 Federal data reflected for 2009 and 2010; not determined for California method.
2	 Data were taken from EPA 2012c
Source: CARB 2012c; EPA 2012.
Table 4–12:	FREQUENCY OF AIR QUALITY STANDARD VIOLATIONS
MONITORING SITE                 YEAR               STATE             STATE            NATIONAL            STATE                 NATIONAL
                                               1-HOUR O3         8-HOUR O3           8-HOUR O3     24-HOUR PM101           24-HOUR PM2.5 1
Del Mar – Mira Costa            2009                       1                 3               1                    —                        —
College                         2010                       0                 2               0                    —                        —
                                2011                       0                 1               0                     —
                                                                                                                                           —
Escondido – East                2009                       —                 —               —
                                                                                                             5.6 (1)                  2.0 (2)
Valley Parkway                  2010                       —                 —               —
                                                                                                             0.0 (0)                  2.0 (2)
                                2011                       —                 —               —
                                                                                                             0.0 (0)                  3.0 (3)
1	 Measurements of PM10 and PM2.5 are usually collected every 6 days and daily, respectively. “Number of days exceeding the standards” is a
   mathematical estimate of the number of days concentrations would have been greater than the level of the standard had each day been moni-
   tored. The numbers in parentheses are the measured number of samples that exceeded the standard.
Source: CARB 2012b.
                                                                                                                                                4-43

                                  City of Carlsbad
4                                                    4.9	 Water Quality
                                                     Local Surface Waters
                                                     For administrative purposes, the San Diego Region is divided into 11 hydro-
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     logic units, which flow from elevated regions in the east toward coastal lagoons,
                                                     estuaries, or bays in the west. The Carlsbad Hydrologic Unit (HU) is approx-
                                                     imately 210 square miles in area extending from the headwaters above Lake
                                                     Wolhford in the east to the Pacific Ocean in the west, and from Vista and
                                                     Oceanside in the north to Solana Beach, Escondido, and the community of
                                                     Rancho Santa Fe to the south. The cities of Carlsbad, San Marcos, and Encinitas
                                                     are entirely within this HU. There are numerous important surface hydrologic
                                                     features within the Carlsbad HU including three unique coastal lagoons, four
                                                     major creeks, and two large water storage reservoirs.
                                                     Most of the surface flow in the streams and rivers of the San Diego Region
                                                     comes from precipitation runoff and storm events. Precipitation occurs pre-
                                                     dominantly during the winter and spring months, and as a result, streamflows
                                                     are highest during this period. Surface flows during summer and fall months
                                                     are typically low, and consist of urban runoff, agricultural runoff, and surfacing
                                                     groundwater.
                                                     Surface Water Quality
                                                     Major impacts to the Carlsbad HU include surface water quality degrada-
                                                     tion, sewage spills, beach closures, sedimentation, habitat degradation and
                                                     loss, invasive species, and eutrophication. Pollutant conditions in the Carlsbad
                                                     HU include bacterial indicators, eutrophic conditions, nutrients, sediments,
                                                     sulfates, nitrates and phosphates. The sources of these pollutants are varied
                                                     and include urban runoff, agricultural runoff, sewage spills, livestock/domestic
                                                     animals, and other natural sources. Key water quality issues with the city’s
                                                     principal surface watersheds are discussed below.
                                                     Buena Vista Lagoon
                                                     Buena Vista Lagoon is a 350-acre fresh water lagoon managed by CDFW as a
                                                     nature reserve. The principal water quality issues in the watershed relate to the
                                                     lagoon, which is listed as impaired for nutrients, indicator bacteria, and sedi-
                                                     mentation/siltation on the EPA’s 2008 303(d) list; a listing means that waters are
                                                     polluted or otherwise degraded and the total maximum daily loads (TMDLs)
                                                     of pollutants that the waterbody can receive and still safely meet water quality
                                                     standards need to be developed. The City of Vista has installed a series of check
                                                     dams and a detention basin to assist in the removal of sediments traveling
                                                     through the Buena Vista Creek, which is listed as impaired for selenium.
                                  4-44

                                                                                      General Plan
                                                                                                 4
Agua Hedionda Lagoon
Agua Hedionda Lagoon is comprised of three inter-connected lagoons, divided
by the Interstate 5 freeway and a railroad bridge. The Agua Hedionda Ecological
Reserve was acquired in 2000 by the CDFW and consists of 186 acres of wetland
at the eastern end of the lagoon. Although Agua Hedionda Lagoon is not listed
                                                                                                  Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
as impaired, Agua Hedionda Creek, which feeds into Agua Hedionda Lagoon,
is listed as impaired for indicator bacteria, phosphorus, Total Nitrogen as N,
toxicity, manganese, and selenium on the EPA’s 2008 303(d) list.
Batiquitos Lagoon
Batiquitos Lagoon was originally open to the ocean, but over time the construc-
tion of transportation corridors and other development resulted in sediment
closing off the lagoon. In the mid-1990s, a significant lagoon restoration and
enhancement project allowed for the lagoon to open to the ocean again, as it
exists today. CDFW is responsible for ongoing maintenance and monitoring
of the lagoon. Although Batiquitos Lagoon is not listed as impaired, two of the
creeks that feed into Batiquitos Lagoon are listed—Encinitas Creek is listed as
impaired for selenium and toxicity, and San Marcos Creek is listed as impaired
for DDE, phosphorus, selenium, and sediment toxicity on the EPA’s 2008 303(d)
list.
TMDLs for the impaired waters associated with the three lagoons are being
developed by the San Diego Water Board.
Water Pollution
As additional development occurs in Carlsbad and in other communities
within the Carlsbad HU, impervious surfaces may increase from the placement
of roads, parking lots, buildings and other infrastructure. Impervious
surfaces reduce the amount of water infiltration into the ground and increase
direct runoff into the city’s creeks and lagoons; also, increased pollution can
be generated from the daily activities of new residents and businesses. The
increased direct runoff and daily activities could result in further water quality
degradation and flooding concerns. In addition, if not controlled, development
activities have the potential to cause soil erosion and sedimentation, which may
result in increased rates of surface runoff, decreased water quality, and related
environmental damage.
The City of Carlsbad currently employs a number of measures, including best
management practices (BMPs), to prevent pollutants and hazardous materials
from entering municipal stormwater conveyance systems. As storm drains are
not connected to sanitary sewer infrastructure, water conveyed to these drains
are not treated prior to discharging into creeks, lagoons and the ocean. Therefore,
pollutants must be reduced and/or removed before entering urban convey-
ance systems. The city’s Storm Water Protection Program covers all phases of
development through planning, construction and existing development and
                                                                                               4-45

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     educates and monitors developers, businesses, municipal facilities, residents,
                                                     school children, and the general public to help prevent pollutants and other
                                                     hazardous materials from entering storm drains.
                                                     Regulatory Context
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     Clean Water Act
                                                     The 1972 federal Clean Water Act (CWA) is the primary federal law regulating
                                                     water quality in the United States. Its objective is to reduce or eliminate water
                                                     pollution in the nation’s rivers, streams, lakes, and coastal waters. At the federal
                                                     level, the CWA is administered by the EPA. In California, the CWA is adminis-
                                                     tered and enforced by the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) and
                                                     nine regional water quality control boards.
                                                     National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Program
                                                     The federal Water Pollution Control Act established the National Pollutant
                                                     Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program to control discharges
                                                     of pollutants from point sources (Section 402). The NPDES permit program is
                                                     the primary federal program that regulates point source and nonpoint-source
                                                     discharges to waters of the United States. The SWRCB issues both general and
                                                     individual NPDES permits for certain activities.
                                  4-46

                                                                                 General Plan
4.10	Goals and Policies
Goals
Open Space Framework
                                                                                            4
                                                                                             Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
4-G.1	 Develop a balanced and integrated open space system reflecting
       a variety of considerations—resource conservation, production of
       resources, recreation, and aesthetic and community identity—and
       ensuring synergies between various open space components and
       compatibility with land use planning.
4-G.2	 Within the Cannon Road Open Space, Farming and Public Use
       Corridor (see Figure 4-5) create a unique, community-oriented
       open space area and ensure the area is permanently protected and
       preserved for open space uses.
Biological Resources and Open Space for Conservation
4-G.3	 Protect environmentally sensitive lands, wildlife habitats, and rare,
       threatened or endangered plant and animal communities.
4-G.4	 Promote conservation of hillsides and ridgelines.
Beaches; Parks and Recreation
4-G.5	 Maintain a diversified, comprehensive system of open space for
       outdoor recreation, including, but not limited to: parks; beaches;
       areas for organized sports; connecting corridors containing trails;
       water recreation areas (beaches, lagoons, lakes); unique conserva-
       tion areas for nature study; and, semi-developed areas for camping.
4-G.6	 Offer a wide variety of recreational activities and park facilities
       designed to encourage educational benefits and active or passive
       participation by users of all ages and interests.
4-G.7	 Operate a financially self-supportive system of recreational facilities
       and programs.
4-G.8	 Coordinate the planning of park facilities and trails with other recre-
       ation-oriented land uses such as open space.
4-G.9	 Improve and maintain high quality beaches for residents and
       visitors.
4-G.10	Increase public access to and use of the Cannon Road Open Space,
       Farming and Public Use Corridor (see Figure 4-5) primarily through
       the incorporation of public trails and active and passive recreation.
Trails and Greenways
4-G.11	 Utilize greenways and trails to connect the city’s open space
        network.
                                                                                          4-47

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     Agricultural Resources
                                                     4-G.12	Recognize the important value of agriculture and horticultural lands
                                                            in the city, and support their productive use.
                                                     Air Quality
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     4-G.13	Protect air quality within the city and support efforts for enhanced
                                                            regional air quality.
                                                     Water Quality
                                                     4-G.14	Promote the protection of Carlsbad’s creeks, lagoons, ocean and
                                                            other natural water bodies from pollution.
                                                     Policies
                                                     Open Space Framework
                                                     4-P.1	 Maintain an integrated open space classification system that
                                                            accommodates conservation, resource production, recreation, and
                                                            aesthetic needs.
                                                     4-P.2	 Designate for preservation as open space those areas that provide
                                                            unique visual amenities within the urban form, such as agriculture,
                                                            hillsides, ridges, valleys, canyons, beaches, lagoons, creeks, lakes
                                                            and other unique resources that provide visual and physical relief to
                                                            the cityscape by creating natural contrasts to the built-up, manmade
                                                            scene.
                                                     4-P.3	 Ensure that the Cannon Road Open Space, Farming, and Public Use
                                                            Corridor is permanently protected and preserved for farming and
                                                            open space uses.
                                                     4-P.4	 Provide public access to open space areas where consistent with
                                                            applicable access restrictions per the Habitat Management Plan,
                                                            easements, deeds, etc. When natural open lands are privately-
                                                            held, acquire or negotiate for public access if the land could be used
                                                            for unprogrammed recreational uses. Public access shall not be
                                                            provided where sensitive resources may be threatened or damaged,
                                                            where public health and safety may be compromised or where
                                                            access would interfere with the managed production of resources,
                                                            such as agriculture.
                                                     4-P.5	 Require compliance with the Growth Management Plan open
                                                            space performance standard specified in the Citywide Facilities and
                                                            Improvements Plan, and maintain appropriate criteria, standards,
                                                            and classifications. The following open space areas shall not be
                                                            utilized to meet the open space performance standard:
                                                           a.	 Schools, except public school playgrounds, athletic fields and
                                                               courts for which the city has joint use agreements with the
                                                               school districts.
                                  4-48

                                                                                  General Plan
                                                                                             4
      b.	 Parks, public or private; however, credit may be granted for
          private parks if the granting of the open space credit will not
          adversely impact the city’s ability to obtain all of the applicable
          open space priorities identified for the local facilities manage-
          ment zone (LFMZ) by the Open Space and Conservation Resource
          Management Plan (OSCRMP).
                                                                                              Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
      c.	 Open space that is not available to the public, unless it is an
          open space priority identified by the OSCRMP and the granting
          of the open space credit will not adversely impact the city’s
          ability to obtain all of the open space priorities identified for the
          LFMZ by the OSCRMP.
      d.	 Powerline easements, except where the land within the
          easement is identified by the OSCRMP as an open space priority,
          such as a trail or greenway, and the granting of the open space
          credit will not adversely impact the city’s ability to achieve all of
          the open space priorities identified for the LFMZ by the OSCRMP.
          Major powerline easements that provide key links to the
          Carlsbad trail system shall receive credit toward the open space
          performance standard.
      e.	 Golf courses, except those portions of golf courses identi-
          fied by the OSCRMP as an open space priority, such as a trail
          or greenway. Credit may be granted for other areas of a golf
          course if the granting of the open space credit for this area will
          not adversely impact the city’s ability to achieve all of the open
          space priorities identified for the LFMZ by the OSCRMP.
4-P.6	 Require that adjustment of the boundaries of any open space area
       shown on the Land Use Map be allowed only if all of the following
       criteria are met:
      a.	 The proposed open space area is equal to or greater than the
          area depicted on the Land Use Map; and
      b.	 The proposed open space area is of environmental quality equal
          to or greater than that depicted on the Land Use Map; and
      c.	 The proposed open space area is contiguous or within close
          proximity to open space shown on the Land Use Map.
      The City Council may also adjust the boundary of any open space
      area shown on the Land Use Map if it finds that the adjustment
      is necessary to mitigate a sensitive environmental area that is
      impacted by development, provided the open space boundary mod-
      ification preserves open space at a 2 to 1 ratio (proposed acreage to
      existing acreage) and is within close proximity to the original area of
      open space.
      Additionally, the City Council may exempt public rights-of-way
      from the open space boundary adjustment requirements. However,
      environmental analysis shall be performed for all proposed public
      right-of-way improvements, and if determined that there are
                                                                                           4-49

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                            significant adverse impacts to the value of the open space system,
                                                            those impacts shall be mitigated.
                                                            The adjustment of open space boundaries shall not result in the
                                                            exchange of environmentally constrained lands that are designated
                                                            open space on the Land Use Map for lands that are not environmen-
                                                            tally constrained.
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                     4-P.7	 Maintain an inventory of all open space lands, including sites desig-
                                                            nated as open space on the Land Use Map, sites dedicated in fee title
                                                            or easement as open space, and school recreation areas.
                                                     4-P.8	 Utilize the criteria developed by the Proposition C Open Space and
                                                            Trails Ad Hoc Citizens Advisory Committee (approved by City Council
                                                            Resolution No. 2006-294, 10/10/06) to evaluate potential future
                                                            open space property acquisitions by the city.
                                                     Habitat and Open Space Conservation
                                                     4-P.9	 Maintain and implement the city’s Habitat Management Plan
                                                            (HMP), including the requirement that all development projects
                                                            comply with the HMP and related documents. Require assessments
                                                            of biological resources prior to approval of any development on sites
                                                            with sensitive habitat, as depicted in Figure 4-3.
                                                     4-P.10	 Consider working with private foundations and organizations or
                                                             designating a conservancy agency to be responsible for protection,
                                                             maintenance, monitoring and liability of open space lands.
                                                     4-P.11	 Ensure that the improvements recommended for open space areas
                                                             are appropriate for the type of open space and the use proposed.
                                                             No improvements (excluding necessary infrastructure) shall be made
                                                             in environmentally sensitive areas, except to enhance the environ-
                                                             mental value of the areas.
                                                     4-P.12	 Continue participation in regional planning efforts to protect
                                                             habitat and environmentally sensitive species.
                                                     4-P.13	 Support innovative site design techniques such as cluster-type
                                                             housing and transfer-of-development-rights to preserve sensitive
                                                             environmental resources and to allow development projects to
                                                             comply with the city’s Habitat Management Plan.
                                                     4-P.14	 Assure that development or grading on hillsides (if allowed)
                                                             relates to the slope of the land in order to preserve the integrity
                                                             and appearance of natural hillsides and other landforms wherever
                                                             possible.
                                                     4-P.15	 Maintain functional wildlife corridors and habitat linkage in order
                                                             to contribute to regional biodiversity and the viability of rare,
                                                             unique or sensitive biological resources throughout the city.
                                                     4-P.16	 Coordinate the implementation and planning of the city’s Habitat
                                                             Management Plan with the North County Multi-Species Habitat
                                                             Conservation Plan.
                                  4-50

                                                                                   General Plan
                                                                                              4
4-P.17	 Seek partnering opportunities with other governmental agencies,
        private land owners and non-profit organizations to acquire open
        space; utilize grants, bonds and other funding sources to leverage
        local funds and reduce cost to Carlsbad taxpayers.
4-P.18	 Require that, at the time of any discretionary approval, any land
                                                                                               Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
        identified as open space for its habitat or scenic value shall have
        an appropriate easement and/or land use and zoning designation
        placed on it for resource protection.
4-P.19	 Require a city permit for any grading, grubbing, or clearing of
        vegetation in undeveloped areas, with appropriate penalties for
        violations.
Parks and Recreation
4-P.20	 Implement and periodically update the Parks and Recreation Needs
        Assessment and Comprehensive Action Plan that identifies appro-
        priate programming for the city’s parklands, prioritizes future
        parkland development, reflects the needs of residents at the neigh-
        borhood and citywide level and of an increasingly diverse and aging
        population, and in concert with the citywide trails program, creates
        new linkages to neighborhoods.
4-P.21	 Acquire and develop park areas in accordance with the Growth
        Management Plan park standard of 3.0 acres of community park
        or special use area per 1,000 residents within each of the four city
        quadrants. Park acreage requirements shall be determined on a
        quadrant basis.
4-P.22	 Maintain appropriate recreational standards (e.g. payment of park
        mitigation fees) for employment areas.
4-P.23	 Utilize the provisions of the Quimby Act, Growth Management Plan
        and Planned Community Zone to ensure the timely construction of
        parks so that they are provided concurrent with need.
4-P.24	 Prefer in-lieu fees to dedication of parkland, unless sites offered for
        dedication provide features and accessibility similar in comparison.
4-P.25	 Consider accessibility, housing density, proximity to schools, general
        public access, local resident access, adjacent residential area traffic
        impacts, safe pedestrian access, and compatible use with the sur-
        rounding environment when determining park locations. Wherever
        possible, park sites should be located near schools or natural areas.
4-P.26	 Locate new public or private parks, plazas, or alternative parks
        (such as greenways) in existing infill neighborhoods—the Village
        and Barrio—where new residential development is contemplated,
        within Growth Management Program requirements and city
        budgetary limitations.
4-P.27	 Provide for joint-use facility agreements with local school districts to
        meet neighborhood and community recreational needs.
4-P.28	 Require, where possible, developers of master planned communi-
        ties to provide pocket parks and active recreational facilities unique
                                                                                            4-51

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                            to each development. Maintenance of pocket parks shall be accom-
                                                            plished through homeowners’ association dues. Pocket parks shall
                                                            remain in private ownership.
                                                     4-P.29	 Require that any development of recreational facilities on public
                                                             land by developers, service clubs, civic groups, individual donors
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                             or organizations be consistent with the goals and policies of this
                                                             element.
                                                     4-P.30	 Consider the following during the development/re-development of
                                                             parkland: protection and enhancement of sensitive natural habitat
                                                             by expanding minimum buffers around sensitive resources; utilizing
                                                             native plant species in park projects; incorporating plant species
                                                             that provide food such as seeds, nuts and berries for wildlife and
                                                             bird species; protecting and buffering drinking water sources such
                                                             as small ponds and wetland areas; and limiting turf grass use to rec-
                                                             reational areas. Use the Carlsbad Landscape Manual in landscape
                                                             refurbishment and new park development projects.
                                                     4-P.31	 Design parks to protect public safety by ensuring adequate lighting,
                                                             signage, and maintenance.
                                                     Special Resource Areas; Lagoons
                                                     4-P.32	 Where appropriate, designate as open space those areas that
                                                             preserve historic, cultural, archeological, paleontological and edu-
                                                             cational resources.
                                                     4-P.33	 Seek to preserve the environmental integrity, ecology, and
                                                             character of special resource areas.
                                                     4-P.34	 Promote expansion of recreational and educational use opportuni-
                                                             ties in areas of significant ecological value, such as lagoons, where
                                                             discretionary use of the resource allows. Consider partnering with
                                                             private foundations for the conservation of such lands and the
                                                             development of educational programming.
                                                           •	 Combine historically significant sites with recreational learning
                                                              opportunities, where possible.
                                                           •	 Utilize community parks in support of historical and cultural
                                                              programs and facilities when feasible and appropriate.
                                                           •	 Coordinate the efforts of the Historic Preservation Commission on
                                                              the siting and care of historic ruins within parks.
                                                     4-P.35	 Seek funding opportunities from state, federal, and local agencies
                                                             to provide additional access points or improve the recreational and
                                                             educational potential of the city’s three lagoons and other special
                                                             resource areas.
                                                     4-P.36	 Assure that, where feasible, developments near or adjacent to
                                                             bodies of water provide open space that has public access to and
                                                             views of the water.
                                                     4-P.37	 Explore ways to increase access to the beach and lagoons from the
                                                             city’s eastern neighborhoods.
                                  4-52

                                                                                   General Plan
                                                                                              4
Beaches
4-P.38	 Work cooperatively with state officials on a development plan for
        South Carlsbad State Beach so as to maximize public recreational
        opportunities.
4-P.39	 Work collaboratively with the California State Parks and Recre-
                                                                                               Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
        ation Department to improve and maintain high quality beaches
        by enhancing beach access, facilities, and services along Carlsbad’s
        entire coastline.
Trails and Greenways
4-P.40	 Prepare a comprehensive Trails Master Plan update, that expands
        the existing and planned 61-mile trail system, with the following
        objectives:
      •	 Connectivity between off-road trails and major on-road pedestrian
         and bicycle routes, such that future improvements in the trail system
         also contribute to linkages between important sites (beaches,
         lagoons, schools, commercial centers, master planned communities,
         and others)
      •	 Design and designate trails as multi-use to be accessible for all user
         groups, including walkers, bicyclists, and equestrians (as land use
         policy allows). Ensure that the network provides an appropriate
         amount of resources for each trail type or user group
      •	 Greenway and trail linkages from major recreational/open space
         areas to other land use areas or activities, including, but not limited
         to, residential neighborhoods, places of employment, parks,
         schools, libraries, and viewpoints
      •	 Linkages/multi-use trails connecting businesses and residential
         neighborhoods to the beaches
4-P.41	 Participate with other north county communities to establish an
        intercommunity open space linkage program and regional trail
        network.
4-P.42	 Locate multi-use trails and associated amenities and passive recre-
        ational features to minimize impacts to sensitive habitats and other
        sensitive surrounding land uses, such as residences.
4-P.43	 Obtain an irrevocable offer to dedicate or a permanent easement
        for multi-use trails on privately owned property where feasible, and
        where trails are proposed as part of the Carlsbad trail system.
Agricultural Resources
4-P.44	 Allow and encourage farming operations to continue within the
        Cannon Road Open Space, Farming, and Public Use Corridor (such as
        the strawberry fields) as long as they are economically viable for the
        landowner.
4-P.45	 Ensure the existing Flower Fields remain a farming and flower
        production use by utilizing all available methods and programs,
        including grants and other outside financial assistance.
                                                                                            4-53

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     4-P.46	 Utilize available methods and resources to reduce the financial
                                                             burdens on agricultural land, not only to prevent premature devel-
                                                             opment, but also to encourage its continued use for agricultural
                                                             purposes.
                                                     4-P.47	 Ensure new development adjacent to an agricultural use is sensitive
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                             to the continuation of the agricultural use by requiring appropriate
                                                             design criteria, such as site layout, use of vegetation and buffers.
                                                     4-P.48	 Encourage soil and water conservation techniques in agricultural
                                                            activities.
                                                     4-P.49	 Ensure that the grading of agricultural lands is accomplished in a
                                                             manner that minimizes erosion of hillsides and minimizes stream
                                                             siltation and to maintain the appearance of natural hillsides and
                                                             other land forms wherever possible.
                                                     4-P.50	 Prevent agricultural run-off and other forms of water pollution
                                                             from entering the storm drain system and polluting the city’s water
                                                             bodies.
                                                     4-P.51	 Prior to the approval of new development within an existing or
                                                             former agricultural area in Carlsbad, require a detailed soils testing
                                                             and analysis report be prepared by a registered soils engineer and
                                                             submitted to the city and the county health department for review
                                                             and approval. This report shall evaluate the potential for soil con-
                                                             tamination due to historic use, handling, or storage of agricultural
                                                             chemicals restricted by the County of San Diego Department of
                                                             Health Services. If hazardous chemicals are detected at concentra-
                                                             tions in the soil that would have a significantly adverse effect on
                                                             human health, the report shall identify a range of possible mitiga-
                                                             tion measures to remediate the significant public health impacts.
                                                     Air Quality
                                                     4-P.52	 Participate in the implementation of transportation demand man-
                                                             agement programs on a regional basis.
                                                     4-P.53	 To the extent practical and feasible, maintain a system of air
                                                             quality alerts (such as through the city website, internet, email to
                                                             city employees, and other tools) based on San Diego Air Pollution
                                                             Control District forecasts. Consider providing incentives to city
                                                             employees to use alternative transportation modes during alert
                                                             days.
                                                     4-P.54	 Provide, whenever possible, incentives for carpooling, flex-time,
                                                             shortened work weeks, and telecommunications and other means
                                                             of reducing vehicular miles traveled.
                                                     4-P.55	 Cooperate with the ongoing efforts of the U.S. Environmental Pro-
                                                             tection Agency, the San Diego Air Pollution Control District, and the
                                                             State of California Air Resources Board in improving air quality in
                                                             the regional air basin.
                                  4-54

                                                                                   General Plan
                                                                                              4
4-P.56	 Ensure that construction and grading projects minimize short-term
        impacts to air quality.
       a)	 Require grading projects to provide a storm water pollution pre-
           vention plan (SWPPP) in compliance with city requirements, which
           include standards for best management practices that control
                                                                                               Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
           pollutants from dust generated by construction activities and
           those related to vehicle and equipment cleaning, fueling and
           maintenance;
       b)	 Require grading projects to undertake measures to minimize mono-
           nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions from vehicle and equipment
           operations; and
       c)	 Monitor all construction to ensure that proper steps are
           implemented.
Water Quality
4-P.57	 Work with the stakeholders in the community and region, such as
        but not limited to the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control
        Board (RWQCB), California Fish and Wildlife, US Fish and Wildlife,
        Coastal Commission, Army Corps of Engineers, Environmental Pro-
        tection Agency, neighboring cities, counties, businesses, residents,
        and non-profit groups, to comply with applicable federal, state and
        local regulations related to water quality in our region, consistent
        with the city’s current NPDES Municipal Storm Water Permit issued
        by the RWQCB or other related regulations. Prepare and implement
        any applicable plans such as a Water Quality Improvement Plan,
        Integrated Regional Water Management Plan, Load Reduction Plan
        or others as needed to comply with applicable regulations.
4-P.58	 Require developments to incorporate structural and non-struc-
        tural best management practices (BMPs) to mitigate or reduce the
        projected increases in pollutant loads. Do not allow post-devel-
        opment runoff from a site that would cause or contribute to an
        exceedance of receiving water quality objectives or has not been
        reduced to the maximum extent practicable.
4-P.59	 Implement water pollution prevention methods to the maximum
        extent practicable, supplemented by pollutant source controls and
        treatment. Use small collection strategies located at, or as close as
        possible to, the source (i.e., the point where water initially meets the
        ground or source of potential pollution) to minimize the transport
        of urban runoff and pollutants offsite and into a municipal separate
        storm sewer system (MS4).
4-P.60	 Make any necessary structural control changes to the storm water
        conveyance system to remove or reduce storm water pollutant
        levels.
4-P.61	 Conduct analysis of the effectiveness of the overall pollution pre-
        vention programs in Carlsbad consistent with the city’s NPDES
        Municipal Storm Water Permit issued by the RWQCB or other related
        regulations.
                                                                                            4-55

                                  City of Carlsbad
4
                                                     4-P.62	 Continue to implement a program to detect and eliminate illicit con-
                                                             nections to storm drains and illegal discharges of non-storm water
                                                             wastes into storm water conveyance systems.
                                                     4-P.63	 Continue to implement a program for the testing and monitoring of
                                                             storm water and/or non-storm water flows consistent with the city’s
Open Space, Conservation, and Recreation
                                                             NPDES Municipal Storm Water Permit issued by the RWQCB or other
                                                             related regulations.
                                                     4-P.64	 Preserve, where possible, natural watercourses or provide natural-
                                                             ized drainage channels within the city. Where feasible, implement
                                                             restoration and rehabilitation opportunities
                                                     4-P.65	 Coordinate the needs of storm water pollution management with
                                                             the overlapping (and sometimes competing) habitat management,
                                                             flood management, capital improvement projects, development,
                                                             aesthetic, and other open space needs.
                                  4-56

6 Public Safety
                                                   General Plan
              Environmental, seismic and topographic
              conditions and the patterns of urban
              development in Carlsbad can potentially
              pose risks to human health and property. The
              Public Safety Element identifies natural and
              manmade hazards that exist within Carlsbad
              and seeks to mitigate their potential impacts
              through preventative and response measures.
              Topics addressed in this element include seismic
              and geologic hazards; flooding and drainage;
              hazardous materials and operations; police, fire
              and emergency response.
                                                             6-1
           City of Carlsbad
6
Public Safety
           6-2
                                                                                     General Plan
6.1	 Introduction
Background and Purpose                                                                          6
                                                                                                    Public Safety
The purpose of this element is to acknowledge the risk posed by hazards, and to
reduce the risk of injury, loss of life, property damage, and economic and social
dislocation resulting from natural and manmade hazards. The proposed overall
development pattern in the Land Use and Community Design Element incor-
porates consideration of flooding risk, seismic safety and other hazards. The
Public Safety Element contains the city’s goals and policies to reduce the risks
associated with identified hazards and integrate mitigating measures into the
city’s development process.
Relationship to State Law
Government Code Section 65302(g) requires each California city and county
to include within its general plan a public safety element that addresses the pro-
tection of the community from any unreasonable risks associated with the
effects of seismic and other geologically-induced hazards, flooding, and fires.
The Public Safety Element is required to include mapping of known seismic
and other geological hazards. Where applicable, it must also address evacuation
routes, peak load water supply requirements, minimum road widths and clear-
ances around structures.
State law also allows cities to address any other locally relevant issues in its
public safety element. In addition to those mentioned above, Carlsbad’s Public
Safety Element also addresses disaster preparedness and the protection from
other local health and safety hazards, such as fire, hazardous materials and
airport hazards.
Relationship to Community Vision
The Public Safety Element is most closely tied to the following objective in the
Community Vision:
Core Value 8: Support quality, comprehensive education and life-long learning
opportunities, provide housing and community services for a changing popula-
tion, and maintain a high standard for citywide public safety.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
The Public Safety Element is strongly correlated to the Land Use and Community
Design Element and the Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element.
The Land Use and Community Design Element includes consideration of fire,
seismic, flooding and other hazards in land use designations and their intensity.
Through restrictions on the development of hazardous areas, identified by
                                                                                               6-3

           City of Carlsbad
6
                              careful investigation as proposed in the Public Safety Element, the Land Use and
                              Community Design Element supplements the policies of this element.
                              Related to the Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element, areas subject
                              to severe hazards, especially those related to seismic or flood-prone conditions,
Public Safety
                              are designated for a reduced level of development or open space, or development
                              is required to be set back from areas impacted by these factors.
                              Additionally, the Public Safety Element is related to the Mobility Element in
                              that good street design and accessibility of the transportation system is vitally
                              important in providing emergency services.
                              Finally, the Public Safety Element is related to the Housing Element and the
                              Arts, History, Culture, and Education Element in that it identifies areas that may
                              present hazardous conditions for residential structures and proposes precau-
                              tionary measures related to older existing structures that may have historic or
                              cultural significance.
           6-4
                                                                                       General Plan
6.2	 Regulatory Setting
Public safety is a topic that is subject to extensive federal, state, and local reg-
ulations that span a variety of safety topics. Some of the key regulations and
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                      Public Safety
regulatory agencies are summarized below. The city is not responsible for
administering all of the regulations; rather, the following discussion provides
examples of how public safety in Carlsbad is a shared responsibility among
various government agencies. For a fuller discussion of the regulatory setting
pertaining to safety, the Environmental Impact Report for the General Plan
should be consulted.
Federal Programs and Regulations
Environmental Protection Agency
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) enforces the
Federal Toxic Substances Control Act (1976) and the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA), which regulates the generation, transporta-
tion, treatment, storage, and disposal of hazardous waste. RCRA was amended
in 1984 by the Hazardous and Solid Waste Act (HSWA), which affirmed and
extended the “cradle to grave” system of regulating hazardous wastes (control-
ling hazardous waste from the time it is generated until its ultimate disposal).
The use of certain techniques for the disposal of some hazardous wastes was
specifically prohibited by the HSWA.
The 1980 Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act, commonly known as Superfund, provides broad federal authority
to respond directly to releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances
that may endanger public health or the environment.
United States Department of Transportation
Transportation of chemicals and hazardous materials are governed by the
United States Department of Transportation (DOT), which stipulates the types
of containers, labeling, and other restrictions to be used in the movement of
such material on interstate highways.
Federal Emergency Management Agency
The primary mission of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is
to reduce the loss of life and property and to protect the nation from all hazards,
including natural disasters, acts of terrorism, and other manmade disasters, by
leading and supporting a risk-based, comprehensive emergency management
system of preparedness, protection, response, recovery, and mitigation. FEMA
maps floodplains, and is currently (2013) in the process of preparing new flood-
plain mapping along much of the California coastline, including Carlsbad.
                                                                                                 6-5

           City of Carlsbad
6
                              Disaster Mitigation Act
                              The Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000 requires a state mitigation plan as a
                              condition of disaster assistance, adding incentives for increased coordination
                              and integration of mitigation activities at the state level.
Public Safety
                              State Regulations
                              California Environmental Protection Agency
                              The management of hazardous materials and waste within California is under
                              the jurisdiction of the California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal EPA).
                              Cal EPA is responsible for developing, implementing and enforcing the state’s
                              environmental protection laws that ensure clean air, clean water, clean soil,
                              safe pesticides and waste recycling and reduction. Within Cal EPA are various
                              departments, three of which are described as follows:
                              Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment
                              The California Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment oversees
                              implementation of the Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act of
                              1986 (commonly known as Proposition 65), which aims to protect California
                              citizens and the state’s drinking water sources from chemicals known to cause
                              cancer, birth defects, or other reproductive harm and to inform citizens about
                              exposures to such chemicals.
                              The California Department of Toxic Substances Control
                              The California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) implements
                              California Code of Regulations Title 22, Division 4.5, which provides standards
                              for the management of hazardous waste. The DTSC has the authority to delegate
                              enforcement of the state’s hazardous waste regulations to local jurisdictions.
                              State Water Resources Control Board
                              The State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB), as well as nine regional
                              water quality control boards, implements various laws related to the protection
                              of water quality. The state and regional boards regulate wastewater discharges
                              to surface and ground water; storm water discharges from construction, indus-
                              trial, and municipal activities; discharges from irrigated agriculture; dredge and
                              fill activities; alteration of federal water bodies; and other activities that could
                              degrade water quality.
                              The California Department of Transportation
                              The California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) manages more than
                              50,000 miles of California’s highway and freeway lanes, provides inter-city rail
                              services, permits more than 400 public-use airports and special-use hospital
                              heliports and works with local agencies. Caltrans is also the first responder for
                              hazardous material spills and releases that occur on those highway and freeway
                              lanes and inter-city rail services.
           6-6

                                                                                       General Plan
                                                                                                  6
California Emergency Management Agency
The California Emergency Management Agency (Cal EMA) is responsible
for assuring the state’s readiness to respond to and recover from all hazards -
natural, manmade, war-caused emergencies and disasters. Cal EMA assists
                                                                                                      Public Safety
local governments in developing their own emergency preparedness and
response plans, in accordance with the Standardized Emergency Management
System and the State Emergency Plan, for earthquakes, floods, fires, hazardous
material incidents, nuclear power plant emergencies, dam breaks, and acts of
terrorism. Cal EMA also administers the State of California Multi-Hazard Mit-
igation Plan (SHMP), which presents goals, strategies, and actions for reducing
future disaster losses throughout the state. The SHMP is a federal requirement
under the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000 in order for the state to receive federal
funds for disaster assistance.
Safe School Plan (California Education Code Sections
32280 et seq.)
This statute requires public schools to prepare a school safety plan that identifies
strategies and programs that will ensure a high level of school safety related to:
child abuse reporting; disaster procedures; on-campus violence; discrimination
and harassment; safe ingress and egress to and from school; safe and orderly
environment conducive to learning; and school discipline.
Local Regulations
County of San Diego Department of Environmental
Health
The County of San Diego Department of Environmental Health (DEH)
protects public health and environmental quality and implements and enforces
local, state, and federal environmental laws. The DEH regulates the following:
retail food safety; public housing; public swimming pools; small drinking
water systems; mobile-home parks; onsite wastewater systems; recreational
water; aboveground and underground storage tanks and cleanup oversight;
and medical and hazardous materials and waste. In addition, DEH serves as the
Solid Waste Local Enforcement Agency and prevents disease carried by rats and
mosquitoes.
California Environmental Protection Agency’s Unified
Program
Cal EPA oversees a unified hazardous waste and hazardous materials manage-
ment and regulatory program, commonly referred to as the Unified Program.
The purpose of this program is to consolidate and coordinate six different
hazardous materials and hazardous waste programs, and to ensure that they are
consistently implemented throughout the state. State law requires local agencies
to implement the Unified Program. The County of San Diego DEH, Hazardous
                                                                                                 6-7

           City of Carlsbad
6
                              Materials Division is the local agency in charge of implementing the program in
                              the county.
                              San Diego County Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation
                              Plan
Public Safety
                              Long-term prevention, mitigation efforts and risk-based preparedness related
                              to specific hazards within the city are addressed in the 2010 San Diego County
                              Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan (HAZMIT Plan). The HAZMIT
                              Plan identifies specific risks for San Diego County and provides methods to
                              help minimize damage caused by natural and manmade disasters. The final
                              list of hazards profiled for San Diego County was determined as wildfire/
                              structure fire, flood, coastal storms/erosion/tsunami, earthquake/liquefaction,
                              rain-induced landslide, dam failure, hazardous materials incidents, nuclear
                              materials release, and terrorism. Currently, the city is in the process of updating
                              its mitigation strategies and action programs within the HAZMIT Plan. The
                              County of San Diego Office of Emergency Services is responsible for coordinat-
                              ing with local jurisdictions and participating agencies to monitor, evaluate, and
                              update the San Diego County Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan as
                              necessary.
                              McClellan-Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan
                              The McClellan-Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) is
                              prepared by the San Diego County Regional Airport Authority to protect the
                              safety of the public from airport related hazards. The ALUCP promotes com-
                              patibility between McClellan-Palomar Airport and the land uses that surround
                              it by addressing noise, overflight, safety, and airspace protection concerns. The
                              ALUCP prevents exposure to excessive noise and safety hazards within the
                              airport influence area (AIA), provides for the orderly growth of the airport
                              and the area surrounding the airport, and safeguards the general welfare of the
                              inhabitants within the vicinity of the airport and the public in general.
                              Carlsbad Municipal Code
                              Chapter 6.03 of the Carlsbad Municipal Code incorporates by reference
                              Chapters 9 and 11 of Division 8 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code of Regu-
                              latory Ordinances, which designates the County of San Diego DEH as the local
                              agency responsible for implementing the state’s Unified Program and specifies
                              reporting, disclosure and monitoring requirements  for hazardous materials
                              and hazardous waste establishments.
           6-8

                                                                                                 General Plan
6.3	 Flooding and Coastal Hazards
Surface Hydrology                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                Public Safety
The San Diego Region is divided into 11 hydrologic units that flow from elevated
regions in the east toward coastal lagoons, estuaries, or bays in the west.
Carlsbad is located within the Carlsbad Hydrologic Unit (HU), also referred
to as the Carlsbad Watershed Management Area, which is approximately 210
square miles in area, extending from the headwaters above Lake Wohlford in
the east to the Pacific Ocean in the west, and from Vista and Oceanside in the
north to Solana Beach, Encinitas, and the community of Rancho Santa Fe to
the south. The cities of Carlsbad, San Marcos, and Encinitas are entirely within
this HU. There are numerous important surface hydrologic features within the
Carlsbad HU including four unique coastal lagoons, three major creeks, and
two large water storage reservoirs. Approximately 48% of the Carlsbad HU is
urbanized. The dominant land uses are residential (29%), commercial/industr
ial (6%), freeways and roads (12%), agriculture (12%), and vacant/undeveloped
(32%).1 
Buena Vista Lagoon
Buena Vista Lagoon is a 350-acre fresh water lagoon owned by the State of Cali-
fornia and managed by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW)
as a nature reserve. Located on the border between Carlsbad and Oceanside, it
became California’s first ecological reserve in 1969. CDFW is the major property
owner of the lagoon; however, a number of adjacent residential property owners
have control of small portions of their property adjacent to the lagoon’s wetland
boundary. Although the lagoon itself is maintained as a nature reserve, much of
the Buena Vista hydrologic area is already developed.
Agua Hedionda Lagoon
Agua Hedionda Lagoon is situated between Tamarack Avenue and Cannon
Road and is comprised of three inter-connected lagoons, divided by the Inter-
state-5 freeway and a railroad bridge. Cabrillo Power LLC owns the three lagoon
sections; the 66-acre outer lagoon adjacent to the Pacific Ocean, which primarily
provides cooling water for the electric producing generators at the Encina Power
Plant; the 27-acre middle lagoon is home to the North Coast YMCA Aquatic
Park; and the 295-acre inner lagoon extends approximately 1,800 yards in a
southeasterly direction from the Interstate-5 freeway bridge. The inner lagoon
may be used for boating – permitted crafts include jet skis and powerboats
(western portion) and passive vessels like sailboats and kayaks (eastern portion).
At the eastern end of the lagoon is the Agua Hedionda Ecological Reserve, which
was acquired in 2000 by the CDFW and consists of 186 acres of wetlands.
1	 Project Clean Water Website 2012, www.projectcleanwater.org/html/ws_carlsbad.html, accessed
   September 21, 2012
                                                                                                           6-9

           City of Carlsbad
6
                              Batiquitos Lagoon
                              The Batiquitos Lagoon consists of approximately 561 acres owned by both the
                              CDFW and the California State Lands Commission and is protected as a game
                              sanctuary and bird estuary. The lagoon was originally open to the ocean, but
Public Safety
                              over time the construction of transportation corridors and other development
                              resulted in sediment closing off the lagoon. Then, in the mid-1990s, a signifi-
                              cant lagoon restoration and enhancement project, conducted by the City of
                              Carlsbad, Port of Los Angeles and other cooperating agencies, allowed for the
                              lagoon to open to the ocean again, as it exists today.
                              Stormwater Drainage
                              Much of the land area in Carlsbad is developed, resulting in impervious surfaces
                              from the placement of roads, parking lots, buildings and other infrastructure.
                              These facilities reduce the amount of water infiltration into the ground, increase
                              direct runoff into the city’s creeks and lagoons, and cause soil erosion and sedi-
                              mentation, which can result in water quality degradation and flooding concerns.
                              The City of Carlsbad currently employs a number of measures, including best
                              management practices (BMPs), to prevent pollutants and hazardous materials
                              from entering municipal stormwater conveyance systems. As storm drains are
                              not connected to sanitary sewer infrastructure, water conveyed to these drains
                              is not treated prior to discharging into creeks, lagoons and the ocean. Therefore,
                              pollutants must be reduced and/or removed before entering urban convey-
                              ance systems. The city’s Storm Water Protection Program covers all phases of
                              development through planning, construction and existing development and
                              educates and monitors developers, businesses, municipal facilities, residents,
                              school children, and the general public to help prevent pollutants and other
                              hazardous materials from entering storm drains.
                              Flood Zones
                              Floodplains are areas of land located adjacent to rivers or streams that are
                              subject to recurring inundation, or flooding. Preserving or restoring natural
                              floodplains helps with flood loss reduction benefits and improves water quality
                              and habitat. Floods are typically described in terms of their statistical frequency.
                              For example, a 100-year floodplain describes an area within which there is a
                              one percent probability of a flood occurring in any given year. FEMA prepares
                              Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) that identify 100-year and 500-year flood
                              zones. As shown in Figure 6-1, the potential flood hazard areas identified on the
                              FIRM maps in Carlsbad include the entire coastline and the following major
                              drainage basins:
                              •	 Buena Vista Creek and Buena Vista Lagoon
                              •	 Agua Hedionda Creek, its northern tributary, and the Agua Hedionda
                                 Lagoon
           6-10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 6-1
                                                  78
                City of
             OCEANSIDE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 6-1:	 PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GENERAL      Potential Flood Hazards
                Oceanside                       RO               RD
                                            M AR N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Potential Flood Hazards
                            Buena                                DR
                                                          AG                                                                                                                                                                                                          78
                            Vista
                            Lagoon                    IL
                                                             E              EL                                                                                                                                                                                                             1% Annual Chance Coastal Flood Zone
                                                         L                                                                                                          Calavera
                                                      V                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (100 Year Flood - High Risk Coastal Areas)
                                                 AD                                                                                                                 Lake
                                            SB
                                          RL                                 C AM
                                     CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1% Annual Chance Flood Zone
                                                                                                                                                   VD
                                                                                                                                               E BL
                                                                                  INO                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                                                                 (100 Year Flood - High Risk Areas)
                                                                                                                                             EG
                                                                                                                 AV
                                                                                                                                          LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oceanside
                                                                                                            ACK
                                                                                    R EA
                                                                                        L             AR                                CO
                                                                 AV
                                                                    E                                   M                                                                                                                                                                                  Highways
                                                            K                                      TA
                                                         AC
                                                       AR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Major Street
                                                 TA
                                                   M                                                                                               RD
                                                                                                                                       ON
                                                                                                                                     NN
                                                                                                                                CA
                                                                                                                                   EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Planned Street
                                                                                                                                           CA                                                                 Maerkle
                                                                                                                                                MIN                                                           Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                   O                                                                                                                                       Railroad
                                                                                                                                                              RE
                                                                                                                                                                A
                                                             Agu a                                                                                                  L                                                                                                                      City Limits
                                     CA                          Hed ion d a                                                                                                                                                                                        SAN MARCOS
                                     RLS                               L agoon
                                        D                                                                                                FARA                                                                                                  City of
                                      BA                                                                                                       DA Y
                                                                                                                                                         AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vista
                                                                        C AN N                                                                              E
P a c i f i c                               BLV                               ON           RD
                                             D
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                         PALO M A
                                                                                                                                                                                                            R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T RD
                                                                                                                                                                    MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                     -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                      AIRPORT                                                                                         City of
                                                                                                         ORT                 RD                                                                                                                                     San Marcos
                                                                                                   A I RP
                                                                                       PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                            BLE
                                                                                                                                                                        C           VIDA R O                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                            A M INO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ETT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IA    LN                            LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  INS                                    ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                           L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                               ETT
                                                                                                                                   IA                                                                                                          A R
                                                                                                                             NS                                                                                                          ALG
                                                                                                                    P   OI
                                                                                                                                                 AV
                                                                                 CAR
                                                                                                                                                    IA   RA
                                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                      AD
                                                                                  LSB
                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                KW
                                                                                           D
                                                                                       BLV
                                                                                                                                        Ba tiq uitos            Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                            AVE
                                                                                                                                                LA        C O STA                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LA
                                                                                                                                                                                            EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                MIN O                                        FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                              CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                    S AN                                                    City of
                                                                                                                                                           Encinitas                               RE                                       N TA
                                                                                                                   ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                    AL
                                                                                                               RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SA                                                                               100
                                                                                                           O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O                                                                              ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                     D IE G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0           0.5           1                           2
                                                                                                                 N RR                                                                                                                                                                                          Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; FEMA, 2012; SANDAG, 2012;
                                                                                                                                                                                  ENCINITAS                                                                                      Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6-11

                                                                                                    General Plan
                                                                                                               6
•	 San Marcos Creek and its northern tributary
•	 Batiquitos Lagoon
•	 Encinitas Creek
                                                                                                                   Public Safety
Most jurisdictions within San Diego County, including the City of Carlsbad,
participate in the National Flood Insurance Program. Pursuant to the City of
Carlsbad’s Local Coastal Plan and Carlsbad Municipal Code Title 21 (Zoning),
development is restricted within 100-year floodplain areas.
Dam Inundation
Dam inundation can be caused by the release of impounded water from struc-
tural failure or overtopping of a dam. The San Diego County HAZMIT Plan
identifies dam-failure risk levels based on dam inundation map data. There are
four dams and a reservoir located within or adjacent to the City of Carlsbad, as
shown in Figure 6-2: the Calavera, Maerkle, San Marcos, and Bressi dams, and
the Stanley A Mahr reservoir. The Calavera and Maerkle dams and Stanley A
Mahr reservoir have been assigned high hazard ratings, San Marcos dam has a
significant hazard rating, and the Bressi dam has a low hazard rating. All four
dams and the reservoir have emergency action plans in place. These facilities are
periodically inspected by the State of California Division of Dam Safety.
Sea Level Rise
In California, sea levels have risen by as much as seven inches along the coast
over the last century, resulting in eroded shorelines, deterioration of infra-
structure, and depletion of natural resources. In 2009, California adopted a
Climate Adaptation Strategy2, which summarizes the most recent science in
predicting potential climate change impacts and recommends response strat-
egies. The California Energy Commission’s 2009 White Paper entitled, The
Impacts of Sea-Level Rise on the California Coast also describes strategies to
address the impacts of sea level rise in California communities. The San Diego
County HAZMIT Plan has identified sea level rise as one of Carlsbad’s (and
other coastal cities) three primary climate change vulnerabilities (the other
two being drought and fire). According to Cal-Adapt online tool (developed
by the California Natural Resources Agency along with others), the historical
average baseline (1961-1990) temperature in the Carlsbad area of 63.0 degrees F
could increase by 3.6 to 6.0 degrees by the end of century period (2070-2090),
depending on various emissions scenarios. According to the Sea Level Rise
Adaptation Strategy for San Diego Bay (south of Carlsbad) prepared in 2012 by
a consortium of cities, sea level in the bay could rise by as much as 17 inches by
2050 and five feet by 2100.
2	 2009 California Climate Adaptation Strategy, California Natural Resources Agency. http://re-
   sources.ca.gov/climate_adaptation/docs/Statewide_Adaptation_Strategy.pdf. As of preparation of
   this General Plan, a 2013 update of the Adaptation Strategy is underway.
                                                                                                             6-13

           City of Carlsbad
6
                              Areas within Carlsbad that are particularly vulnerable to sea level rise are those
                              areas immediately adjacent to the coast and the lagoons, which are similarly vul-
                              nerable to coastal storms. Potential strategies to reduce the impacts of sea-level
                              rise on the city may include hard engineering (seawalls, breakwaters, levees) soft
Public Safety
                              engineering (beach nourishment and/or replenishment, wetlands restoration)
                              and restricting or reducing development near the coastal areas.
                              In 2011, FEMA initiated the California Coastal Analysis and Mapping Project/
                              Open Pacific Coast Study, which involves over 1,200 miles of new coastal flood
                              hazard mapping and base-flood elevation determinations. Under this initiative,
                              many coastal communities, including Carlsbad, will have coastal flood data and
                              mapping updated for the first time in over 20 years. This study will improve the
                              quality of the coastal data used for both floodplain management and planning
                              purposes.
                              Tsunamis and Seiches
                              Tsunamis are long wavelength ocean waves generated by sudden movements
                              of the ocean bottom during events such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions,
                              or landslides. The County of San Diego maps zones of high risk for tsunami
                              run-up. As shown in Figure 6-3, the only areas identified within the City of
                              Carlsbad as having risk for tsunami run-up are the immediate vicinity of the
                              Buena Vista, Agua Hedionda, and Batiquitos lagoons.
                              Seiches are defined as wave-like oscillatory movements in enclosed or semi-
                              enclosed bodies of water such as lakes or reservoirs. Potential effects from
                              seiches include flooding damage and related hazards from spilling or sloshing
                              water, as well as increased pressure on containment structures. The County of
                              San Diego maps zones of high risk for dam inundation throughout the county.
                              The high-risk areas are located in other communities upstream in the Carlsbad
                              Watershed Management Area.
           6-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 6-2
                                                   78
                City of
             OCEANSIDE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GENERAL 6-2:	 Dam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PLANInundation Areas
                Oceanside                        RO               RD
                                             M AR N
                                                                                                                                                   Lake                                                                                                                           Carlsbad Dams
                            Buena                                 DR                                                                             Calavera
                                                           AG                                                                                    Reservoir                                                                                                          78
                            Vista                             E
                            Lagoon                     IL                    EL                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dams & Reservoirs
                                                          L                                                                                                          Calavera
                                                       V
                                                   D                                                                                                                 Lake
                                              BA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dam Inundation Points
                                        R   LS                                C AM
                                     CA
                                                                                                                                                    VD
                                                                                                                                                E BL
                                                                                   INO                                   E                                                                                                                                                                  Dam Inundation Areas
                                                                                                                                              EG
                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                           LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                City of
                                                                                                             ACK
                                                                                     R EA                                                CO
                                                                                                                                                                                               Oceanside
                                                                                         L             AR                                                                                                                                                                                   Highways
                                                                     E                                   M                                                                                     Maerkle # 2
                                                             K    AV                                TA
                                                          AC                                                                                                                                     Tank Maerkle # 1                                                                           Major Street
                                                        AR
                                               TA
                                                 M
                                                                                               Calavera                                             RD
                                                                                                                                        ON
                                                                                                                                      NN                                             Maerkle Dam                Dam                         Pechstein Dam                                   Planned Street
                                                                                                 Lake                            CA                                                                          Maerkle
                                                                                            Inundation Zone                         EL
                                                                                                                                            CA
                                                                                                                                                                                      & Reservoir            Reservoir                        Inundation
                                                                                                                                                 MIN                               Inundation Zone                                               Zone                                       Railroad
                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                               RE                                                                                                                           City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                              Agu a                                                                                                  L
                                     CA                           Hed ion d a                                                                                                                                                                                     SAN MARCOS
                                     RLS                                L agoon                                                                                                                                                                                                   (* There is no inundation zone associated with Bressi Dam)
                                        D                                                                                                 FARA                                                                                               City of
                                      BA                                                                                                        DA Y
                                                                                                                                                          AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vista
                                                                         C AN N                                                                              E
P a c i f i c                               BLV                                ON           RD
                                              D
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                         PALO M A
                                                                                                                                                                                                            R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T RD
                                                                                                                                                                     MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                      -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                       AIRPORT                                                                                      City of
                                                                                                          ORT                 RD                                                                                                                                  San Marcos           San Marcos 854
                                                                                                    A I RP
                                                                                        PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                             BLE
                                                                                                                                                                         C           VIDA R O                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                             A M INO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ETT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IA    LN                            LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                INS                                    ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bressi Dam*                          R
                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                ETT
                                                                                                                                    IA                                                                                                       A R
                                                                                                                              NS                                                                                                       ALG
                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                     PO                           AV
                                                                                  CAR
                                                                                                                                                     IA   RA
                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                       AD
                                                                                   LSB
                                                                                                                                                                    Y
                                                                                                                                                                 KW
                                                                                            D
                                                                                        BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                         San Marcos Dam
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Inundation Zone                                               Mahr
                                                                                                                                                                 Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Reservoir
                                                                                                                                         Ba tiq uitos
                                                                                                                                                                             AVE
                                                                                                                                                 LA        C O STA                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LA
                                                                                                                                                                                             EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MIN O                                     FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                     S AN                                                    City of
                                                                                                                                                            Encinitas                              RE                                     N TA
                                                                                                                    ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                     AL
                                                                                                                RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SA                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Stanley Mahr
                                                                                                            O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O                                                                                  ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C                    Dam
                                                                                                      D IE G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Inundation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0            0.5           1                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Zone
                                                                                                                  N RR                                                                                                                                                                                           Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                   ENCINITAS                                                                                                                           Mt2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; SANDAG,  Israel Dam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DUDEK, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lake Wohlford Dixon Dam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6-15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 6-3
                                                   78
                City of
             OCEANSIDE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure  6-3:	 Maximum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GENERAL     PLAN Tsunami Projected Run-up
                Oceanside                       RO                RD
                                            M AR N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Maximum Tsunami Projected
                            Buena                                 DR                                                                                                                                                                                                               Run-up
                                                           AG                                                                                                                                                                                                         78
                            Vista                             E
                            Lagoon                     IL                    EL
                                                          L                                                                                                            Calavera
                                                       V
                                               A   D                                                                                                                   Lake
                                            SB
                                          RL                                  C AM                                                                                                                                                                                                           Historic Tsunami Effect Felt
                                     CA
                                                                                                                                                      VD
                                                                                                                                                  E BL
                                                                                   INO                                     E
                                                                                                                                                EG
                                                                                                                    AV
                                                                                                                                             LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                  City of
                                                                                                              ACK
                                                                                     R EA                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oceanside
                                                                                         L               AR                                                                                                                                                                                  FEMA VE Zone (High Risk)
                                                                    VE                                  AM
                                                      C           KA                                T                                                                                                                                                                                        Maximum Tsunami Projected Runup
                                                    RA
                                                AMA                                                                                                   RD
                                               T                                                                                          ON
                                                                                                                                        NN
                                                                                                                                   CA
                                                                                                                                      EL                                                                                                                                                     Highways
                                                                                                                                              CA                                                              Maerkle
                                                                                                                                                   MIN                                                        Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                      O                                                                                                                                      Major Street
                                                                                                                                                                 RE
                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                       L
                                     CA
                                                              Agu a                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Planned Street
                                                                  Hed ion d a                                                                                                                                                                                       SAN MARCOS
                                     RLS                                L agoon
                                        D                                                                                                   FARA                                                                                               City of                                       Railroad
                                      BA                                                                                                          DA Y
                                                                                                                                                            AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Vista
                                                                         C AN N                                                                                E                                                                                                                             City Limits
P a c i f i c                               BLV                                ON           RD
                                              D
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                           PALO M A
                                                                                                                                                                                                              R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T RD
                                                                                                                                                                       MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                        -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                         AIRPORT                                                                                      City of
                                                                                                          ORT                   RD                                                                                                                                  San Marcos
                                                                                                    A I RP
                                                                                        PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                               BLE
                                                                                                                                                                           C           VIDA R O                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                               A M INO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ETT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IA    LN                            LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  INS                                    ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                              L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                  ETT
                                                                                                                                      IA                                                                                                       A R
                                                                                                                                NS                                                                                                       ALG
                                                                                                                       P   OI
                                                                                                                                                    AV
                                                                                  CAR
                                                                                                                                                       IA   RA
                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                       AD
                                                                                   LSB
                                                                                                                                                                      Y
                                                                                                                                                                   KW
                                                                                            D
                                                                                        BLV
                                                                                                                                           Ba tiq uitos            Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                               AVE
                                                                                                                                                   LA        C O STA                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LA
                                                                                                                                                                                               EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MIN O                                     FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                     S AN                                                      City of
                                                                                                                                                              Encinitas                              RE                                     N TA
                                                                                                                      ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                       AL
                                                                                                                  RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SA                                                                                  100
                                                                                                              O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O                                                                                 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                        D IE G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0            0.5          1                          2
                                                                                                                    N RR                                                                                                                                                                                          Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; SANDAG, 2012; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                     ENCINITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6-17

                                                                                     General Plan
6.4	 Geologic and Seismic Hazards
Geology and Soils                                                                               6
                                                                                                    Public Safety
The City of Carlsbad is within the coastal portion of the Peninsular Ranges
Geomorphic Province, a region characterized by northwest-trending struc-
tural blocks and intervening fault zones. Topographically, the Peninsular
Ranges Province is composed of generally parallel ranges of steep-sloping hills
and mountains separated by alluvial valleys. More recent uplift and erosion
has produced the characteristic canyon and mesa topography present today
in western San Diego County, as well as the deposition of surficial materials
including Quaternary-age (less than approximately two million years old)
alluvium, colluvium and topsoil.3 Figure 6-4 shows the local geology of Carlsbad.
Seismicity
There are no active faults that run directly through Carlsbad. Additionally, the
California Geologic Survey does not include the City of Carlsbad on its list of
cities affected by Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zones. The nearest fault to
the city is the Newport-Inglewood-Rose Canyon Fault, which runs offshore of
the western edge of the city and is considered active. Other faults in the region
include the Coronado Bank, La Nacion, Elsinore, Agua Caliente, and San
Jacinto.
Fault activity has the potential to result in ground shaking, which can be of
varying intensity depending on the intensity of earthquake activity, proximity
to that activity, and local soils and geology conditions. Although there are no
active faults within Carlsbad, the city is located within a seismically active
region and earthquakes have the potential to cause ground shaking of sig-
nificant magnitude. Figure 6-5 shows the location and extent of the profiled
earthquake faults within San Diego County based on a United States Geological
Survey earthquake model that shows probabilistic peak ground acceleration.
Although located near fault lines, Carlsbad lies within a medium-low probabi-
listic peak ground acceleration zone.
Historical documents record that an earthquake centered either on the Rose
Canyon or Coronado Bank faults struck San Diego on May 27, 1862, damaging
buildings in Old Town and causing ground rupture near the San Diego River
mouth. This earthquake is believed to have had a magnitude of about 6.0 based
on descriptions of the damage it caused. The strongest recorded earthquake in
the San Diego area was a magnitude of 5.3 on the Richter scale that struck on July
13, 1986 on the Coronado Bank fault, 25 miles offshore of Solana Beach. There
have been several moderate earthquakes recorded within the Rose Canyon
Fault Zone as well. On June 17, 1985, three earthquakes hit San Diego measuring
3	Ibid.
                                                                                              6-19
           City of Carlsbad
6
                              3.9, 4.0, and 3.9, respectively, and on October 28, 1986, a stronger earthquake
                              with a magnitude of 4.7 occurred.4
                              Seismic Risk to Development
Public Safety
                              Earthquake damage to structures can be caused by ground rupture, liquefac-
                              tion, ground shaking, and possibly inundation from tsunami (as discussed
                              above). The level of damage at a location resulting from an earthquake will
                              depend upon the magnitude of the event, the epicenter distance, the response of
                              geologic materials, and the design and construction quality of structures.
                              During an earthquake, shaking of granular loose soil saturated with water can
                              lead to liquefaction, a condition in which sediments below the water table tem-
                              porarily lose strength during an earthquake and behave as a viscous liquid
                              rather than a solid. As a result, this can cause structures to lose foundation-
                              bearing capacity. Historically, seismic shaking levels in the San Diego region,
                              including in Carlsbad, have not been sufficient enough to trigger liquefaction,
                              and as such, the city generally has a low liquefaction risk. However, there are
                              areas of the city that have a higher risk of liquefaction due to the presence of
                              hydric soils or soils that are often saturated or characteristic of wetlands. These
                              areas are limited to the immediate vicinity of the Buena Vista, Agua Hedionda,
                              and Batiquitos Lagoons, as shown in Figure 6-6. Additionally, in general, south
                              facing slopes in Carlsbad are gentle grade and not prone to landslides, while
                              north facing slopes are generally steeper and more susceptible to landslides.
                              Development in a liquefaction hazard zone requires adherence to the guidelines
                              for evaluating and mitigating seismic hazards as required by California Public
                              Resources Code Section 2695(a). Before a development permit can be granted
                              for a site within a seismic hazard zone, a geotechnical investigation of the site
                              must be conducted and appropriate mitigation measures incorporated into the
                              project design. Mitigation of liquefaction hazards can include edge contain-
                              ment structures (e.g. berms, dikes, retaining walls, etc.), driving piles, removal
                              or treatment of liquefiable soils, or modification of site geometry.
                              The city’s Building Division implements and enforces the Carlsbad Municipal
                              Code and the California Building Code regulations relative to seismic risk to
                              development. Chapter 18.07 of the Carlsbad Municipal Code specifies the need
                              and establishes guidelines for the seismic upgrade of unreinforced masonry
                              buildings.
                              4	 Deméré, Thomas A., Ph.D., San Diego Natural History Museum, Geology of San Diego County,
                                 California, http://www.sdnhm.org/archive/research/paleontology/sdfaults.html, accessed on
                                 September 25, 2012b
           6-20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 6-4
                                                   78
                City of
             OCEANSIDE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GENERAL 6-4:	 PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Geology
                Oceanside                       RO                RD
                                            M AR N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Geologic Map of the Oceanside
                            Buena                                 DR                                                                                                                                                                                                              Quadrangle
                                                           AG                                                                                                                                                                                                          78
                            Vista                             E
                            Lagoon                     IL                    EL
                                                          L                                                                                                          Calavera
                                                       V
                                               A   D                                                                                                                 Lake
                                            SB
                                          RL                                  C AM                                                                                                                                                                                                          Alluvium
                                     CA
                                                                                                                                                    VD
                                                                                                                                                E BL
                                                                                   INO                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                    City of
                                                                                                                                              EG                                                                                                                                            Cretaceous marine undivided
                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                           LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oceanside
                                                                                                             ACK
                                                                                     R EA
                                                                                         L             AR                                CO                                                                                                                                                 Eocene marine
                                                                    VE                                   M
                                                             C    KA                                TA                                                                                                                                                                                      Mesozoic granitic rocks
                                                           RA
                                                 MA                                                                                                 RD
                                               TA                                                                                       ON
                                                                                                                                      NN                                                                                                                                                    Upper Cretaceous marine
                                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                                    EL
                                                                                                                                            CA                                                                 Maerkle                                                                      Mesozoic volcanic and metavolcanic
                                                                                                                                                 MIN                                                           Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                               RE                                                                                                                           Pliocene marine
                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                              Agu a                                                                                                  L
                                     CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Water
                                                                  Hed ion d a                                                                                                                                                                                        SAN MARCOS
                                     RLS                                L agoon
                                        D                                                                                                 FARA                                                                                                  City of
                                      BA                                                                                                        DA Y
                                                                                                                                                          AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vista                                      Highways
                                                                         C AN N                                                                              E
P a c i f i c                               BLV                                ON           RD
                                              D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Major Street
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                          PALO M A
                                                                                                                                                                                                             R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T RD                                                                  Planned Street
                                                                                                                                                                     MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                      -PALOMAR                                                                                                              Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                       AIRPORT                                                                                         City of
                                                                                                          ORT                 RD                                                                                                                                     San Marcos
                                                                                                    A I RP                                                                                                                                                                                  City Limits
                                                                                        PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                             BLE
                                                                                                                                                                         C           VIDA R O                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                             A M INO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ETT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IA    LN                            LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   INS                                    ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                ETT
                                                                                                                                    IA                                                                                                          A R
                                                                                                                              NS                                                                                                          ALG
                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                     PO                           AV
                                                                                  CAR
                                                                                                                                                     IA   RA
                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                       AD
                                                                                   LSB
                                                                                                                                                                    Y
                                                                                                                                                                 KW
                                                                                            D
                                                                                        BLV
                                                                                                                                         Ba tiq uitos            Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                             AVE
                                                                                                                                                 LA        C O STA                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                                                                                                             EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MIN O                                        FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                     S AN                                                    City of
                                                                                                                                                            Encinitas                               RE                                       N TA
                                                                                                                    ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                     AL
                                                                                                                RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SA                                                                              100
                                                                                                            O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                                                                             ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                                      D IE G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           0.5          1                        2
                                                                                                                  N RR                                                                                                                                                                                         Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; DUDEK, 2013; SANDAG, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                   ENCINITAS                                                                                      Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6-21

5
                                                                                                                                                   Figure 6-5
                                                                                                                                      76           Figure
                                                                                                                                                   GENERAL    6-5:	 PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                       Earthquake Faults
                                                                                                                                                   Earthquake Faults
                                                                               15
            5
                                                       76
                                                                                                                                                             Earthquake Fault Lines
                                                                                                                                                             Freeway
                                                                                                                                                             Major Highway
                                                                                                                                                             Minor Highway/Major Street
                                                          Vista                                                                                              Passenger Rail Lines
                Oceanside
                                                                                                                                                             County Lines
                                                                78      San                                                                                  City of Carlsbad
                                                                       Marcos
                                                                                                                                                             Urban Areas
                          CARLSBAD                                                               Escondido
                                                                                                                  San Diego                          78
                                                                                                                                                78
                                   Encinitas
                                                                                                                                         Ramona
                                        Solana Beach
                                                                                                                            67
                                                                                            15            Poway                                    SAN DIEGO
                                               Del Mar                      56
  P a c i f i c
   O c e a n                                                             San
                                                                        Diego
                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                              79
                                                                   805
                                                                                                                        Santee
                                                                    52
                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                   125           El
                                                                                                                                Cajon
                                                                          163
                                                                                               8
                                                                                   San Diego              La Mesa
                                                                                                                                                   0                3                6                         12
                                                                                  Metropolitan                               94
                                                                                                                                                                                   Miles
                                                                                                                                                   Source: ESRI, 2009; City of Carlsbad, 2013; DUDEK, 2013;
                                                                                                            Lemon
                                                                                      Area                  Grove
                                                                                                                                                            USGS, 2002; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                   94
                                                                                                                                                                                                            6-23

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 6-6
                                                   78
                City of
             OCEANSIDE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GENERAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 6-6:	 PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Liquefaction Hazards
                Oceanside                        RO               RD
                                             M AR N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Liquefaction Hazard
                            Buena                                 DR
                                                           AG                                                                                                                                                                                                          78
                            Vista
                            Lagoon                     IL
                                                              E              EL                                                                                                                                                                                                   Potential Liquefaction
                                                          L                                                                                                          Calavera
                                                       V
                                                   D                                                                                                                 Lake                                                                                                                   Riverwash
                                              BA
                                         AR
                                            LS                                C AM
                                                                                                                                                    VD
                                     C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Tidal flats
                                                                                                                                                E BL
                                                                                   INO                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                    City of
                                                                                                                                              EG
                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                           LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oceanside                                                                                Tujunga sand, 0 to 5 percent slopes
                                                                                                             ACK
                                                                                     R EA
                                                                                                       AR                                CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Other Hazard
                                                                                         L
                                                                     E                                   M
                                                                  AV                                TA
                                                             CK
                                                           RA
                                                 MA                                                                                                 RD
                                               TA                                                                                       ON
                                                                                                                                      NN                                                                                                                                                    Highways
                                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                                    EL
                                                                                                                                            CA
                                                                                                                                                 MIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Maerkle                                                                      Major Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                               RE                                                                                                                           Planned Street
                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                              Agu a                                                                                                  L
                                     CA                           Hed ion d a                                                                                                                                                                                        SAN MARCOS             Railroad
                                     RLS                                L agoon
                                           D                                                                                              FARA                                                                                                  City of
                                         BA                                                                                                     DA Y                                                                                                                                        City Limits
                                                                                                                                                          AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vista
                                                                         C AN N                                                                              E
P a c i f i c                               BLV                                ON           RD
                                               D
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                          PALO M A
                                                                                                                                                                                                             R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T RD
                                                                                                                                                                     MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                      -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                       AIRPORT                                                                                         City of
                                                                                                          ORT                 RD                                                                                                                                     San Marcos
                                                                                                    A I RP
                                                                                        PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                             BLE
                                                                                                                                                                         C           VIDA R O                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                             A M INO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ETT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IA    LN                            LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   INS                                    ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                ETT
                                                                                                                                    IA                                                                                                          A R
                                                                                                                              NS                                                                                                          ALG
                                                                                                                     P   OI
                                                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                  CAR
                                                                                                                                                     IA   RA
                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                       AD
                                                                                   LSB
                                                                                                                                                                    Y
                                                                                                                                                                 KW
                                                                                            D
                                                                                        BLV
                                                                                                                                         Ba tiq uitos            Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                             AVE
                                                                                                                                                 LA        C O STA                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                                                                                                             EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MIN O                                        FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                     S AN                                                    City of
                                                                                                                                                            Encinitas                               RE                                       N TA
                                                                                                                    ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                     AL
                                                                                                                RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SA                                                                              100
                                                                                                            O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                                                                             ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                                      D IE G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           0.5          1                        2
                                                                                                                  N RR                                                                                                                                                                                         Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; DUDEK, 2013; SANDAG, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                   ENCINITAS                                                                                      Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6-25

                                                                                       General Plan
6.5	 Airport Hazards
For land use policies related to the airport, see Chapter 2: Land Use and
Community Design. For noise policies related to the airport, see Chapter 5: Noise                 6
                                                                                                      Public Safety
Element.
The McClellan-Palomar Airport, located in Carlsbad, serves the northern part
of San Diego County. The airport, owned and operated by the County of San
Diego, is defined by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) as a commer-
cial service airport that, in addition to private aircraft, has regularly scheduled
commercial flights to Los Angeles International Airport (LAX). The McClellan-
Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) is prepared according
to Federal Aviation Administration requirements and adopted by the San Diego
County Regional Airport Authority acting as the Airport Land Use Commis-
sion for the County of San Diego. The ALUCP provides measures to minimize
the public’s exposure to excessive noise and safety hazards within areas around
the airport, and identifies areas likely to be impacted by noise and flight activity
created by aircraft operations at the airport. These impacted areas include the
Airport Influence Area (AIA), the Clear Zone, and the Flight Activity Zone. The
AIA, shown in Figure 6-7, includes a large portion of the City of Carlsbad, as
well as portions of the cities of Vista, San Marcos, and Escondido.
Within the AIA, the ALUCP establishes six safety zones for the purpose of
evaluating safety compatibility of new/future land use actions. The safety zone
boundaries depict relative risk of aircraft accidents occurring near the airport
and are derived from general aviation aircraft accident location data and data
regarding the airport’s runway configuration and airport operational proce-
dures. The ALUCP limits development intensities in these zones by imposing
floor area and lot coverage maximums, by incorporating risk reduction
measures in the design and construction of buildings, and/or by restricting
certain uses altogether. Generally, allowable uses and development intensities
range from most restrictive in Safety Zone 1 to least restrictive in Safety Zone
6 (these are shown in Figure 5-4). For example, all residential and virtually all
non-residential uses are considered incompatible land uses in Zone 1, while all
land uses in Zone 6 are considered to be either compatible or conditionally-
compatible with the airport.
The FAA establishes airspace protection zones in the airspace above and sur-
rounding airports in order to protect aircraft from obstructions such as
buildings, towers, etc. in navigable airspace. Airspace protection zones are
defined in Part 77 of the Code of Federal Aviation Regulations; the protected
airspace around McClellan-Palomar Airport is depicted in Figure 6-7.
The ALUCP also requires that certain development projects record overflight
notification documents in order to provide constructive notice to current
and prospective property owners of aircraft activity within the vicinity of the
                                                                                                6-27

           City of Carlsbad
6
                              airport. Under certain circumstances, developers of specific properties may
                              be required to grant avigation easements to the airport owner (County of San
                              Diego). Among other things, an avigation easement grants the right of flight in
                              the airspace above the property, allows the generation of noise and other impacts
Public Safety
                              associated with overflight, restricts the height of structures, trees and other
                              objects on the property, prohibits potential on ground flight hazards (sources
                              of light/glare, etc.) and permits access to the property to remove or mark objects
                              exceeding the established height limit. Figure 6-7 depicts the avigation easement
                              and overflight notification areas surrounding the airport.
                              The city requires review of all proposed development projects within the AIA.
                              New development proposals must process a site development plan, or other
                              development permit, and be found to be consistent or conditionally consis-
                              tent with applicable land use compatibility policies with respect to noise, safety,
                              airspace protection, and overflight, as contained in the ALUCP. Additionally,
                              development proposals are required to comply with FAA regulations con-
                              cerning the construction or alteration of structures that may affect navigable
                              airspace.
           6-28
                                                                78                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 6-7
      C i t y of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure  6-7:	 McClellan-Palomar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CARLSBAD       GENERAL PLAN   Airport
    O ce a n s i d e                                                        MARR ON RD
                          W
                           Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Influence   Area/Safety Zones
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    McClellan-Palomar Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Influence Area/Safety Zones
         T        TA
       AS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LAKE
     CO       VIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BLVD
                                                                                         DR
                               Buena
             HW                Vista          5                             LA
              Y                                                               GE
                               Lagoon                                   IL
                                                                            V                                                                                                                                                Calavera                                                                                    ME
                                                                    A   D                                                                                                                                                                                                           N           RD                            LR
                                                                 SB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Lake                                                 NO                                            O
                                                               RL                                                                                                                                                                                                               AN
                                                             CA                                                                                                                                                                                                             C                                                        DR                                 DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SE                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RI
                                                                                                                                                                           AV                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                             E                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           W                                                                                Airport Safety Zones
                                                                                                                            M                                                                          LLEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                     EL C A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SH A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CO
                                                                                                                                                                       ACK
                                                                                                                                                                      AR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Zone 1- Runway Protection Zone
                                                                                                                         I NO                                    AM                                        B LV
                                                                                                                                                                   T                                         D
                                                                                        MA
                                                                                          RACK
                                                                                                                                RE
                                                                                                                                AL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Zone 2 - Inner Approach/Departure Zone
                                                                                     TA
                                                                                                       A   VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E AVE                                   Zone 3 - Inner Turning Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                       RD
                                                                                                                                                                                               ON
                                                                                                                                                                                             NN                                                                                                                                                                                                 OR
                                                                                                                                                                                        CA                                                                                                                                                                                                     M                                            Zone 4 - Outer Approach/Departure Zone
                                           CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Squires                                                                             CA
                                              RL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Reservoir                                                                      SY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6                                                                                                                                                                                               Zone 5 - Sideline Zone
                                                     AD
                                                  SB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BUSINESS PA RK
                                                        VD                      Ag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Zone 6 - Traffic Pattern Zone
                                                      BL                             ua
                                                                                          He
                                                                                               dio
                                                                                                     nda
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Avigation Easement Areas*
                                                                                                           Lago
                                                                                                                  on                                                                                  FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                        DR                                                        Airport Overflight Notification Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                           DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                        RA     YA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VE                                         EL                                                                                      Vis ta                                                                                  (only applies to new resdiential development)
                                                                                                      CANN                                                                                                                                                   CA                                                               6
                                                                                                                ON
                                                                                                                        RD                                                                                                                                       MI                                        4                                                                                                                                Airport Property Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MCCLELLAN-                                       RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PALOMAR                                         AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2                                                                                                                                                   City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AIRPORT                                                        AR AIRPORT
                                                                                                                                                                                                D                                                                               PALOM                              RD
                                                                                                                                                                                             BLV                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                      GE                                        5                c ti o n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                   LLE 3                                              te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a y P ro                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                              CO                                  Runw
                                                                                                                                 6                                                                    1                             5
                                                                                                                                                                           4            2                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of                                         Major Road
                                                                                                                                                                   AIRPORT         RD
                                                                                                                                                     MAR                                                                                                           4                                                                                       ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Mar cos
                                                                                                                                                 PALO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Planned Road
                                                                                                                                                                                            3                                                                                                                                                                     SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LR                                                 FE
                                                                                                                                                                                 IAR
                                                                                                                                                                                    A                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AM         IDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ROBL E                                                                                                   DR                                            NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A                        Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                               AV                                                               I NO V                                                                  LN                                                                                  SA
                                                                                                                                       PASEO                                                                                                                                                                     TIA                                                                                 HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P   OIN                                                                             RAN                                              *Defined as the Runway Protection Zone or
                                                                                                                                                                                    PK W
                                                                                                                                                     ORTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            within the contour of the 65 dB CNEL or
                                                                                                                                                   LN
                                                                                                                                                                                        Y
                                                                                                                                                 DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            areas where the ground penetrates a Part 77
                                                                                                                                                                                                LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            airspace surface.
                                                                                                                                                                                      TIA                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                                   SET                                                                                                                                                         RD
                                                                                                                                                                                 IN
                                                                                                                                       A ENC I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                               PO                                                                                                                                                   ALG
                                                                                                                                    NID
                                                                                                                                 AVE
                                                                                                                 CAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AV
                                                                                                                  LSB                                                                                                   IA
                                                                                                                     AD                   S                                                                                 PK
                                                                                                                                        NA                                                                               RA    W
                                                                                                                         BLV                                                                                                       Y
                                                                                                                           D
                  Pacific
                                                                                                                                                                                    Bat
                  Ocean                                                                                                                                                                     iquitos Lagoon
                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA COSTA AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LA C
                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                             SAN                                                City of
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Encinitas
                                                                                                                                                               DIEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TA
                                                                                                                                                       COA                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                         RR                                                                                                       MIN                                                             FE
                                                                                                                                                                    HERN                                                                                                        CA                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                                                ORT
                                                                                                                                                            O N                                                                                                                          REAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SA
                                                                                                                                                                  HWY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CH
0      1/4          1/2                   1                                          2                                                                        ST                                                                                                                                                              RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                        MILES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OLIVENHAIN RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                          LEUCADIA BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Source: McClellan-Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan, 2010.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6-29

                                                                                       General Plan
6.6	 Railroad Hazards
For Mobility policies related to the railroad, see Chapter 3: Mobility. For noise
policies related to the railroad, see Chapter 5: Noise Element. Safety hazards                    6
                                                                                                      Public Safety
related to transportation of hazardous materials are discussed in Section 6.7,
below.
The North County Transit District (NCTD) owns the north/south railroad
that parallels Carlsbad’s entire seven-mile coastline, as well as Interstate-5 and
Carlsbad Boulevard. NCTD operates the Coaster commuter rail service on this
rail line and owns two passenger rail stations located within the city: Carlsbad
Village and Carlsbad Poinsettia stations. The Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe
freight line and the Amtrak passenger service also use the rail line through the
city.
The railroad, while providing a vital service for passenger transit and goods
movement through the city, presents potential safety concerns in the city. The
railroad acts as a barrier and restricts east/west access for emergency services; it
also results in the potential for train collisions with automobiles, bicyclists and
pedestrians. Fatal train incidents have occurred in the Carlsbad Village section
of the railway, all involving pedestrians.
As part of the North Coast Corridor (NCC) Program, the San Diego Associa-
tion of Governments (SANDAG) plans, during the next 20 years, to construct
nearly $820 million in improvements to the San Diego County rail corridor,
including a primary effort to double track the corridor from Orange County
to downtown San Diego. Double tracking the rail corridor through San Diego
County will add the capacity for approximately 100 more railcars per day
through the corridor. To date, approximately half of the rail corridor has been
double tracked. Other infrastructure improvements planned by SANDAG
include bridge and track replacements, new platforms, pedestrian under-cross-
ings, and other safety and operational enhancements.
Along the rail corridor through Carlsbad, SANDAG is considering two options
for double tracking the railroad: at-grade tracks and grade-separated tracks
(railroad tracks located in a trench below street grade). The city is working
closely with SANDAG and other agencies to encourage and support the grade-
separated option, which would increase east-west crossings and improve
east-west access for emergency services, and would reduce the potential for
train collisions with automobiles, bicyclists and pedestrians.
                                                                                                6-31

           City of Carlsbad
6                             6.7	 Hazardous Materials
                              Hazardous materials include a wide variety of substances commonly used in
                              households and businesses. Motor oil, paint, solvents, lawn care and gardening
Public Safety
                              products, household cleaners, gasoline, and refrigerants are among the diverse
                              range of substances classified as hazardous materials. Nearly all businesses and
                              residences generate some amount of hazardous waste. Certain businesses and
                              industries, including gas stations, automotive service and repair shops, printers,
                              dry cleaners, and photo processors, generate larger amounts of such substances.
                              Hospitals, clinics, and laboratories generate medical waste, much of which is
                              also potentially hazardous.
                              Some hazardous materials present a radiation risk. Radioactive materials,
                              if handled improperly, or if radiation is accidentally released into the envi-
                              ronment, can be dangerous because of the harmful effects of certain types of
                              radiation on the human body.
                              Hazardous Materials Transport
                              Major transportation routes within Carlsbad include Interstate 5 and State
                              Route 78, surface streets, and the San Diego Northern railroad. Petroleum
                              pipelines, as well as the oil and natural gas pipelines to the Encina Power Plant,
                              also traverse through Carlsbad, and there are high pressure fuel lines along El
                              Camino Real and other areas, as shown in Figure 6-8. These transportation
                              routes and pipelines are used to transport hazardous materials from suppliers
                              to users. Transportation accidents involving hazardous materials could occur
                              on any of the routes, potentially resulting in explosions, physical contact by
                              emergency response personnel, environmental degradation, and exposure to
                              the public.
                              Hazardous Materials Facilities
                              The County of San Diego, through its California Environmental Protection
                              Agency (CalEPA) Unified Program, has recorded (as of 2012) approximately
                              338 facilities within Carlsbad that store and maintain chemical, biological, and
                              radiological agents, and explosives. In addition, there are 180 facilities within
                              the city that are registered with the U.S. EPA as generators of hazardous waste.5
                              Potential Environmental Hazards
                              Sites within the City of Carlsbad where the presence of hazardous materials
                              present potential environmental hazards were identified using information
                              from state databases and a review of online regulatory files for select sites. The
                              databases used were EnviroStor, which identifies hazardous waste facility and
                              5	 County of San Diego, 2010, San Diego County Multi-Jurisdiction Hazard Mitigation Plan, page
                                 4-51.
           6-32
                                                                                      06 03                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 6-8
                                                                                  230 138                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure  6-8:	 Electric and Gas Trasmission Lines
                                                                                             10
                                                       78
                City of
             OCEANSIDE                                                                02 230                                                                                                2                                                                                                     GENERAL PLAN
                Oceanside                            RO               RD          230                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                          80 02
                                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                 M AR N                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Electric and Gas Transmission Lines
                            Buena                                     DR
                                                               AG                                                                                                                                                                                                                 78
                            Vista
                            Lagoon                         IL
                                                                  E             EL                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Electric Substations
                                                              L                                                                                                       Calavera
                                                           V
                                                  B   AD                                                                                                              Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Electric Transmission Lines*
                                            R   LS                               C AM
                                         CA
                                                                                                                                                     VD
                                                                                                                                                 E BL
                                                                                   INO                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             230 KV
                                                                                                                                               EG
                                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                            LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oceanside
                                                                                                              ACK                                                                                                                                                                                            138 KV
                                                                                       R EA
                                                                                         L              AR                                CO
                                                                         E                                M                                                                                                                                                                                       Gas Transmission Lines*
                                                                      AV                             TA
                                                                 CK
                                                               RA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Above 200 psi
                                                        MA                                                                                           RD
                                                      TA                                                                                 ON
                                                                                                                                       NN
                                                                                                                                  CA                                                                                                                                                                         Above 60 psi
                                                                                                                                     EL
                                                                                                                                             CA                                                                        Maerkle
                                                                                                                                                  MIN                                                                  Reservoir                                                                             Petroleum Gas Mains
                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                                                                                RE
                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                          Agu a                                                                                                       L
                                        CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Highways
                                                              Hed ion d a                                                                                                                                                                                                       SAN MARCOS
                                         RLS           CANNON L agoon
                                            D                                                                                              FARA                                                                                                            City of                                           Major Street
                                          BA                                                                                                     DA Y
                                                                                                                                                           AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Vista
                                     ENCINA     BLV
                                                                             C AN N
                                                                                   ON
                                                                                                                                                              E                                                                                                                                              Planned Street
P a c i f i c                                     D
                                                                                              RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Railroad
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                               PALO M A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T RD
                                                                                                                                                                      MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                       -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                        AIRPORT                                                                                                   City of
                                                                                                           ORT                 RD                                                                                                                                               San Marcos
                                                                                                     A I RP
                                                                                         PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                                BLE
                                                                                                                                                                          C             VIDA R O                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                              A M INO                                             TIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LN                             LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I NSET                                    ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                      23012                                N
                                                                                                                                             L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                         13807                   ETT
                                                                                                                                     IA                                                                                                                    A R
                                                                                                                               NS                                                                                                                   ALG
                                                                                                                           I                                                                                   13
                                                                                                                      PO                           AV                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                  CAR
                                                                                                                                                      IA   RA
                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                         AD
                                                                                     LSB
                                                                                                                                                                     Y                                                                   BATIQUITOS
                                                                                                                                                                  KW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   23
                                                                                             D                                                                                                                                       01                13
                                                                                         BLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1                  82
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  * Note that the location of electric transmission lines and gas
                                                                                                                                                                  Lago o n                                                                                                                        transmission pipelines are approximate. The map provides a
                                                                                                                                          Ba tiq uitos
                                                                                                                                                                              AVE                                                                                                                 generalized guide and is not an authoritative depiction of where
                                                                                                                                                  LA        C O STA                                                                                  A                                            the risks are more likely. A site-specific study should be performed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CO                                                   for detail analysis.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                    EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      MIN O                                              FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D                         23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00
                                                                                                      S AN                                                    City of                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                             Encinitas                                   RE                                            N TA                               23
                                                                                                                     ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          AL
                                                                                                                 RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SA                                        80                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                             O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O                                                                                       ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                       D IE G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0            0.5           1                           2
                                                                                                                   N RR                                                                                                                                                                                                            Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Source: City of Carlsbad, 1994; SANDAG, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                    ENCINITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6-33

                                                                                      General Plan
                                                                                                 6
cleanup sites, and SWRCB GeoTracker, which identifies permitted underground
storage tanks (UST) and cleanup sites. The databases included the following
types of sites: release sites (cleanup sites), UST sites, permitted hazardous waste
facilities, wastewater treatment tiered permit facilities, and proposed school
                                                                                                     Public Safety
sites evaluated by the California DTSC for the presence of hazardous materials.
The hazardous materials sites identified in the EnviroStor and GeoTracker
databases were evaluated as part of the General Plan Environmental Impact
Report (EIR) in order to rank the sites in terms of potential environmental
concern.
Using the databases, a total of 214 hazardous materials sites with 126 unique
listings were identified within Carlsbad (see the General Plan EIR for details
of the listings). A total of 110 of those unique site listings have had known
releases, while the remaining 16 have not had known releases. The San Diego
Regional Water Quality Control Board’s Geographic Environmental Informa-
tion Management System is a data warehouse that tracks regulatory data about
underground fuel tanks, fuel pipelines and public drinking water supplies using
GeoTracker; as information in the database is periodically updated, the database
should be consulted for current information.
                                                                                               6-35

           City of Carlsbad
6                             6.8	 Police, Fire, and Emergency
                                   Services
Public Safety
                              Police Services
                              The Carlsbad Police Department conducts its safety services out of the Carlsbad
                              Public Safety and Service Center located on Orion Way. The Public Safety Center
                              location is depicted on Figure 6-9. The patrol division is the core of the Police
                              Department’s law enforcement services, responding to more than 90,000 calls
                              for service annually. Although street patrols are the majority of the division’s
                              activity, other special services include canine units, bicycle patrol, crisis nego-
                              tiations, bilingual services, tactical response team (SWAT; Special Weapons and
                              Tactics) and mental health assistance teams.
                              In May 2012, the Carlsbad Safety Training Center was completed to provide
                              necessary training for local police, fire and other safety workers. The training
                              center is located next to the Public Safety and Service Center, and includes a
                              shooting range and structures that can be used to simulate fires in residential
                              and commercial buildings as well as help police conduct tactical training.
                              Anticipated Space Needs for the Police Department
                              To accommodate population growth, the Police Department expects to grow
                              to a point where it will need to occupy the space inside the Public Safety and
                              Service Center that is currently occupied by Fire Administration. Alternative
                              solutions the Police Department is considering include relocating some or all
                              Police Department services to another facility, relocating Fire Administra-
                              tion to another facility, or expanding the Public Safety and Service Center to
                              accommodate Police Department growth and the continued presence of Fire
                              Administration. Also needed by the Police Department is a secure storage
                              facility for large pieces of evidence, such as vehicles.
                              Fire and Emergency Medical Services
                              The City of Carlsbad has six fire stations, indicated on Figure 6-9. The oldest of
                              the stations was constructed in 1966, while the newest was completed in 2009.
                              Fire Operations is the largest division within the Carlsbad Fire Department and
                              is responsible for fire suppression, rescue, emergency medical service delivery
                              and disaster mitigation. The Fire Department delivers advanced life support
                              level care on all fire engines and ambulances, including a licensed paramedic.
                              Currently, more than 75 percent of the city’s fire suppression personnel are
                              licensed paramedics; frequently multiple paramedics are available on-scene at
                              emergency incidents.
                              City of Carlsbad SWAT medics are firefighter/paramedics on special assign-
                              ment working alongside the Carlsbad Police Department SWAT team. SWAT
           6-36

                                               Lagoon
                                            Observation
                                                  Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 6-9
                                                                               78
                   City of
                OCEANSIDE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GENERAL 6-9:	 PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Public Safety Services
                       Oceanside                                             RO            RD
                                                                         M AR N
                                                                   Hosp Grove
                                                                                                              Hidden Canyon                                    Hope
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Public Safety Services
                                                            Buena Park/Trailheads                                                        Hope                  Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                  Calavera Hills
                                                                                                              Community Park
                                        Buena                Vista                        DR                                          Elementary               Field               Elementary/
                                                          Elementary                AG                                                                                                Middle                                                                                                                   78
                                        Vista                                         E                                                                        Calavera
                                        Lagoon                                  IL L                                                                             Hills                                Calavera                                                                                                                     Police Station
                                                                            V                                                                                 Community
                                                                         AD                                                                                                     Calavera              Lake
                                                                     LSB                                                                                         Park           Hills
                                             Carlsbad              R   Fire
                                                               CA StationCarlsbad                                      Fire Station                                           EG
                                                                                                                                                                                Trailhead                                                                                                                                          Fire Station
                                             City Hall                     High                                        #3                                                   LL                                                      City of
                                                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                Oak      #1
                                                                Park
                                                                                                                                                     AV    Calavera
                                   Magee                                                                                                                     Hills                                                                 Oceanside                                                                                       Safety Training Center
                                                                  Holiday                       Magnolia                                         ACK                                VD
                                                                                                                                                                                E BL
                                  House &
                                                                   Park              Valley                             DIST # 3                          Community
                                    Park                                                       Elementary
                                                                                    Middle                                                  AR              Center
                                                                                              E                                              M                                                                                                                                                                                     Community/Senior Centers
                                                                                            AV                                         TA                  Future
       Frazee/Tamarack State
                                                           Jefferson                   A CK                                                               Robertson
        Beach Facilities-Bluffs
                                                                              M     AR                                                                                                  RD
                                                          Elementary        TA
                                                                                                                                                           Ranch
                                                                                                                                                            Park         ON                                                                                                                                                        City Hall
                           Harding                                                                                   Kelly                                             NN
                          Community                                            DIST# 1                            Elementary                                      CA
                            Center                                                                                   Field
                                                                                                                                   Kelly                              EL
                                                                                                                                                                             CA                                                                     Squires
                                 Senior                                                                                         Elementary                                     MIN                                                                  Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                                                  O                                                                                                                                               Public Schools
                                 Center                                                                                                                                                         RE
                                                                                                                            Laguna                                                                A
                                                                                       Agua                                                                                                           L
                                                                                                                            Riveria                                                                                                                                                                                               Existing and Planned Parks
                                                                    BA                                                                                                                                                   Safety Training
                                                                R LS
                                                                                          H ed io nda                        Park                                                   Future                                                                                                                 SAN MARCOS
                                                                                                                                                                                    Zone 5                                   Center
                                                              CA
                                                                                                 La goo n
                                                                                                                                                                           FARA      Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fire Station                                 City of                                        Open Space
                                                                   D                                                                                    Future                  DA  Y                                                                                               Vista
                                                                                                                                                       Veteran's                           AV             DIST # 5                    #5
                                                                           D
                                                                                                 CANN
                                                                                                            ON                                         Memorial                              E                                                                                                                                    Fire Districts
P a c i f i c                                                          BLV                                             RD                                Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Carlsbad Police
                                                                               Future           Car                                                                                                                            Department
 O c e a n                                                                     Cannon
                                                                                Lake
                                                                                                Country
                                                                                                Park                                                                                                                                  PALOM A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R       AIRPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RT   RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Highways
                                                                                Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      -PALOMAR                                                                                                                    Major Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                       AIRPORT                                                                                               City of
                                                                                                                                               RT               RD                                                                                                                                         San Marcos
                                                                                                                                       A   IRPO                                                                                                                                                                                   Planned Street
                                                                                                                   PALOM A R                                                                                                                                                Carrillo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Elementary
                                                                                                                             DIST # 4                                                                                         ROB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LE              Poinsettia                                                                       Railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                           C           VIDA                     Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                               A M INO                                         IA    LN          Carillo Ranch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Alga
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ETT                  Historic Park                                    City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         INS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                              Aviara                                   Norte
                                                                                                                                 Poinsettia                                                                                                           PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ME
                                                                                                                                                                                              Community                                Community
                                                                                                                                 Community                                                    Park                                     Park
                                                                                                                                 Park
                                                                                                                                                    Pacific Rim            LN
                                                                                                                                                    Elementary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                              ETT
                                                                                                                                                                  IA                                                                                                              A R
                                                                                                                                                            NS                                       Aviara Oaks                                                              A LG
                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                      PO                           AV                Elementary/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           El Fuerte
                                                                                                                L SB
                                                                                                                                                                                      IA                Middle
                                                                                                                                                                                           RA                                              DIST # 2                        Park      La Costa
                                                                                                            C AR                      Fire Station # 4                                           P                                                                                 Meadows
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Y                                                                              Elementary
                                                                                                                AD                                                                               KW
                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                                   BLV                                                                                                   Fire Station # 2                                                     Fire Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DIST # 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         La Costa Canyon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Community Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Lago o n                                                                                    Cadencia
                                                                                                                                                                          Ba tiquitos                                                                                                         Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                               AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                  LA         C O STA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CO         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MINO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       La Costa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Heights
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Elementary             Stagecoach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Community                                                            500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D StagecoachCenter
                                                                                                                                        SAN                                                   City of                                                                                  Community
                                                                                                                                                                                             Encinitas                                RE          El Camino                    N TA    Park        La Costa
                                                                                                                                           DI E G                                                                                          AL        Creek                                            Canyon                                                    100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Elementary                SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       High
                                                                                                                                              O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O                                                                                 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H Mission
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Estancia
                                                                                                                                                         RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N        Elementary
                                                                                                                                                     ERN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0            0.5           1                         2
                                                                                                                                                 RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Olivenhain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pioneer                                                              Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Elementary                              Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; SANDAG, 2013; Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ENCINITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6-37

                                                                                                                                        General Plan
                                                                                                                                                            6
medics are also deployed with Carlsbad police officers in support of other law
enforcement units such as the San Diego Sheriff’s SWAT team and the regional
law enforcement task force.
                                                                                                                                                             Public Safety
 Table 6–1:	 FIRE STATIONS SUMMARY
 STATIONS BUILT          ADDRESS                               STAFFING DESCRIPTION
 1             1966      1275 Carlsbad Village Dr.             Crew of five: captain, engineer and three firefighter/paramedics
 2             1969      1906 Arenal Rd.                       Crew of five: captain, engineer and three firefighter/paramedics
 31
               1973      3701 Catalina Dr.                     Crew of three: captain, engineer and firefighter/paramedic
 4             1986      6885 Batiquitos Dr.                   Crew of three: captain, engineer and firefighter/paramedic
 5             1988      2540 Orion Way                        Crew of four: duty battalion chief, captain, engineer, and
                                                               firefighter/paramedic
 6             2009      7201 Rancho Santa Fe Rd.              Crew of three: captain, engineer, and firefighter/paramedic
 1	 Fire Station 3 is planned to be replaced with a new station to be constructed in the Robertson Ranch Master Plan area. Construction of the new sta-
    tion is anticipated to be completed by the end of 2014.
 Source: City of Carlsbad Fire Department Service Provider Information Request, September 2010.
Anticipated Space Needs for the Fire Department
Based on needs identified by the Carlsbad Police Department for additional
space, considerations will need to be made for the relocation of Fire Adminis-
tration in close proximity to Fire Station No. 5 and the Carlsbad Safety Training
Center. At that time, consideration for the relocation of Fire Prevention staff to
the same location should also be made.
The future needs of the Fire Department must be considered when embarking
on the remodeling or rebuilding of a fire station. Three out of the six fire stations
(Fire Stations 1, 2 and 3) are currently minimally meeting the operational needs
of the city. These three stations are 40 years or older and nearing the end of their
service life; Stations 1 and 2 should be considered for major remodel or recon-
struction; Fire Station 3 is planned to be replaced in 2014 with a new station in
the Robertson Ranch Master Plan area. Increased service demands, changes
in staffing, and the increasing size of fire apparatus require considerations for
increasing the size and capabilities of these city facilities.
Wildland Fire Hazards
The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) has
mapped fire threat potential throughout California. CAL FIRE ranks fire
threat according to the availability of fuel and the likelihood of an area burning
(based on topography, fire history, and climate).6 The rankings include little or
no fire threat, moderate, high, and very high fire threat. The large amounts of
open space and wildland make Carlsbad susceptible to brush fires year round.
The proximity of native vegetation and the climate of the region contribute to a
6	 County of San Diego, 2010, San Diego County Multi-Jurisdiction Hazard Mitigation Plan, page
   4-89.
                                                                                                                                                          6-39

           City of Carlsbad
6
                              moderate to high threat of wildfires in the city, as illustrated in Figure 6-10. Most
                              of Carlsbad has only moderate fire threat; however there is high and very high
                              fire threat in the central and eastern portions of the city.7
                              Urban Fire Hazards
Public Safety
                              Urban fire risk in Carlsbad is greatest in older structures and neighborhoods
                              built before modern building codes for fire safety and building systems were
                              in place. Other factors affecting urban fire risk and relative likelihood of loss
                              of life or property include building age, height and use; storage of flammable
                              material; building construction materials; availability of sprinkler systems; and
                              proximity to a fire station and hydrants.
                              Peakload Water Supply Requirement
                              The Carlsbad Fire Department requires a minimum flow of water for fire pro-
                              tection in accordance with the adopted amended California Fire Code and
                              the Insurance Services Office standards. Water mains serving single-family
                              detached houses must provide a flow of 1,500 gallons per minute, in addition
                              to the peak normal maximum daily consumption needs for a neighborhood.
                              The required fire-flow standard for commercial, industrial, manufacturing
                              and large apartment buildings varies from 1,500 to 8,000 gallons per minute, in
                              addition to the peak normal daily consumption needs. This standard is based
                              on type of construction, type of use and any built-in fire protection (sprinklers,
                              etc.).
                              There are currently no known water flow pressure or supply deficiencies in
                              Carlsbad. The Carlsbad Fire Marshal reviews proposed projects to ensure
                              adequate fire hydrant locations, water flow pressure, and access for emergency
                              vehicles is provided.
                              Minimum Road Widths and Clearances Around Structures
                              Clear emergency vehicle access to buildings is important. Such access is
                              regulated by the adopted and amended California Fire Code and adopted
                              Carlsbad land development engineering standards. Under the current Fire
                              Code, all portions of a building shall be within 150 feet of a serviceable fire access
                              road.
                              7	 County of San Diego, 2010, San Diego County Multi-Jurisdiction Hazard Mitigation Plan, page
                                 4-93 and 4-94.
           6-40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 6-11
                                                   78
                City of
             OCEANSIDE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GENERAL 6-10:	PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Structure Fire/Wildfire Threat
                Oceanside                        RO               RD
                                             M AR N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Structure Fire/Wildfire Threat
                            Buena                                 DR
                                                           AG                                                                                                                                                                                                          78
                            Vista
                            Lagoon                     IL
                                                              E              EL                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fire Hazard Severity Zones
                                                          L                                                                                                          Calavera
                                                       V
                                              B   AD                                                                                                                 Lake                                                                                                                   Very High Threat
                                        R   LS                                C AM
                                     CA
                                                                                                                                                    VD                                                                                                                                      High Threat
                                                                                                                                                E BL
                                                                                   INO                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                    City of
                                                                                                                                              EG
                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                           LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oceanside                                                                                Moderate Threat
                                                                                                             ACK
                                                                                     R EA
                                                                                                       AR                                CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Little or No Threat
                                                                                         L
                                                                     E                                   M
                                                                  AV                                TA
                                                             CK
                                                           RA                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Urban
                                                    MA                                                                                              RD
                                                  TA                                                                                    ON
                                                                                                                                      NN
                                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                                    EL
                                                                                                                                            CA                                                                 Maerkle                                                                      Highways
                                                                                                                                                 MIN                                                           Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                               RE                                                                                                                           Major Street
                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                              Agu a                                                                                                  L
                                     CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Planned Street
                                                                  Hed ion d a                                                                                                                                                                                        SAN MARCOS
                                     RLS                                L agoon
                                        D                                                                                                 FARA                                                                                                  City of
                                      BA                                                                                                        DA Y                                                                                                                                        Railroad
                                                                                                                                                          AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vista
                                                                         C AN N                                                                              E
P a c i f i c                               BLV                                ON           RD                                                                                                                                                                                              City Limits
                                              D
 O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                          PALO M A
                                                                                                                                                                                                             R AIRPO R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T RD
                                                                                                                                                                     MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                      -PALOMAR
                                                                                                                                                                       AIRPORT                                                                                         City of
                                                                                                          ORT                 RD                                                                                                                                     San Marcos
                                                                                                    A I RP
                                                                                        PALOM A R
                                                                                                                                                                                             BLE
                                                                                                                                                                         C           VIDA R O                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                             A M INO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ETT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IA    LN                            LRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   INS                                    ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                ETT
                                                                                                                                    IA                                                                                                          A R
                                                                                                                              NS                                                                                                          ALG
                                                                                                                     P   OI
                                                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                  CAR
                                                                                                                                                     IA   RA
                                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                       AD
                                                                                   LSB
                                                                                                                                                                    Y
                                                                                                                                                                 KW
                                                                                            D
                                                                                        BLV
                                                                                                                                         Ba tiq uitos            Lago o n
                                                                                                                                                                             AVE
                                                                                                                                                 LA        C O STA                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        STA V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                                                                                                             EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MIN O                                        FE R
                                                                                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          500 ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                     S AN                                                    City of
                                                                                                                                                            Encinitas                               RE                                       N TA
                                                                                                                    ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                     AL
                                                                                                                RTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SA                                                                              100
                                                                                                            O NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                                                                             ACRES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                                      D IE G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0           0.5          1                        2
                                                                                                                  N RR                                                                                                                                                                                         Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Source: City of Carlsbad, 2013; DUDEK, 2013; SANDAG, 2013;
                                                                                                                                                                                   ENCINITAS                                                                                      Dyett & Bhatia, 2013.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6-41

                                                                                   General Plan
6.9	 Emergency Preparedness
Coordination and Management                                                                   6
                                                                                                  Public Safety
Chapter 6.04 of the Carlsbad Municipal Code defines the organization, power
and duties of the City of Carlsbad emergency organization. The City of Carlsbad
Fire Department’s Emergency Preparedness Division supports the emergency
organization by further defining the scope of the city’s emergency manage-
ment program and large-scale incident response activities. The strategic focus
of the emergency management program is contained in the Emergency Pre-
paredness Division’s mission statement. Carlsbad’s Emergency Management
Administrative Team (CEMAT) assists the Emergency Preparedness Division
in preparedness, response, recovery and mitigation tasks. By resolution, the
city has adopted the State of California Standardized Emergency Management
System (SEMS), National Incident Management System (NIMS) and Incident
Command System (ICS) as its emergency management systems. All City of
Carlsbad employees are disaster service workers. Carlsbad’s Community
Emergency Response Team (CERT) is made up of City of Carlsbad disaster
volunteers and reports to the Emergency Preparedness Division, or the EOC
in the event of an actual disaster. In general, the City of Carlsbad Emergency
Operations Plan (EOP) further establishes and details emergency organization,
assigns tasks, specifies policies and general procedures, and provides for coor-
dination of planning efforts of the various emergency staff and service elements
utilizing SEMS, NIMS and ICS. The city’s EOP identifies the city’s Emergency
Operations Center (EOC) as the location from which centralized emergency
management would be performed during a major emergency or disaster,
including receiving and disseminating information, maintaining contact with
other EOCs and providing instructions to the public. Emergency prepared-
ness and disaster response information is shared with the public through
the City of Carlsbad’s website, reverse-911 systems, social media including
“sdemergency”mobile application, traditional media, public outreach and the
EOC hotline, when activated.
Evacuation Routes
Carlsbad is a participant in the Unified San Diego County Emergency Services
Organization (USDCESO). The USDCESO Operational Area Emergency Plan
(October 2010) contains evacuation routes resulting from a variety of emer-
gencies. Evacuation routes in this document are incorporated by reference in
this General Plan; the document can be accessed at http://www.co.san-diego.
ca.us/oes/emergency_management/protected/docs/2010_Complete_Plan_w_
Annexes.pdf
City of Carlsbad EOP Annex Q (2013) provides Carlsbad-specific evacuation
information and is available in the EOC.
                                                                                            6-43

           City of Carlsbad
6                             6.10	Goals and Policies
                              Goals
Public Safety
                              6-G.1	 Minimize injury, loss of life, and damage to property resulting from
                                     fire, flood, hazardous material release, or seismic disasters.
                              6-G.2	 Minimize safety hazards related to aircraft operations in areas
                                     around the McClellan-Palomar Airport.
                              6-G.3	 Maintain safety services that are responsive to citizens’ needs to
                                     ensure a safe and secure environment for people and property in
                                     the community.
                              6-G.4	 Minimize safety hazards related to emergency service, automobile,
                                     bicycle and pedestrian access across the railroad.
                              Policies
                              Flooding and Coastal Hazards
                              6-P.1	 Enforce the Cobey-Alquist Floodplain Management Act and the
                                     city’s Floodplain Management Regulations to prohibit construction
                                     of structures in a designated floodway where such development
                                     would endanger life or significantly restrict the carrying capacity
                                     of the designated floodway; and to regulate development within
                                     other areas of special flood hazard, flood related erosion hazard
                                     and mudslide hazard to ensure such development does not
                                     adversely affect public health and safety due to water and erosion
                                     hazards, or result in damaging increases in erosion, flood height or
                                     velocities.
                              6-P.2	 Continue to implement and pursue flood control programs that
                                     reduce flood hazards, such as the city’s Grading Ordinance and the
                                     Floodplain Management Regulations.
                              6-P.3	 Cooperate and coordinate with federal, state and local jurisdictions,
                                     and agencies involved in the mitigation of flood hazards from dam
                                     inundation, tsunamis, sea level rise, and major flood events.
                              6-P.4	 Require all proposed drainage facilities to comply with the city’s
                                     Standard Design Criteria to ensure they are properly sized to handle
                                     100-year flood conditions.
                              6-P.5	 Require installation of protective structures or other design
                                     measures to protect proposed building and development sites from
                                     the effects of flooding.
                              6-P.6	 Enforce the requirements of Titles 18, 20, and 21 pertaining to
                                     drainage and flood control when reviewing applications for
                                     building permits and subdivisions.
                              6-P.7	 Comply with all requirements of the California Department of
                                     Water Resources’ Division of Safety of Dams to ensure adequate
                                     flood control.
           6-44

                                                                                  General Plan
                                                                                             6
6-P.8	 Comply with Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
       requirements to identify flood hazard areas and control develop-
       ment within these areas in order for residents to qualify for federal
       flood insurance. Cooperate with FEMA on shoreline flooding
       hazards and other mapping efforts.
                                                                                                 Public Safety
Geology and Seismicity
6-P.9	 Allow for consideration of seismic and geologic hazards at the
       earliest possible point in the development process, preferably
       before comprehensive engineering work has commenced.
6-P.10	 Maintain geotechnical report guidelines identifying specific require-
        ments for various levels of geotechnical evaluation, including
        reconnaissance studies, preliminary geotechnical investigation
        reports, and as-graded geotechnical reports.
6-P.11	 Use information in Figure 6-4 as a generalized guideline for
        planning purposes and in determining the type and extent of geo-
        technical report to be required for a proposed development project.
        When a geotechnical report is required, require submission of the
        report and demonstration that a project conforms to all mitigation
        measures recommended in the report prior to city approval of the
        proposed development.
6-P.12	 Require a geotechnical investigation and report of all sites proposed
        for development in areas where geologic conditions or soil types
        are susceptible to liquefaction. Also require demonstration that a
        project conforms to all mitigation measures recommended in the
        geotechnical report prior to city approval of the proposed develop-
        ment (as required by state law).
6-P.13	 Prohibit location of critical structures directly across known earth-
        quake faults unless a geotechnical and/or seismic investigation is
        performed to show that the earthquake fault is neither active nor
        potentially active.
6-P.14	 Require applicants to conduct detailed geologic and seismic inves-
        tigations at sites where the construction of critical structures
        (high-occupancy structures and those that must remain in operation
        during emergencies) and structures over four stories are under
        consideration.
6-P.15	 In accordance with the California Subdivision Map Act, deny subdi-
        vision maps if a project site is not physically suitable for either the
        type or density of a proposed development because of geologic,
        seismic, or other hazards.
6-P.16	 Require qualified geotechnical engineering professionals to review
        grading plans and inspect areas of excavation during and after
        grading, to evaluate slope stability and other geotechnical condi-
        tions that may affect site development and public safety. In areas of
        known or suspected landslides and/or adverse geologic conditions,
        the following determinations should be made: extent of landslide,
                                                                                           6-45
           City of Carlsbad
6
                                      depth-to-slide plane, soil types and strengths, presence of clay
                                      seams and ground water conditions.
                              6-P.17	 Continue to regulate development, including remodeling or struc-
                                      tural rehabilitation, to ensure adequate mitigation of safety hazards
Public Safety
                                      on sites having a history or threat of seismic dangers, erosion, sub-
                                      sidence, or flooding.
                              Airport Hazards
                              6-P.18	 Ensure that development in the McClellan-Palomar Airport
                                      Influence Area is consistent with the land use compatibility policies
                                      contained in the McClellan-Palomar Airport Land Use Compatibility
                                      Plan.
                              See also policies in the Land Use and Community Design Element related to McClel-
                              lan-Palomar Airport.
                              Railroad Hazards
                              6-P.19	 Coordinate with other agencies and private entities to investi-
                                      gate methods of improving service safety along and across the rail
                                      corridor; such as through development of a grade separated rail
                                      corridor that includes grade separated street crossings at Grand
                                      Avenue, Carlsbad Village Drive, Tamarack Avenue and Cannon Road,
                                      as well as new pedestrian and bicycle crossings at Chestnut Avenue,
                                      the Village and Poinsettia COASTER stations, and other appropriate
                                      locations.
                              See also policies in the Mobility and Noise Elements related to the railroad.
                              Soils and Hazardous Materials
                              6-P.20	 Limit hazards associated with the manufacture, use, transfer,
                                      storage and disposal of hazardous materials and hazardous wastes
                                      through enforcement of applicable local, county, state and federal
                                      regulations.
                              6-P.21	 Coordinate with the County of San Diego and use the San Diego
                                      County Multi-Jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan as a guide for
                                      implementing actions to reduce hazardous waste impacts.
                              6-P.22	 Regulate locations for the manufacture, storage, and use of
                                      hazardous materials within the city through implementation of
                                      Carlsbad Municipal Code Title 21 (Zoning Ordinance).
                              6-P.23	 Regulate development on sites with known contamination of soil
                                      and groundwater to ensure that construction workers, future
                                      occupants, and the environment as a whole, are adequately
                                      protected from hazards associated with contamination, and
                                      encourage cleanup of such sites.
                              6-P.24	 Provide for hazardous materials emergency incident responses.
                                      Coordinate such responses with applicable federal, state and county
                                      agencies.
           6-46
                                                                                   General Plan
                                                                                              6
6-P.25	 Maintain regulations that require proper storage and disposal of
        hazardous materials to reduce the likelihood of leakage, explosions,
        or fire, and to properly contain potential spills from leaving the site.
6-P.26	 Enhance and expand the use of desiltation/pollutant basins to
                                                                                                  Public Safety
        function as hazardous material spill control facilities to prevent the
        spread of contaminants to downstream areas.
6-P.27	 Support public awareness and participation in household hazardous
        waste management, solid waste, and recycling programs.
Police, Fire and Emergency Services
6-P.28	Maintain adequate Police and Fire Department staff to provide
       adequate and timely response to all emergencies.
6-P.29	 Ensure Fire Department facilities and service are provided consistent
        with the minimum performance standards of the city’s Growth Man-
        agement Plan.
6-P.30	 Encourage physical planning and community design practices that
        deter crime and promote safety.
6-P.31	 Maintain close coordination between planned improvements to the
        circulation system within the city and the location of fire stations to
        assure adequate levels of service and response times to all areas of
        the community.
6-P.32	 Consider site constraints in terms of hazards and current levels
        of emergency service delivery capabilities when making land use
        decisions. In areas where population or building densities may be
        inappropriate to the hazards present, take measures to mitigate the
        risk of life and property loss.
6-P.33	 Coordinate the delivery of fire protection services through mutual
        aid agreements with other agencies when appropriate.
6-P.34	 Enforce the Uniform Building and Fire codes, adopted by the city,
        to provide fire protection standards for all existing and proposed
        structures.
6-P.35	 When future development is proposed to be intermixed with
        wildlands and/or adjacent to wildlands, require applicants to comply
        with the city’s adopted Landscape Manual, which includes require-
        ments related to fire protection, and calls for preparation of a fire
        protection plan when a proposed project contains or is bounded by
        hazardous vegetation or is within an area bounded by a very high
        fire hazard severity zone, or as determined by the Fire Code official
        or his representative.
Emergency Preparedness
6-P.36	 Maintain and periodically update the City of Carlsbad Emergency
        Operations Plan as appropriate information becomes available, and
        continue participating in multijurisdictional disaster planning.
                                                                                            6-47

           City of Carlsbad
6
                              6-P.37	 Promote public awareness of possible natural and man-made
                                      hazards, measures that can be taken to protect lives and property,
                                      response plans, and evacuation routes.
                              6-P.38	 Inform the public and contractors of the danger involved and the
Public Safety
                                      necessary precautions that must be taken when working on or near
                                      pipelines or utility transmission lines.
                              6-P.39	 Ensure all new development complies with all applicable regulations
                                      regarding the provision of public utilities and facilities.
           6-48
10   Housing
               General Plan
                          10
                              Housing
                        10-1
     City of Carlsbad
10
Housing
     10-2
10.1 Introduction
Purpose of the Housing Element
The	Housing	Element	of	the	General	Plan	is	designed	to	provide	the	city	with	a	coordinated	
and	 comprehensive	 strategy	 for	 promoting	 the	 production	 of	 safe,	 decent,	 and	 affordable	
housing	within	the	community.		A	priority	of	both	state	and	local	governments,	Government	
Code	Section	65580	states	the	intent	of	creating	housing	elements:	
The	availability	of	housing	is	of	vital	statewide	importance,	and	the	early	attainment	of	decent	
housing	and	a	suitable	living	environment	for	every	Californian	family	is	a	priority	of	the	highest	
order.	
	
Per state law, the Housing Element has two main purposes:
    1. To provide an assessment of both current and future housing needs and
        constraints in meeting these needs; and
    2. To provide a strategy that establishes housing goals, policies, and programs.
This	Housing	Element	is	an	eight‐year	plan	for	the	2013‐2021	period	 April	30,	2013	–	April	
29,	2021 ,	which	differs	from	the	city’s	other	General	Plan	elements	that	cover	a	much	longer	
period.		The	Housing	Element	serves	as	an	integrated	part	of	the	General	Plan,	but	is	updated	
more	 frequently	 to	 ensure	 its	 relevancy	 and	 accuracy.	 	 The	 Housing	 Element	 identifies	
strategies	and	programs	that	focus	on:	
	
    1. Conserving and improving existing affordable housing;
    2. Maximizing housing opportunities throughout the community;
    3. Assisting in the provision of affordable housing;
    4. Removing governmental and other constraints to housing investment; and
    5. Promoting fair and equal housing opportunities.
Element Organization
The Housing Element has the following major components:
       An	 introduction	 to	 review	 the	 requirements	 of	 the	 Housing	 Element,	 public	
        participation	process,	and	data	sources	 Section	10.1 ;	
       A	profile	and	analysis	of	the	city’s	demographics,	housing	characteristics,	and	existing	
        and	future	housing	needs	 Section	10.2 ;	
       A	 review	 of	 resources	 available	 to	 facilitate	 and	 encourage	 the	 production	 and	
        maintenance	of	housing,	including	land	available	for	new	construction,	financial	and	
        administrative	 resources	 available	 for	 housing,	 and	 opportunities	 for	 energy	
        conservation	 Section	10.3 ;	
	
       An	analysis	of	constraints	on	housing	production	and	maintenance,	including	market,	
        governmental,	and	environmental	limitations	to	meeting	the	city’s	identified	needs	
         Section	10.4 ;	
                                                                                               10-3

        An	evaluation	of	accomplishments	under	the	2005‐2010	Housing	Element	 Section	
         10.5 ;	and	
        A	 statement	 of	 the	 Housing	 Plan	 to	 address	 the	 city’s	 identified	 housing	 needs,	
         including	an	assessment	of	past	accomplishments,	and	a	formulation	of	housing	goals,	
         policies,	and	programs	 Sections	10.6	and	10.7 .	
        An	identification	of	the	city’s	quantified	objectives	for	the	2010‐2020	RHNA	period,	
         by	income	group,	based	on	growth	estimates,	past	and	anticipated	development,	and	
         income	data	 Section	10.8 .	
	
A	 series	 of	 appendices	 provide	 additional	 documentation.	 	 Appendix	 A	 supports	 the	
assessment	 of	 the	 2005‐2010	 Housing	 Element	 synthesized	 in	 Section	 10.5.	 	 Appendix	 B	
describes	the	sites	inventory	introduced	in	Section	10.3.	
	
Relationship to State Law
	
The	California	Legislature	has	identified	the	attainment	of	a	decent	home	and	suitable	living	
environment	for	every	resident	as	the	state’s	major	housing	goal.		Recognizing	the	important	
role	of	local	planning	programs	in	pursuing	this	goal,	the	legislature	has	mandated	that	all	
cities	and	counties	prepare	a	housing	element	as	part	of	their	comprehensive	general	plan.		
Government	Code	Section	65302 c 	sets	forth	the	specific	components	to	be	contained	in	a	
community’s	housing	element.	
Planning Period
	
State	 law	 now	 requires	 housing	 elements	 to	 be	 updated	 every	 eight	 years	 to	 reflect	 a	
community’s	changing	housing	needs,	unless	otherwise	extended	by	state	legislation.		The	
previous	 2005‐2010 	housing	element	cycle	for	the	San	Diego	region	was	extended	by	state	
legislation	 SB	575 	to	align	local	housing	elements	with	regional	transportation	planning.		
Therefore,	 the	 2005‐2010	 Carlsbad	 Housing	 Element	 covered	 the	 period	 spanning	 July	 1,	
2005	through	April	29,	2013.		This	Housing	Element	covers	the	planning	period	of	April	30,	
2013	through	April	29,	2021.	
	
While	this	Housing	Element	covers	an	eight‐year	planning	period,	Government	Code	Section	
65588 e 	requires	Carlsbad	to	update	this	Housing	Element	after	four	years	 April	30,	2017 	
and	 again	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 eight‐year	 planning	 period.	 	 This	 mid‐planning	 period	 update,	
providing	the	housing	plan	for	the	second	half	of	the	eight‐year	planning	period	 April	30,	
2017,	to	April	29,	2021 ,	is	anticipated	by	Housing	Element	Program	3.18	in	Section	10.7.	
	
Hereafter,	this	update	will	be	referred	to	as	the	“2017	Housing	Element	Update.”	
	
Changes in State Law since Previous Update
	
In	 addition	 to	 the	 above‐described	 provisions	 in	 SB	 575,	 the	 following	 items	 represent	
substantive	changes	to	state	law	since	the	city’s	last	Housing	Element	or	which	have	been	
newly	addressed	in	this	2013‐2021	Housing	Element.	
	
10-4

SB	375	requires	alignment	of	regional	transportation	planning	and	local	land	use	and	housing	
plans.		This	2013‐2021	Housing	Element	 the	fifth	housing	element	cycle 	was conducted in 
conjunction with the development of the 2050 Regional Transportation Plan and its Sustainable 
Communities Strategy in accordance with SB 375. 
 
AB 1233 requires local governments to zone or rezone adequate sites, within the first year of the 
new planning period, to address any portion of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) 
for which the jurisdiction failed to identify or make available sites in the prior planning period.  
During the prior planning period (2005‐2013), the city redesignated sufficient sites at appropriate 
densities to accommodate all of its RHNA. 
 
AB  2511:    The  city  shall  not  permit  residential  development  at  a  density  below  the  density 
assumed for that site in the housing element, unless:  a) the city demonstrates that the remaining 
sites identified in the housing element can accommodate the city’s remaining RHNA, or b) the city 
identifies  an  additional  site(s)  that  can  accommodate  the  remaining  RHNA.    This  provision  is 
addressed in Sections 10.4 and 10.7 (Program 2.1). 
 
SB 812 requires that housing elements include an analysis of the special housing needs of disabled 
persons, including persons with developmental disabilities.  This is addressed in the Special Needs 
Households section of Section 10.2, the Housing for Persons with Disabilities discussion of Section 
10.3, and in Program 3.11 of Section 10.7. 
 
The city is required to address each of the following state laws before the adoption of this housing 
element  update  (due  April  30,  2017).    However,  these  laws  do  not  actually  require  review  or 
revision of the housing element itself. 
 
     SB 244 requires the city to review and revise as necessary its General Plan Land Use and 
         Community  Design  Element  to  address  “disadvantaged  communities.”    These 
         communities  can  be  unincorporated  island  or  fringe  communities  within  spheres  of 
         influence  or  isolated  and  long  established  “legacy”  communities  that  may  lack  basic 
         infrastructure. 
     SB 1241 requires the city to review and revise as necessary its General Plan Public Safety 
         Element to address the risk of fire in state responsibility areas and very high fire hazard 
         severity zones. 
     AB 162 requires the city to review and revise as necessary its General Plan Open Space, 
         Conservation, and Recreation Element and Public Safety Element to identify areas that 
         may  accommodate  floodwater  for  purposes  of  groundwater  recharge  and  stormwater 
         management  and  to  discuss  information  and  policies  regarding  flood  hazards  and 
         protection. 
          
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) 
 
A critical measure of compliance with state housing element law is the ability of a jurisdiction to 
accommodate its share of the region’s housing needs‐‐the RHNA.  For San Diego County, the state 
projected the region’s growth for an 11‐year period between Jan. 1, 2010 and Dec. 31, 2020, which 
                                                                                                     10-5

coordinates with the Regional Transportation Plan.  Therefore, while the Housing Element is an eight‐
year document, the city must accommodate the full 11 year RHNA.  Table 10‐1 presents Carlsbad’s 
allocation of the region’s housing needs by income group as determined by SANDAG. 
 
TABLE 10‐1:         2010‐2020 RHNA 
INCOME GROUP                                            CARLSBAD                                  REGION 
                                                            #                 %                    #                      %
Very Low (<50%  AMI)                                     912               18%              36,450                     23%
Low (50‐80% AMI)                                         693               14%              27,700                     17%
Moderate (80‐120% AMI)                                1,062                21%              30,610                     19%
Above  Moderate (>120%  AMI)                          2,332                47%              67,220                     41%
TOTAL                                                 4,999              100%             161,980                    100%
Sources:  SANDAG, RHNA PLAN :  Fifth Housing Element Cycle Planning for Housing in the San Diego  Region 2010 – 2020, Table 
4. 
 
Pursuant  to  state  law  (AB  2634),  the  city  must  project  the  number  of  extremely  low  income 
housing needs, which is not a specified income group in the RHNA.  This target may be based on 
Census income distribution or the city may assume 50 percent of the very low income units as 
extremely low income.  Approximately 4,610 extremely low income and 3,250 very low income 
Carlsbad  households  were  identified  in  the  2009‐2013  Comprehensive  Housing  Affordability 
Strategy (2013 CHAS) data prepared by the Census Bureau for the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development.  CHAS data demonstrate the extent of housing problems and housing 
needs,  particularly  for  low  income  households,  and  rely  on  the  American  Community  Survey.  
These household totals equate to 59 and 41 percent, respectively, of the total extremely low and 
very low income households.  These percentages suggest that of Carlsbad’s RHNA share of 912 
very low income households, at least 538 units should be available for extremely low income and 
374 units for very low income households. See Section 10.2 for a more detailed analysis. 
 
Relationship to Community Vision 
 
The Housing Element is most closely related to the following core values in the Carlsbad Community 
Vision: 
 
Core Value 1:  Small Town Feel, Beach Community Character, and Connectedness.  Enhance Carlsbad’s 
defining attributes‐it’s small town feel, and beach community character. 
 
Core  Value  9:    Neighborhood  Revitalization,  Community  Design  and  Livability.    Revitalize 
neighborhoods  and  enhance  citywide  livability.    Promote  a  greater  mix  of  uses  citywide,  more 
activities along the coastline, and link density to public transportation. 
 
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements 
 
To promote a uniform and compatible vision for the development of the community, California 
law  requires  the  General  Plan  be  internally  consistent  in  its  goals  and  policies.    The  Housing 
Element is a component of the General Plan (updated in parallel with this Housing Element); as a 
10-6

result, the Housing Element is consistent with the vision of the General Plan and is supported by 
goals and policies of the other General Plan elements.  General Plan elements and policies that 
affect housing are summarized below: 
 
The Land Use and Community Design Element directs the location, amount, and type of residential 
development in the city.  It presents the desirable pattern for the ultimate development of the 
city, and reflects the community’s evolution and changing demographics over the General Plan 
horizon.  The element ensures the availability of sufficient residential land at appropriate densities 
to meet the city’s housing needs identified in this Housing Element. 
 
The  Mobility  Element  contains  policies  to  minimize  traffic  volumes  and  speeds  in  residential 
neighborhoods, while improving connectivity to schools, parks, services, and other destinations, 
with an emphasis on pedestrian, bicycle and transit mobility. 
 
The Open Space, Conservation and Recreation Element establishes goals and polices to:  protect 
sensitive resources from development impacts; maintain and improve appropriate access to open 
space; and ensure park and recreation opportunities are sufficient to meet the needs of future 
residents. 
 
The  Noise  and  Public  Safety  Elements  contain  policies  to  protect  residents  from  unacceptable 
noise  levels  and  safety  concerns  by  guiding  future  development  away  from  significant  noise 
sources and potential hazards and by enforcing mitigations when necessary. 
 
Public Participation (2009‐2015) 
 
The Housing Element was prepared as part of Envision Carlsbad, which was the city’s program to 
update  its  General  Plan  (including  the  Housing  Element).    The  first  phase  of  Envision  Carlsbad 
included an extensive community participation campaign that laid the foundation for the update.  
Approximately 8,000 community members directly participated in activities such as workshops, a 
community survey, and other public meetings.  A product of this broad‐based outreach effort was 
the Carlsbad Community Vision, which articulated what the community values most for Carlsbad’s 
future, including the following related to housing: 
 
In  the  future,  Carlsbad  will  be  a  multi‐generational  community,  with  supportive  services  that 
accommodate the needs of the elderly as well as families with young children.  Carlsbad will uphold 
universal design standards that foster accessibility, and will be a leader in innovative financing and 
design approaches to enhance availability of high‐quality housing for all income levels.  The housing 
supply will match the diverse population and workforce needs, essential to a sustainable economic 
future. 
 
As part of the stakeholder outreach specific to housing, from January through May 2009, the city 
conducted several small group meetings with for‐profit and not‐for‐profit housing providers, as 
well as organizations working with homeless individuals and people with disabilities.  The city also 
held  a  developer  forum  (June  2011)  to  understand  potential  constraints  to  the  production  of 
housing (market rate and affordable), and a housing stakeholder forum (March 2012) specifically 
                                                                                                        10-7

focused on affordable and multi‐family housing and the Housing Element.  The city encouraged 
participation by representatives of organizations serving low‐income and special needs groups. 
 
Following is a complete summary of the public participation activities conducted in preparation 
for this Housing Element update. 
 
Visioning Workshops 
 
Four community workshops were held in March and April 2009 on different weekday evenings and 
in different locations around the city.  Although workshops focused on an array of issues related to 
the community’s aspirations for the future, housing was a key focus at each workshop.  The events 
were  designed  to  engage  the  attention,  interest,  and  active  involvement  of  a  broad  spectrum  of 
Carlsbad  community  members,  and  provide  opportunities  for  energetic  group  discussion  of  and 
effective input into the community’s vision of Carlsbad’s future.  In all, over 265 community members 
attended the workshops. 
 
In  regard  to  housing,  participants  at  the  workshops  discussed  the  need  for  and  the  design  of 
affordable housing so that it fits in with the context of the rest of the city.  Some residents expressed 
desire for controlled and managed population growth and development.  Some participants did not 
want the city to over build while others wanted no more development at all.  Some envisioned higher 
density development downtown, or a hierarchy of densities, while others emphasized the need for 
lower density development. 
 
Finally, many participants emphasized the need to promote walkability through location of activities, 
design of neighborhoods, and pedestrian‐friendly development. 
 
Community Vision Survey 
 
In 2009, the city initiated a survey to assess residents’ perceptions regarding the quality of life in 
their neighborhood and the city.  Surveys were mailed to every household in the city (a total of 
over 41,600 households) and nearly 7,200 completed responses were received—an impressive 
response  rate  of  over  17  percent.    Findings  that  contribute  to  understanding  of  housing 
preferences include: 
 
      Just over half of all residents (51%) believe that providing a range of housing options of 
         different types and price levels within Carlsbad is a medium or high priority for the city. 
      In addition, over half of all residents  (53%) believe that providing food and shelter for 
         homeless families both in the city and the region is a medium or high priority. 
      Nearly two‐thirds of all residents (64%) believe that developing more housing choices to 
         give seniors additional options for living in Carlsbad as they get older is a medium or high 
         priority for the city. 
 
10-8

 
Barrio Workshop 
 
On  March  10,  2011,  the  city  conducted  a  workshop  to  discuss  issues  specific  to  the  Barrio 
community in Carlsbad.  Approximately 85 community members participated in the workshop to 
discuss  a  range  of  topics,  such  as  the  culture  and  historic  character  of  the  neighborhood, 
streetscape and connectivity improvements, and potential land use opportunities.  Participants 
debated  the  merits  of  increasing  densities  and  allowing  more  multi‐family  housing  in  the 
neighborhood.   While some participants did not  want to see increased  density or multi‐family 
development, most were either supportive or at least willing to identify preferable locations for 
such  housing.    Many  supported  locating  new  multi‐family  housing  along  the  periphery  of  the 
neighborhood, while protecting the small‐scale single and two‐family character of the Barrio core. 
 
General Plan Developer Forum 
 
On  June  8,  2011,  the  city  hosted  a  forum  with  developers  active  in  Carlsbad  to  understand 
development/business  community  issues  and  perspectives  relating  to  future  development  in 
Carlsbad;  discuss  major  land  use  and  development  opportunities;  and  identify  key  factors 
necessary to achieve the Carlsbad Community Vision objectives.  Approximately 18 participants 
attended.  They  discussed  the  kind  of  uses  and  development  that  is  appropriate  in  the  various 
opportunity areas; and the financial feasibility of development at densities/intensities for future 
development. 
 
Housing Element Stakeholder Workshop 
 
On March 28, 2012, the city held a workshop to invite representatives of organizations that assist 
special needs groups and low‐income residents, and who develop and manage affordable housing, 
including  shelters,  senior,  and  family  housing.    The  city  invited  the  following  representatives  and 
groups: 
 
      Farmers and landowners with active farming; 
      Advocates and organizations representing farmworkers, homelessness, the poor, mental 
         and physical health, and the elderly; 
      Local developers of market rate housing (those based or active in Carlsbad); 
      Affordable housing developers; and 
      Representatives from government agencies (e.g. military, SANDAG, adjacent jurisdictions, 
         school districts, infrastructure providers) 
 
Eleven participants ultimately took part in the workshop providing their feedback on future housing 
needs and constraints to housing production.  Key issues and ideas that emerged from the workshop 
and which the Housing Element will address were as follows: 
      Current market and development trends favor multi‐family residential rentals. 
      Affordable  housing  should  be  transit  accessible  so  that  residents  can  access  jobs  and 
         services. 
                                                                                                           10-9

        Potential  development  barriers  include  lack  of  available  land  and  high  cost  of  land 
         (especially for infill development).  Still, Carlsbad was praised for having a clearly laid‐out 
         development review process. 
        Participants  suggested  allowing  more  flexibility  in  zoning,  such  as  allowing  parking 
         unbundling and reductions in parking requirements in appropriate locations. 
        Participants recommended that for homeless families, there needs to be a focus on more 
         permanent solutions, such as affordable rental housing, rather than shelters. 
 
General Plan Land Use Plan Alternatives and Preferred Plan Development 
 
Following visioning workshops and the survey described above, a range of meetings with decision‐
makers,  the  Envision  Carlsbad  Citizens  Committee  (EC3),  and  the  community  at‐large  helped  to 
debate  and  shape  the  land  use  plan  and  location  of  appropriate  housing  sites  for  the  Housing 
Element. 
 
     On May 11, 2011 and Aug. 10, 2011, the EC3 helped to brainstorm and then refine various 
         land  use  concepts  for  where  housing  should  be  located  along  with  commercial 
         developments and other uses. 
     In parallel, on July 13, 2011 and Aug. 17, 2011, the Planning Commission held its own set 
         of meetings to consider land use and housing options.  These meetings included time for 
         public comment. 
     Two community workshops were subsequently held on Jan. 31, 2012 and Feb. 2, 2012, 
         and an online survey was administered during a two‐month period to educate community 
         members on plan options and seek their feedback about the appropriateness of housing 
         sites and densities, in an effort to select a preferred alternative. 
     Based on feedback from these meetings and the online survey about alternative choices, 
         a preferred alternative emerged which was further discussed and endorsed during EC3 
         meetings on March 28, 2012 and April 17, 2012.  This “Preferred Plan” was discussed and 
         refined by the Planning Commission over a series of four meetings (May 2, 2012, May 16, 
         2012, June 20, 2012, and July 18, 2012) and ultimately recommended to the City Council. 
     The City Council endorsed and provided further direction on this Preferred Plan during 
         their Sept. 11, 2012 meeting, setting the stage for preparation of the General Plan and 
         establishing the Housing Element’s sites inventory described herein. 
 
Decision‐Maker Housing Element Workshops/Hearings 
 
On March 20, 2012, the City Council conducted a workshop on housing issues.  At this workshop, the 
council received an issue paper on emerging land use and demographic trends affecting housing in 
Carlsbad, housing element law and the RHNA, and recent legislative changes and case law regarding 
affordable housing.  The City Council discussed the local policy implications of these issues in the 
context of the updates to the General Plan and this Housing Element. 
 
On September 19, 2013, the Housing Commission conducted a public hearing on the draft Housing 
Element and recommended approval of the plan to the Planning Commission and City Council. 
10-10

 
On July 24, 2015, the Planning Commission held a public hearing on the General Plan, including the 
Housing Element, and recommended its approval to the City Council. 
 
The  City  Council,  based  on  the  recommendations  of  its  commissions  and  input  from  the  public, 
approved the General Plan, including the Housing Element, on September 22, 2015. 
 
Public Participation (2016‐2017) 
 
Following the extensive public participation over the past several years that resulted in the parallel 
adoption of the General Plan and the Housing Element, the city conducted additional public outreach 
as part of the 2017 Housing Element Update. 
 
Annual Housing Element Progress Report 
 
The city presented its annual Housing Element Progress Report at the May 17, 2016, City Council 
meeting.  This report fulfills state reporting requirements and Housing Element Program 3.18 (see 
Section 10.7) and informs the element update. 
Housing Element Workshop  
On September 22, 2016, the city’s Housing Commission held an evening public workshop on the 
2017 Housing Element Update.  To gain a wide variety of input on housing development, policy 
and issues in Carlsbad, the city posted a news release on the its website and mailed over 200 
workshop  notices  to  service  providers,  affordable  and  market‐rate  housing  developers, 
government agencies, farming interests, and interested residents.   
The  workshop  began  with  a  staff  presentation  on  the  housing  element  process  and  proposed 
update. A written staff report, accessible on the Commission’s website prior to the workshop, 
supported the information presented.   
The  following  public  comments  were  made  at  the  meeting  or  in  correspondence  written  in 
response  to  the  meeting.  After  each  comment  is  a  city  reply  that  identifies  where  related 
discussion occurs in the 2017 Housing Element Update.  
        The request, from Lakeshore Gardens Mobile Home Park residents, that Carlsbad make a 
         reasonable effort to assist those living in zones designated as affordable housing, such as 
         by establishing rules limiting rent increases.  Also requested is city assistance in establishing 
         a requirement that managers of affordable housing properties provide resource referrals to 
         anyone needing assistance regarding their health and safety and that managers personally 
         connect their clients with the County of San Diego Aging and Independence Services and the 
         City  of  Carlsbad  Housing  Office,  where  appropriate.    These  requests  are  made  by  many 
         Lakeshore Gardens residents in the form of a signed petition.  Reply:  Regarding  the first 
         request, Carlsbad does not have “zones designated as affordable housing” and proposes 
         no  programs  recommending  any  kind  of  rent  control.    However,  the  Housing  Plan 
         (Sections 10.6 and 10.7) identifies goals, policies and programs to not only develop but 
                                                                                                      10-11

      also  preserve  affordable  housing;  specifically,  see  Program  1.2:  Mobile  Home  Park 
      Preservation.   
      Regarding the second request about requiring managers of affordable housing properties 
      to  provide  resource  referrals,  the  city  notes  that  Lakeshore  Gardens  is  not  an  affordable 
      housing property.  Further, the city does not recommend proposing such a requirement as 
      it would be difficult to regulate and enforce.  Additionally, while affordable housing property 
      managers have an interest in ensuring persons and families with low incomes successfully 
      find and occupy housing, they typically do not have the skills or means to provide resource 
      referrals.  Adequate means may require additional personnel and special funding. 
      	
      The city does make efforts to help address the concern expressed in this second request by 
      providing  resource  information  to  assist  people  in  making  decisions  about  agencies  and 
      organizations  to  contact.    Additionally,  the  city  periodically  conducts  trainings  to  assist 
      market  rate  and/or  affordable  property  managers.    Trainings  topics  have  included  fair 
      housing laws, first aid and mental health.   Furthermore, the city provides CDBG funding to 
      community,  social  welfare,  non‐profits  and  other  charitable  groups  that  provide 
      supportive services (Section 10.7, Programs 3.14 and 4.1).  
                         
     The reasonableness of counting properties west of Interstate 5 as potential affordable 
      housing sites due to high land costs, and possible alternatives to these properties.  Reply:  
      The city acknowledges the high cost of land throughout Carlsbad (Section 10.4 and Table 
      10‐31).  Nevertheless,  the  city’s  sites  inventory  (Section  10.3,  Appendix  B)  does  count 
      parcels west of the freeway as they do represent affordable housing opportunities and do 
      provide income‐restricted residences, typically because of the city’s inclusionary housing 
      requirements;  Poinsettia  Station,  Roosevelt  Gardens,  and  Seagrove  are  projects  with 
      units affordable to lower income households west of Interstate 5.  Further, and although 
      broader in area than just west of the Interstate, Table 10.41 notes that in the city’s Coastal 
      Zone, 830 affordable housing units (including second dwelling units) were built between 
      July 1, 1991, and December 31, 2015.  
      In  realization  of  the  high  land  values,  the  city  has  used  and  will  continue  to  use  its 
      resources and regulations to facilitate affordable housing construction and monitor the 
      success of programs regarding the same (Section 10.7, Programs 2.1 to 2.3; 3.1 to 3.18).  
      Furthermore,  the  city  will  continue  to  meet  with  and  assist  developers  regarding  the 
      location of affordable housing sites (Section 10.7, Programs 2.1 to 2.3).  
     The  need  to  respect  community  interests  in  the  siting  of  development,  including  new 
      residential projects.  Reply: Carlsbad’s development review process ensures public input 
      (Section 10.4, Table 10‐38).  
     The lengthy processing times for development projects. Reply: Over the past few years, 
      the city has streamlined its development review process while still respecting the need 
      for public input (Section 10.4). 
10-12

          Any recourses available for people frequently rejected for Section 8 housing. Reply: The 
           city’s Housing and Neighborhood Services Department is available to assist people in this 
           regard.  
          Homelessness in general and the need for a homeless shelter in the Village (downtown 
           Carlsbad).  Reply: Carlsbad’s response to homelessness in the city is discussed throughout 
           the 2017 Housing Element Update (e.g., Section 10.2, Tables 10‐12 and 10‐13, and Section 
           10.7, Programs 3.13 and 3.14). Of note are the recently completed expansion of the La 
           Posada  de  Guadalupe  homeless/farmworker  shelter  in  Carlsbad,  efforts  by  local  and 
           regional  organizations  serving  the  homeless,  such  as  Catholic  Charities,  Interfaith 
           Community Services, and Solutions for Change, and city funding to support these efforts.  
          The  request  for  the  elimination  of  the  requirement  to  develop  inclusionary  affordable 
           housing  in  the  quadrant  of  market  rate  development.  Reply:  The  city  supports  its 
           Inclusionary Housing Program (Section 10.7, Program 3.1) to require affordable housing 
           development in the same city quadrant in which the related market‐rate construction is 
           occurring.  Overall,  this  ensures  affordable  housing  is  dispersed,  not  concentrated,  and 
           occurring generally where and when development occurs. While affordable housing must 
           be located within the same quadrant, it does not have to be built on the same site as the 
           market‐rate project.  
Housing Element Posting and Distribution 
The 2017 Housing Element Update was posted on the city’s website on October 27, 2016, as part 
of a webpage with project‐related information, including an overview and link to receive project 
updates via email. The city also provided paper copies of the update at its libraries, city clerk’s 
office, Senior Center, and Faraday Center on November 10, 2016.   
On November 14, notice of the update’s availability was provided in a news release, a website 
posting, and in a mailing to stakeholders and interested parties. The notice included the website 
link  to  the  update  and  a  listing  of  the  city  facilities  at  which  the  document  could  be  viewed. 
Additionally,  the  notice  announced  a  30  day  public  review  period  of  the  updated  element 
beginning  November  15  and  ending  December  15.    This  notice  was  also  published  in  the 
newspaper on November 15.  
In late 2016, the state Department of Housing and Community Development reviewed the update 
and required revisions. The city made the changes and released a subsequent draft in January 
2017. As done previously, the revised draft was distributed and noticed for public review. Notices 
included information about upcoming project hearings.  
Decision‐Maker Housing Element Hearings 
On February 9, 2017, the Housing Commission held a public meeting on the 2017 Housing Element 
Update and recommended its approval to the City Council.   
 
The  following  week,  on  February  15,  the  Planning  Commission  held  a  public  hearing  and  also 
recommended its approval of the update to the City Council.   
                                                                                                           10-13

 
The  City  Council,  based  on  the  recommendations  of  its  commissions  and  input  from  the  public, 
approved the 2017 Housing Element Update on March 28, 2017.   
 
At the three meetings, thirteen speakers commented on a variety of topics. These topics included 
the size of second dwelling units, increasing rents, housing for homeless women, the price of land in 
the Barrio, the difficulty in providing affordable housing in coastal cities, the present need to address 
housing issues, and the identity of individual properties in the sites inventory.  
 
 
	
10-14

10.2 Housing Needs Assessment 
The City of Carlsbad is committed to the goal of providing adequate housing for its present and future 
residents.  To implement this goal, the city must target its limited resources toward those households 
with the greatest need.  This chapter discusses the characteristics of the city’s present and future 
population in order to better define the nature and extent of housing needs in Carlsbad. 
Population Characteristics 
Population Growth 
Since its incorporation in 1952, Carlsbad has grown steadily and substantially over the decades from 
a population of 9,253 in 1960 to 105,328 in 2010.  The number of Carlsbad residents is expected to 
reach  approximately  118,241  in  2020  (Table  10‐2),  an  increase  of  12  percent  over  the  2010 
population.  According to the state Department of Finance, Carlsbad's population on January 1, 2016, 
was 112,930. 
Between 2000 and 2010, Carlsbad’s proportional change in population was over three times that for 
the  region  as  a  whole.    San  Marcos  was  the  only  neighboring  jurisdiction  to  have  a  greater 
proportional increase than Carlsbad during this period.  According to SANDAG, Carlsbad’s projected 
growth in population from 2010 to 2020 will be modest, similar to unincorporated county areas and 
the region as a whole, but less than Escondido and San Marcos. 
TABLE 10–2:         POPULATION GROWTH 
                                              POPULATION                           PERCENT CHANGE 
                                                                      2020                     2010‐2020 
       JURISDICTION                    2000          2010       (PROJECTED)    2000‐2010      (PROJECTED) 
Carlsbad                            78,247        105,328          118,241           35%              12% 
Encinitas                           58,014         59,518           62,829            3%               6% 
Escondido                          133,559        143,911          165,051            8%              15% 
Oceanside                          161,029        167,086          177,929            4%               6% 
Poway                               48,044         47,811           50,010            0%               5% 
San Marcos                          54,977         83,781           98,940           52%              18% 
Vista                               89,857         93,834           96,973            4%               3% 
Unincorporated County              442,919        486,604          543,471           10%              12% 
REGION TOTAL                     2,813,833     3,095,313        3,435,713           10%               11% 
                                                                                                             
Sources:  U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010; and SANDAG 2050 Regional  Growth Forecast). 
                                        
                                                                                                     10-15

Age Trends 
Housing needs are determined in part by the age of residents; each age group often has a distinct 
lifestyle,  family  characteristics,  and  income  level,  resulting  in  different  housing  needs.    A 
significant presence of children under 18 years of age can be an indicator of the need for larger 
housing units since this characteristic is often tied to families and larger households.  The presence 
of a large number of seniors may indicate a need for smaller homes that are more affordable and 
require less maintenance to allow residents to age in place. 
As summarized in Table 10‐3, the median age for Carlsbad residents was 40.4 in 2010—one of the 
highest of northern San Diego County cities and nearly six years higher than the median age for 
county residents as a whole.  In 2010, Carlsbad residents under 18 years of age represented 24 
percent of the city’s population, while seniors (over 65) represented 14 percent—similar to the 
city’s percent share in 2000. 
Reflective  of  the  city’s  relatively  high  median  age,  the  proportion  of  residents  aged  45  to  64 
increased  between  2000  and  2010,  while  the  proportion  of  residents  25  to  44  years  of  age 
declined (Chart 10‐1).  This latter group tends to consist of young families with children. 
American  Community  Survey  5‐year  estimates  for  2010‐2014  (2014  ACS  estimates)  indicate 
percentages similar to the 2010 Census as expressed in the table and chart below and show an 
increase in Carlsbad’s median age to 41.4. 
TABLE 10‐3: AGE CHARACTERISTICS AND PERCENT SHARE OF TOTAL POPULATION 
                                      UNDER 18 YEARS               OVER 65 YEARS               MEDIAN AGE 
                                       2000             2010        2000               2010              2010 
                                    #     %           #    %      #    %            #     %
Carlsbad                     18,240  23% 25,384 24% 10,980 14% 14,798                  14%               40.4
Encinitas                    13,401  23% 12,261 21%          6,055 10%        7,643    13%                41.5
Escondido                    39,667  30% 39,719 28% 14,720 11% 15,084                   11%              32.5
Oceanside                   44,444  28% 39,766 24% 21,859 14% 21,501                   13%               35.2
Poway                        14,750  31% 11,953 25%          4,138 9%         5,900    12%                41.3
San Marcos                   15,998  29% 23,291 28%          6,525 12%        8,527    10%               32.9
Vista                        26,688  30% 25,054 27%          9,006 10%        8,673      9%               31.1
San Diego  Co.             723,155 26% 724,303 23% 313,750 11% 351,425                  11%              34.6  
  
 Sources: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010. 
                                              
10-16

Chart 10‐1:            AGE DISTRIBUTION 2000‐2010 
                                                                                                          
Race and Ethnicity 
Carlsbad did not experience substantial race/ethnicity changes between 2000 and 2010. In 2010, 
75 percent of Carlsbad residents were White, 13 percent Hispanic/Latino, and 7 percent Asian.  
Black/African  American  and  other  races/ethnicities  comprised  just  1  and  3  percent  of  the 
population, respectively (Table 10‐4).  2014 ACS estimates indicate percentages similar to those 
for 2010. 
TABLE 10–4:            RACE/ETHNICITY 2000 AND 2010 
                                                       2000                         2010 
RACE/ETHNICITY                                         #        %                   #                 % 
White                                            63,013       81%             78,879               75% 
Hispanic/Latino                                   9,170       12%             13,988               13% 
Asian/Pacific Islander                            3,403        4%              7,518                7% 
Black/African American                              691       <1%              1,232                1% 
Other                                             1,769        2%              3,440                3% 
Total percentage may not sum to 100% due to rounding. 
Sources:  U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010. 
 
                                                                                              10-17

Employment Characteristics 
Employment has an important impact on housing needs. Incomes associated with different jobs 
and the number of workers in a household determines the type and size of housing a household 
can afford.  In some cases, the types of the jobs themselves can affect housing needs and demand 
(such  as  in  communities  with  military  installations,  college  campuses,  and  large  amounts  of 
seasonal agriculture).  Employment growth typically leads to strong housing demand, while the 
reverse is true when employment contracts. 
Occupation and Wage Scale 
As  of  2014,  the  two  largest  occupational  categories  for  city  residents  were 
Managerial/Professional and Sales/Office occupations (Table 10‐5).  These categories accounted 
for more than 79 percent of occupations held by Carlsbad residents and approximately 65 percent 
of jobs held countywide by all San Diego County employed residents. 
Management occupations are the highest paid occupations in the San Diego region, while food 
preparation, personal care and service, and cleanup and maintenance are the lowest paid (Table 
10‐6).    The  high  proportion  of  Managerial/Professional  occupations  accounts  for  Carlsbad’s 
relatively high median household income. 
TABLE 10–5:          EMPLOYMENT PROFILE FOR CARLSBAD EMPLOYED RESIDENTS 
                                                             CARLSBAD                   SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
OCCUPATIONS OF EMPLOYED RESIDENTS                                  #         %                        #     % 
Managerial/Professional                                     27,002         55%                  575,955   41% 
Sales/Office                                                12,075         24%                  341,275   24% 
Service                                                      6,080         12%                  275,521   19% 
Production/Transportation/Material Moving                    2,342          5%                  116,591    8% 
Construction/Extraction/Maintenance                          1,899          4%        111,091 111,983      8% 
Total1                                                      49,398       100%               1,421,325    100% 
1Civilian population 16 years and over.  Total percentage may not sum to 100% due to rounding. 
Source:  American Community Survey 2014 ACS estimates. 
                                          
10-18

TABLE 10–6:         AVERAGE ANNUAL SALARY BY OCCUPATION 
OCCUPATIONS                                                                             AVERAGE SALARY 
Management                                                                                      $125,268 
Legal                                                                                           $112,781 
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical                                                           $94,612 
Architecture and Engineering                                                                     $93,810 
Computer and Mathematical                                                                        $93,800 
Life, Physical and Social Science                                                                $82,478 
Business and Financial Operations                                                                $79,811 
Education, Training and Library                                                                  $61,082 
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports and Media                                                    $57,481 
Construction and Extraction                                                                      $54,418 
Community and Social Service                                                                     $50,025 
MEDIAN1                                                                                          $55,180 
Protective Service                                                                               $53,750 
Installation, Maintenance and Repair                                                             $48,312 
Sales                                                                                            $39,949 
Office and Administrative Support                                                                $39,583 
Production                                                                                       $37,706 
Transportation and Material Moving                                                               $33,333 
Healthcare Support                                                                               $36,282 
Farming, Fishing and Forestry                                                                    $29,099 
Building  Grounds Cleanup and Maintenance                                                        $30,245 
Personal Care and Service                                                                        $27,880 
Food Preparation and Serving Related                                                             $26,982 
1Median of salaries reported by EDD. 
Sources:  State Employment Development Department (EDD), Occupational Employment & Wage Data  2016 – 1st Qtr. 
Employment Trends 
SANDAG has projected that Carlsbad’s employment base will grow by over 12,400 jobs between 
2010 and 2020.  Table 10‐7 provides SANDAG’s employment projections for Carlsbad and the San 
Diego  region  (county‐level).    These  data  show  that  Carlsbad’s  share  of  regional  employment 
growth would be 6 percent; in 2010, Carlsbad had an estimated 65,000 jobs, or over 4 percent of 
the county total.                                      
                                                                                                      10-19

TABLE 10–7: EMPLOYMENT PROJECTIONS 
                                                                         CHANGE (2010-2020)
JURISDICTION                       2010                 2020                   #                     %
San Diego Region              1,421,941                                                           14%
                                                  1,624,124              202,183
City of Carlsbad                 64,956              77,431               12,475                  19%
                                                                                                          
Source:  SANDAG 2050 Regional Growth Forecast. 
Household Characteristics and Special Needs Groups 
Household Type 
The U.S. Census defines a household as all persons who occupy a housing unit, which may include 
single persons living alone, families related through marriage or blood, and unrelated individuals 
living  together.    Information  on  household  characteristics  is  important  to  understanding  the 
growth  and  changing  needs  of  a  community.    A  family‐oriented  community  may  need  large 
housing units, while a community with many single or elderly households may need smaller units 
with fewer bedrooms. 
As shown in Table 10‐8, roughly 29 percent of the city’s households in 2010 were married families 
without children, 25 percent were married families with children, 13 percent were other families, 
and 32 percent were non‐family households.  Among the non‐family households, almost half were 
single‐households and almost one‐third were elderly living alone.  In fact, senior households saw 
the highest growth rate among households:  growing by 46 percent between 2000 and 2010.  The 
city had a relatively low average household size of 2.53 in 2010, increased slightly from 2.46 in 
2000.  Countywide, the average household size was slightly larger, at 2.75 in 2010. 
2014 ACS estimates suggest an approximately 3 percent increase in the number of households (to 
42,516),  reflective  of  Carlsbad’s  more  modest  growth  since  2010.    Percentages  of  family 
households,  including  those  with  children,  and  non‐family  households,  including  those  with 
singles aged 65 years and over, are similar to the percentages noted for 2010 in Table 10‐8. 
10-20

TABLE 10–8:         HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS 
                                            2000                    2010              % CHANGE
                                                                                      (2000-2010)
HOUSEHOLD TYPE                              #         %               #         %
 Households                            31,410      100%          41,345      100%            32%
 Family Households                     21,067       67%         27,968        68%            33%
 Married With Children                  7,596       24%         10,538        25%            39%
 Married No Children                    9,374       30%         12,119        29%            29%
 Other Families                         4,097       13%           5,311       13%            30%
 Non-Family Households                 10,343       33%         13,377        32%            29%
 Singles                                5,134       16%           6,090       15%            19%
 Singles 65+                            2,596        8%           3,800        9%            46%
 Other                                  2,613        8%           3,487        8%            33%
 Average Household Size                     2.46                    2.53                3%
                                                                                                   
Sources:  U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010. 
Household Income 
Income is the most important factor affecting housing opportunities, determining the ability of 
households to balance housing costs with other basic necessities.  The 2014 ACS estimates, which 
are part of an ongoing, yearly survey prepared by the Census, reported that the median household 
income in Carlsbad was $87,416.  Compared to neighboring jurisdictions, this median income was 
lower than that for Solana Beach, Encinitas and Poway and higher than that for Oceanside, San 
Marcos, Vista, and San Diego County as a whole (Chart 10‐2). 
                                                                                            10-21

 CHART 10‐2:       MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME 2010‐2014 
                                                   $96,315	
$100,000                    $92,564	                                        $90,579	
                $87,416	
 $90,000
 $80,000
 $70,000                                                                                             $63,996	
                                        $58,385	                $56,139	
 $60,000
                                                                                          $47,782	
 $50,000
 $40,000
 $30,000
 $20,000
 $10,000
       $0
              Carlsbad     Encinitas  Oceanside    Poway     San	Marcos    Solana         Vista    San	Diego
                                                                           Beach                    County
   Source:	2014	ACS	estimates.	
 For  purposes  of  the  Housing  Element  and  other  state  housing  programs,  the  California 
 Department  of  Housing  and  Community  Development  (HCD)  has  established  five  income 
 categories based on Area Median Income (AMI) of a Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).  The 
 AMI, which is different than the estimated median household incomes shown in Chart 10‐2, is 
 applicable to all jurisdictions in San Diego County and changes with the cost of living.  The AMI for 
 San Diego County is $75,900 (2016), and the five income categories based on the AMI are: 
  
       Extremely Low Income (0‐30 percent AMI) 
          Very Low Income (31‐50 percent AMI) 
          Low Income (51‐80 percent AMI) 
          Moderate Income (81‐120 percent AMI) 
          Above Moderate Income (>120 percent AMI) 
 According  to  the  2013  CHAS  data  prepared  by  the  Census  Bureau  for  the  U.S.  Department  of 
 Housing  and  Urban  Development  (HUD),  in  2013,  11  percent  of  Carlsbad  households  earned 
 extremely low incomes, 8 percent of households earned very low incomes, and 12 percent earned 
 low  incomes  (Table  10‐9  below).    Lower  income  households  were  fairly  evenly  split  between 
 owner‐  and  renter‐households,  with  slightly  more  renters  (54%).    However,  the  majority  of 
 moderate and above moderate income households were owner‐households.  Note that the CHAS 
 data does not provide an above‐moderate income category (more than 120% AMI) as established 
 by HCD; instead, it is simply grouped as part of household income above 100% of AMI, as reflected 
 in Table 10‐9. 
 10-22

  TABLE 10–9:          HOUSEHOLDS BY TENURE AND HOUSEHOLD TYPE 2013  
                              OWNER                   RENTER             TOTAL          % OF TOTAL1 
  Extremely Low                 2,265                  2,345             4,610                  11% 
  Income 
  Very Low Income               1,430                  1,820             3,250                   8% 
  Low Income                    2,165                  2,790             4,955                  12% 
  Moderate Income               1,740                  1,520             3,260                   8% 
  (81‐100% AMI) 
  Moderate/Above               19,450                  6,575           26,025                   62% 
  Moderate Income 
  (above 100% AMI) 
  TOTAL1                       27,050                 15,050           42,100                 100% 
  1
    Total percentage does not sum to 100% due to rounding.  
  Source:  2013 CHAS data.  
The  Housing  Element  must  project  housing  needs  for  extremely  low  income  households  as  a 
portion of the very low income household RHNA target. For Carlsbad, approximately 4,610 (59 
percent) extremely low income households and 3,250 (41 percent) very low income households 
were identified in the 2013 CHAS data.  This suggests that of Carlsbad’s RHNA share of 912 very 
low  income  households,  at  least  538  units  (59  percent)  should  be  available  for  extremely  low 
income and up to 374 units (41 percent) for very low income households.  This is essentially a 
reversal of the 2008 CHAS data presented in the Housing Element adopted as part of the General 
Plan in 2015 and prepared for the first half (2013‐2017) of the current eight year planning period.  
However,  as  indicated  in  this  2017  Housing  Element  Update  (e.g.,  see  Section  10.3),  the  city 
continues to help meet the need for affordable housing by providing adequate sites and financial 
assistance and by approving affordable housing projects, including modification of development 
standards as necessary. 
Special Needs Households 
Certain  groups  have  greater  difficulty  finding  decent,  affordable  housing  due  to  special 
circumstances.  Special circumstances may be related to one’s income, family characteristics, and 
disability  status  among  others.    In  Carlsbad,  persons  and  families  with  special  needs  include 
seniors,  persons  with  disabilities,  large  households,  single‐parent  families,  homeless, 
farmworkers, students, and military personnel.  Table 10‐10 summarizes the presence of special 
needs groups in the city and the following discussion summarizes their housing needs. 
 
 
 
                                                                                                     10-23

TABLE 10–10:  SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS IN CARLSBAD 
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS                                                          NUMBER          % OF TOTAL 
                                                                                             POPULATION 
Seniors                                                                         16,266               15% 
Disabled Persons                                                                 8,258                8% 
                                 1 
Persons in Large Households                                                      6,914                6% 
Persons in Single Parent Households1                                            13,248               12% 
Homeless Persons                                                                   108               <1% 
                                                                    2
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting and Mining Workers                      158               <1% 
Students3                                                                        6,638                6% 
         2
Military                                                                           917                2% 
1Based on number of households multiplied by average household size. 
2 Employed workforce 16 years and older. 
3 Population enrolled in college or graduate school. 
Sources:  Regional  Task Force on the Homeless, 2016; 2014 ACS estimates. 
Senior Households 
Senior households have special housing needs due to three concerns – income, health care costs, 
and disabilities.  According to the 2014 ACS estimates, 16,266 seniors (aged 65 and up) resided in 
the  city  in  2014  and  9,899  households  were  headed  by  seniors.    Among  the  senior‐headed 
households, 78 percent were owners and 22 percent were renters.  
The 2010‐2014 ACS reported that seniors 65 and over earned a median income of $62,622 (nearly 
three‐quarters of the citywide median income, as reported by the Census Bureau).  In addition, 
approximately  29  percent  of  the  senior  population  also  experiences  one  or  more  disabilities, 
which  affects  housing  needs  and  potential  costs.Carlsbad  is  a  popular  retirement  community, 
which includes facilities that provide assisted living, nursing and special care, and general services 
to seniors.  As of June 2016, Carlsbad had 2,237 beds within 31 licensed senior residential care 
facilities,  according  to  the  California  Department  of  Social  Services,  Community  Care  Licensing 
Division.  Almost 95 percent of these beds were provided in nine complexes having more than six 
beds, including three continuing care retirement communities (CCRC). 
The  largest  of  these  communities  is  La  Costa  Glen  (1,328  beds),  which  opened  in  2003  and 
completed construction of its final phase in 2008.  ActivCare at Bressi Ranch, an 80‐bed facility 
specializing in Alzheimer’s and dementia care, opened in late 2011.  A planned fourth CCRC – Dos 
Colinas – was approved by the City Council in January 2012.  When constructed, Dos Colinas will 
provide living and support services to more than 300 seniors. 
In 1999, the city purchased Tyler Court, a 75‐unit apartment complex that provides affordable 
housing for very low and extremely low‐income seniors.  In 2011, the city provided funding for 
the  Tavarua  Senior  Apartments,  a  50‐unit  project  that  provides  housing  to  low  and  very  low‐
income seniors.  Construction was completed in spring 2013. 
In 2015, the city approved 101 senior low income apartments in Robertson Ranch that is part of 
a large, mixed‐income rental project.  Through early 2016, the city also reviewed plans for a 98‐
10-24

unit  senior  apartment  project  on  the  west  side  of  Cannon  Road  and  also  in  Robertson  Ranch; 
twenty of the apartments would be available to low‐income senior households only; this project 
was approved in May 2016. 
Persons with Disabilities 
Disabled persons have special housing needs because of their often fixed and limited income, lack 
of accessible and affordable housing, and the medical costs associated with their disabilities.  The 
Census  defines  a  “disability”  as  “a  long‐lasting  physical,  mental,  or  emotional  condition.    This 
condition  can  make  it  difficult  for  a  person  to  do  activities  such  as  walking,  climbing  stairs, 
dressing, bathing, learning, or remembering.  This condition can also impede a person from being 
able to go outside the home alone or to work at a job or business.” 
According to the 2014 ACS estimates, 8,217 persons with one or more disability resided in Carlsbad 
in  2014,  representing  more  than  8  percent  of  the  city’s  residents  over  five  years  of  age.    Of  the 
population with disabilities, 4,571  (55%)  were seniors.   Individuals  with  cognitive, ambulatory, or 
independent living difficulties represented the most common disabilities, as reported in Table 10‐11. 
For those of working age, disabilities can also restrict the type of work performed and income earned.  
In  fact,  according  to  the  2014  ACS  estimates,  73  percent  of  individuals  over  16  with  a  reported 
disability were not in the labor force; 23 percent were employed; and 4 percent were unemployed 
(i.e., looking for work). 
Persons with Developmental Disabilities 
Chapter 507, Statutes of 2010 (SB 812) amended state housing element law to require the analysis 
of the disabled to include an evaluation of the special housing needs of persons with developmental 
disabilities.  A developmental disability is defined as a disability that originates before an individual 
becomes  18  years  old,  continues,  or  can  be  expected  to  continue,  indefinitely,  and  constitutes  a 
substantial  disability.    This  definition  includes  mental  retardation,  cerebral  palsy,  epilepsy,  and 
autism. 
The California Department of Developmental Services contracts with nonprofit regional centers to 
provide or coordinate services and support for individuals with developmental disabilities.  In the San 
Diego region, the San Diego Regional Center, with a satellite office in Carlsbad, provides a variety of 
services  to  persons  with  developmental  disabilities  and  advocates  for  opportunities  to  maximize 
potential and to experience full inclusion in all areas of community life. 
As  of  January  2016,  the  San  Diego  Regional  Center  served  approximately  22,400  clients  with 
developmental disabilities who live in San Diego County, with the Carlsbad satellite office serving 23 
percent.  This includes 151 clients who live in Carlsbad; sixty‐seven of these individuals are children 
under the age of 18 who live with their parents.  The remaining 84 clients are adults over the age of 
18;  over  half  (57  percent)  of  these  individuals  live  with  their  parents,  while  23  live  in  their  own 
apartments with “come‐in support” and assistance and 13 live in licensed group homes.  Additional 
persons with developmental disabilities may reside in Carlsbad, but are not seeking assistance from 
the San Diego Regional Center. 
                                                                                                               10-25

TABLE 10–11:  INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES IN CARLSBAD 
                                                     YOUTH (AGE 5 ‐ 17) ADULTS (AGE 18 ‐ 64) SENIORS (AGE 65+)    TOTAL
Individuals Reporting One or More Disabilities                    414                 3,232              4,571   8,217 
With hearing difficulty                                           150                   764              2,144   3,058 
With vision difficulty                                              82                  448                639   1,169 
With cognitive difficulty                                         209                 1,257                993   2,459 
With ambulatory difficulty                                          46                1,150              2,512   3,708 
With self‐care difficulty                                           76                  567                859   1,502 
With independent living difficulty                                N/A                 1,075              2,006   3,081 
Columns do not sum to total individuals row because individuals may report more than one disability. 
Sources:  2014 ACS estimates. 
While  some  developmentally  disabled  individuals  can  live  and  work  independently  within  a 
conventional  housing  environment,  more  severely  disabled  individuals  will  require  a  group  living 
environment with supervision.  In general, the San Diego Regional Center (and its clients) prefer to 
house  persons  with  developmental  disabilities  with  family  members.    When  that  is  not  feasible, 
come‐in  support  and  licensed  group  apartments  housing  four  to  six  persons  (with  individual 
bedrooms, but shared bathrooms and kitchen facilities) are preferred.  This type of housing may be 
designed  to  look  like  a  big  house  and  is  compatible  with  and  appropriate  for  existing  residential 
neighborhoods with good access to transit and services. 
In  2008,  the  city  provided  Community  Development  Block  Grant  funds  to  TERI,  Inc.  for  property 
acquisition for a residential care home for developmentally disabled adults.  TERI operates two such 
homes in Carlsbad. 
Incorporating  ‘barrier‐free’  design  in  all  new  multifamily  housing  (as  required  by  California  and 
Federal Fair Housing laws) is especially important to provide the widest range of choices for disabled 
residents. In 2011, the city adopted a reasonable accommodation ordinance to provide flexibility in 
development standards for housing for persons with disabilities. 
The  most  severely  affected  individuals  may  require  an  institutional  environment  where  medical 
attention  and  physical  therapy  are  provided.    Because  developmental  disabilities  exist  before 
adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition 
from the person’s living situation as a child to an appropriate level of independence as an adult. 
10-26

Large Households 
Large households are defined as households with five or more persons in the unit.  Lower income 
large households are a special needs group because of their need for larger units, which are often in 
limited supply and therefore command higher rents.  In order to save for the necessities of food, 
clothing, and medical care, it is common for lower income large households to reside in smaller units, 
frequently resulting in overcrowding. 
According  to  the 2013  CHAS  data,  710  households were  considered  large  households  with lower 
income  levels,  or  0  to  80  percent  AMI.    This  represents  less  than  2  percent  of  the  city’s  total 
households—a small, but important special needs group to assist.  Of these large households, 23 
percent were owners and 77 percent were renters. 
According to the 2014 ACS estimates, the city’s housing stock included 28,689 units with three or 
more bedrooms.  Among these large units, 21,828 were owner‐occupied and 5,468 were renter‐
occupied, suggesting that rental units may be competitive to attain. 
Single‐Parent Households 
Carlsbad was home to 2,790 single‐parent households with children under age 18 in 2014, according 
to the 2014 ACS estimates.  Of these, 2,097 (75 percent) were female‐headed families with children.  
Single‐parent households, in particular female‐headed families, often require special assistance such 
as accessible day care, health care, and other supportive services because they often have lower 
incomes.  In fact, according to the 2014 ACS estimates, 26 percent of all single‐parent female‐headed 
households  with  children  lived  in  poverty  during  the  previous  year.    This  suggests  a  need  for 
affordable units with adequate bedroom counts and potentially some on‐site or nearby day care and 
other services. 
Homeless 
HUD defines a person as homeless if he/she is not imprisoned and: 
     1. Lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence; 
     2. The primary nighttime residence is a publicly or privately operated shelter designed for 
         temporary living arrangements; 
     3. The primary residence is an institution that provides a temporary residence for individuals 
         that should otherwise be institutionalized; or 
     4. The primary residence is a public or private place not designed for or ordinarily used as a 
         regular sleeping accommodation. 
 
Assessing  a  region’s  homeless  population  is  difficult  because  of  the  transient  nature  of  the 
population.  San Diego County’s leading authority on the region’s homeless population is the Regional 
Task Force on the Homeless (RTFH).  Based on the RTFH's "We All Count," a point‐in‐time count of 
San  Diego  County  homeless  conducted  annually,  the  majority  (96%)  of  the  region’s  homeless  is 
concentrated in the incorporated, urban areas, but homeless persons also make their temporary 
residence in rural, unincorporated areas and pockets of open space, such as creeks and hillsides..  
Rural homeless tend to be individuals and migrant farmworkers/day laborers.  The RTFH estimated 
                                                                                                          10-27

108 homeless persons in Carlsbad in 2016, including 41 unsheltered individuals (38 percent).  Since 
2011, and based on the annual point‐in‐time counts, the number of those unsheltered in the city has 
averaged  about  41  persons  per  year,  with  a  low  of  about  20  persons  in  2014  to  a  high  of 
approximately 80 persons in 2013. 
In the North San Diego County area, the majority of homeless persons congregate in the cities of 
Oceanside, Vista, and Escondido (Table 10‐12).  This is reflected in the number of shelters and service 
agencies in those communities (Table 10‐13), some of which are also in Carlsbad.  .  As La Posada de 
Guadalupe  provides  between  100  and  120  beds,  the  unsheltered  need  should  be  sufficiently 
accommodated in the city. 
TABLE 10–12:  HOMELESS POPULATION BY JURISDICTION 2016 
                                                   SHELTERED
     UNSHELTERED              EMERGENCY TRANSITIONAL                  SAFE HAVENS          TOTAL     % UNSHELTERED
                                SHELTERS           HOUSING
Carlsbad                 41                 67                    0                   0          108           38%
Encinitas                54                 28                   11                   0           93           58%
Escondido               225                 75                  224                   8          532           42%
Oceanside               392                 60                  521                   0          667           45%
San Diego City        2,745               885                1,419                   44        5,093           54%
San Marcos               44                  0                   55                   0           99           44%
Solana Beach              7                  0                    0                   0            7          100%
Vista                    64               112                   247                   0          423           15%
San Diego               336                  0                    8                   0          344           98%
County
Unincorporated
                                                                                                                    
Source:  San Diego Regional Task Force on the Homeless, We All Count Point‐In‐Time Count, 2016. 
                                        
10-28

TABLE 10–13:  HOMELESS SHELTERS AND SERVICES, NORTH SAN DIEGO COUNTY 
 
  NAME                  AGENCY               TARGET POPULATION    SPECIAL NEEDS      LOCATION       # BEDS1 
  Emergency Shelters 
  House of              Brother Benno’s      Women,  women with   Homeless           Oceanside             7 
  Martha and            Foundation           children 
  Mary 
  Libre!                Community            Women,  women with   Domestic           Encinitas            15 
                        Resource Center      children             violence 
  Carol’s House         Community Resource   Women, women with    Domestic violence  Encinitas            24 
                        Center               children 
  Women’s Resource  Women’s Resource         Women,  women with   Domestic           Oceanside            28 
  Center                Center               children             violence 
  Casa Raphael          Alpha Project        Adult men            Homeless           Vista                24 
  Transitional Shelters 
  Brother Benno’s  Brother Benno’s           Adult men and women  Homeless/Low‐      Oceanside          n.a. 
  Recovery              Foundation                                income 
  House of Dorothy  Brother Benno’s  Women                        Substance abuse  Oceanside               6 
                        Foundation 
  Casa Raphael          Alpha  Project for  Adult men             Homeless/Low‐      Vista             140. 
                        the Homeless                              income 
  Centro                Community            Families             Homeless           Vista               51 
                        Housing of N.C. 
  Family Recovery       E.Y.E.               Women  with          Substance abuse  Oceanside             90 
  Center                                     children 
  Solutions Intake  Solutions for            Family homeless      Homeless           Vista              322 
  and Access Center  Change 
  La Posada de          Catholic  Charities  Adult men            Homeless           Carlsbad           120 
  Guadalupe 
  Mary’s House          YMCA                 Young women          Emancipated        Oceanside             4 
                                                                  foster/probation 
                                                                  youth 
                                     
                                                                                              10-29

TABLE 10–13:  HOMELESS SHELTERS AND SERVICES, NORTH SAN DIEGO COUNTY  
    NAME                              AGENCY                        TARGET POPULATION             SPECIAL NEEDS                LOCATION               # BEDS1 
    Oz North Coast                    Y.M.C.A.                      Homeless youth                Homeless                     Oceanside                      6 
    Transition House                  Women’s Resource              Families                      Homeless                     Oceanside                     17 
                                      Center 
    Transitional House                Community Resource  Families                                Homeless                     Encinitas                     12 
    Program                           Center 
    LifeSpring House                  North County Lifeline         Young adults                  Homeless                     Vista                         13 
    Day Shelters 
    Brother Benno’s                   Brother Benno’s               General                       Homeless/Low‐income          Oceanside                     ‐‐ 
    Center                            Foundation 
    N.C. Regional                     M.I.T.E.                      General                       SMI and  substance           Oceanside                     ‐‐ 
    Recovery Center                                                                               abuse 
    Stand Up For Kids                 Stand Up For Kids             Youth                         Homeless                     Oceanside                     ‐‐ 
    Social Services 
    Case                              North Coastal                 General                       Homeless                     Oceanside                     ‐‐ 
    Management                        Regional  Center 
    Agency 
     211 San Diego                    2‐1‐1 San Diego               General                       Homeless/General             San Diego County              ‐‐ 
    North County Lifeline  Lifeline                                 General                       Homeless                     Vista                         ‐‐ 
                                      Community 
                                      Services 
    Oceanside Family                  Salvation Army                General                       Homeless                     Oceanside                     ‐‐ 
    Services 
    Social Services                   Community                     General                       Homeless                     Carlsbad Encinitas            ‐‐ 
                                      Resources Center 
    Social Services                   Interfaith Community          General                       Homeless/General             North County                     
                                      Services 
    TOTAL BEDS                                                                                                                                        589
                                                                                                                                                                  
   
  n.a. = Not Available 
 
  1 B a s e d  upon  the number  of shelter beds available  each night. 
 
 2  T h i s  facility is operated as part of Solutions for Change (SFC) 1000‐day Solutions University program.  A 32‐unit emergency shelter address 
    immediate homeless needs for up to 90 days; families can then transition into the program and campus‐style apartment housing for up to 500 days, 
    where  services, counseling and training are providing. Once families successfully complete this portion of the program, they become eligible to 
    move to permanent, off‐campus affordable housing during the second half of the program.  Currently, SFC owns and manages more than  80 units 
    throughout North County, including 16 units in Carlsbad. 
 
  Sources:  San Diego  Regional  Task Force on the Homeless, 2016; sandiego.networkofcare.org and www.211sandiego.org, both accessed July 
  2016. 
 
 
 
10-30

Farmworkers 
Based  on  the  environmental  impact  report  prepared  for  the  General  Plan  as  well  as  recent 
development primarily in Robertson Ranch, there are approximately 650 acres of agricultural land 
in Carlsbad (including active or fallow), a reduction of about 300 acres from that estimated in 2008.  
According  to  California  Regional  Economies  Employment  data  for  2013,  9,698  persons  were 
employed  in  agriculture  (including  forestry,  fishing,  and  hunting)  in  San  Diego  County,  earning 
average annual wages of $31,086, substantially lower than the area median income (AMI) of the 
county ($75,900). This data compares individual income versus household income and does not 
necessarily constitute the agricultural worker’s entire income; also, please note that the $75,900 
AMI for San Diego County has remained the same since 2012.  
 
According to the 2014 ACS estimates, only 158 persons who lived in Carlsbad were employed in the 
farming, forestry, and fishing occupations in 2014.  However, the Census likely underestimated the 
true number of farmworkers in Carlsbad due to the seasonal nature of the employment, the use of 
migrant  laborers,  and  the  significant  level  of  under‐reporting  among  undocumented  persons.    In 
2010, 89 of the city’s homeless persons were farmworkers or day laborers, further underscoring the 
needs of this group of residents/workers. 
 
In 2008, the City Council approved $2 million in Agricultural Conversion Mitigation Fee funding to 
rebuild  and  expand  the  city’s  existing  homeless/farmworker  shelter,  La  Posada  de  Guadalupe. 
Completed in July 2013, the expansion provides 50 to 72 beds specifically for farmworkers in addition 
to  the  50  beds  the  shelter  already  provides  for  other  homeless  persons  (which  may  include 
farmworkers).  More information about this project and the funding may be found in Section 10.3., 
Financial Resources. 
Students 
Typically, students have low incomes and therefore can be impacted by a lack of affordable housing, 
which can often lead to overcrowding within this special needs group.  Carlsbad is located in proximity 
to California State University at San Marcos, Mira Costa Community College, and Palomar Community 
College.  In addition, the University of California at San Diego is located approximately 20 miles to the 
south, and the private University of San Diego, as well as the region’s largest university, San Diego 
State University, are located within a 30‐minute drive from Carlsbad.  According to Census and ACS 
estimates  in  2010  and  2014,  respectively,  approximately  24  percent  of  Carlsbad  residents  were 
enrolled in a college or graduate school.  
Military 
The U.S. Marine Corps Camp Pendleton is located within five miles north of Carlsbad, adjacent to the 
city of Oceanside.  As a result, there is demand for housing for military personnel within Carlsbad.  
This demand has two components:  active military personnel seeking housing near the base, and 
retired military remaining near the base after serving.  Most enlisted military individuals earn incomes 
at the lower range of the military pay scale and need affordable housing options.  As of July 2010 
Camp Pendleton had approximately 7,300 housing units on base.  However, the waiting list for on‐
base housing can take up to 18 months, depending on rank, the number of bedrooms requested and 
                                                                                                      10-31

various other factors.  The 2014 ACS estimates reported that 917 active duty military personnel lived 
in Carlsbad.  Although proximity to the base makes Carlsbad a desirable place to reside for all military 
ranks, high housing costs may explain the relatively low number of military personnel residing in the 
city. 
In 2016, the city received proposals to build two very low income apartment projects specifically for 
veterans and totaling 50 units.  If approved, these projects would be constructed in the Village and 
Barrio neighborhoods, south of Carlsbad Village Drive. 
Housing Characteristics 
Housing Type 
According to SANDAG estimates, Carlsbad had 46,022 housing units as of 2015. Among these units, 
as indicated in Chart 10‐3, two‐thirds (67 percent) were single‐family, including 49 percent consisting 
of single‐family  detached  units and 18  percent single‐family  attached  units;  multi‐family  dwelling 
units comprised 30 percent of the city’s housing stock in 2015 and the remaining 3 percent were 
mobile homes. 
 
CHART 10‐3:  HOUSING TYPES 2015 
                                                                Mobile	home/other		
                                                                        3%
                    Multi‐family	
                       dwelling
                          30%
                                                                               Single‐family	
                                                                             detached	dwelling
                                                                                   49%
                         Single‐family	
                      attached	dwelling	
                             18%
Source: SANDAG, 2015 
Between 2000 and 2010, the housing stock in Carlsbad increased 31 percent (over 10,000 homes).  
Much of that increase was due to the significant increase in multi‐family units.  Through 2010, the 
proportion  of  single‐family  dwelling  units  (detached  and  attached)  and  mobile  homes  in  the  city 
decreased but the proportion of multi‐family units increased (Table 10‐14, below), suggesting a trend 
toward  more  compact  development  and  opportunities  for  more  affordable  housing;  this  trend 
continued  through  2015,  particularly  in  the  form  of  single  family  attached  housing.    The  pace  of 
growth, however, declined as the housing stock only increased by 1,600 units, or almost 4 percent. 
 
10-32

TABLE 10–14:          HOUSING UNIT TYPE 2000‐2015 
                                               2000                          2010                            2015 
   HOUSING UNIT TYPE                            #             %               #           %                   #        % 
   Single Family Detached                 17,824            53%         22,847          52%           22,5521        49% 
   Single Family Attached                  5,728            17%           6,765         15%               8,512      18% 
   Multifamily                             8,937            26%          13,511         30%             13,643       30% 
   Mobile Homes/Other                      1,309             4%           1,299          3%              1,315        3% 
   TOTAL                                  33,798          100%         44,422          100%             46,022      100% 
 1The decrease from 2010 to 2015 in single family detached housing units is due to use of different data sources 
 (SANDAG vs. U.S. Census) and is not an indicator of significant demolition or loss of housing units.   
    
   Sources: SANDAG, 2015; U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010. 
    
  The trend toward increased multi‐family construction is forecast to be county‐wide and long‐
  lasting:  SANDAG’s Series 13: 2050 Regional Growth Forecast estimates 84 percent of housing 
  growth by 2050 will be multi‐family. 
  Housing Tenure 
  From  2000  to  2010,  the  tenure  distribution  (owner  versus  renter)  in  Carlsbad  shifted  slightly 
  toward renters, while owner‐occupied units still represent the majority; 2014 data suggests this 
  trend is continuing.  Rental units are a good option for lower income households in the short‐term 
  since they do not necessitate large down payments (though they may require security deposits).  
  By definition, a household is an occupied housing unit.  
  According to the 2000 Census, among the occupied housing units in Carlsbad, 67 percent were 
  owner‐occupied  and  33  percent  were  renter‐occupied.    In  2010,  the  proportion  of  renter‐
  households  increased  to  35  percent,  while  the  proportion  of  homeowners  decreased  to  65 
  percent, which was higher than the average homeownership rate of San Diego County in 2010, 
  where only 54 percent of the households were owner‐occupied.  2014 ACS estimates appear to 
  suggest a similar or slightly higher percentage of renters as reported in 2010. 
  Housing Vacancy 
  A vacancy rate is often a good indicator of how effectively for‐sale and rental units are meeting 
  the  current  demand  for  housing  in  a  community.    Vacancy  rates  of  5  to  6  percent  for  rental 
  housing and 1.5 to 2 percent for ownership housing are generally considered a balance between 
  the demand and supply for housing.  A higher vacancy rate may indicate an excess supply of units 
  and therefore price depreciation, while a low vacancy rate may indicate a shortage of units and 
  resulting escalation of housing prices. 
  While  the  overall  vacancy  rate  in  the  city  was  7.5  percent  in  2014,  the  true  vacancy  rate  was 
  substantially lower (Table 10‐15).  Due to its desirable location and the various amenities offered 
  in the city, a portion of the housing stock in the city has always been used as second and vacation 
  homes.  These units were not available for sale or for rent.  Of those units available, the for‐sale 
  vacancy rate was 1.1 percent in 2014, and rental vacancy rate was 1.2 percent.  These low vacancy 
                                                                                                                   10-33

rates suggest that the for‐sale and rental markets are competitive and that sale prices and market‐
rate rents may increase. 
TABLE 10–15:  HOUSING VACANCY 2014 
                                     TYPE                                                #                 % 
For Rent                                                                                             592      1.2%
For Sale                                                                                             496      1.1%
Seasonal/Recreational Use                                                                          1,475      3.2%
Other Vacant1                                                                                       905       1.9%
OVERALL VACANCY                                                                                   3,468       7.5%
1
  I n c l u d e s  units that are rented or sold, but not occupied  (i.e., abandoned or otherwise vacant) 
Sources: 2014 ACS estimates. 
 
Housing Age and Condition 
Housing age and condition affect the quality of life in Carlsbad.  Like any other tangible asset, housing 
is subject to gradual deterioration over time.  If not properly and regularly maintained, housing can 
deteriorate  and  discourage  reinvestment,  thereby  depressing  neighboring  property  values,  and 
eventually affecting the quality of life in a neighborhood.  
Carlsbad’s housing stock is much newer on average compared to San Diego County’s housing stock 
(Chart 10‐4), suggesting households may need to spend less on repairs and upgrades. Although the 
city incorporated more than 50 years ago, the majority of the housing in Carlsbad is fairly new, with 
a relatively small portion of the housing stock over 30 years old (approximately 35 percent).  The 
majority (65 percent) of the city’s housing stock was constructed after 1980, including 21 percent 
that was constructed after 2000. 
Most homes require greater maintenance as they approach 30 years of age. Common repairs needed 
include a new roof, wall plaster, and stucco.  Using the 30‐year measure, as many as 15,000 housing 
units could be in need of repair or rehabilitation if they have not been well maintained.  Housing units 
aged more than 30 years are primarily concentrated in Carlsbad’s Village area.  
Homes older than 50 years require more substantial repairs, such as new siding, or plumbing, in order 
to maintain the quality of the structure.  Approximately 2,000 units are older than 50 years.  The 
Census Bureau also provides estimates of substandard housing conditions.  While this is not a severe 
problem in Carlsbad, in 2010, Census estimates included 13 units with incomplete plumbing and 41 
units  without  a  complete  kitchen.    According  to  the  city’s  Building  Department,  an  estimated  10 
housing units in the city are in dilapidated condition and in need of replacement.  
  
  
  
  
  
10-34

 CHART 10‐ 4:             YEAR STRUCTURE BUILT  2010 
                                                                                                        
 Sources:  U.S. Census, 2000; and American Community Survey 5‐year estimates for 2006‐2010. 
 
Housing Costs and Affordability 
 
If  housing  costs  are  relatively  high  in  comparison  to  household  income,  there  will  be  a 
correspondingly higher prevalence of housing cost burden (overpayment) and overcrowding.  This 
section summarizes the cost and affordability of the housing stock to Carlsbad residents.  
Homeownership Market 
Like most communities across the state and country, housing prices increased in the early 2000s in 
Carlsbad, decreased early this decade with the housing market and economic downturn, and then 
experienced an upswing.  From 2010 through early 2012, Carlsbad median sales prices dropped 15 
percent. Since, prices in the city have increased about 33 percent, or approximately $175,000 (Chart 
10‐5). 
The upward trend in home prices between 2015 and 2016 is characteristic not only for Carlsbad, but 
most other North County cities as well (Table 10‐16). Median home prices in Carlsbad climbed 4 
percent between 2015 and 2016.  At 24 percent, Solana Beach experienced the largest year over year 
increase in value. 
                                                                                                10-35

  CHART 10‐5:     MEDIAN HOME SALES PRICES IN CARLSBAD1  
 
        $800,000
                                                                          $678,000	 $687,000	
        $700,000
                                                               $644,000	
                    $591,000	  $587,000	
        $600,000                                    $558,000	
                                          $513,000	
        $500,000
        $400,000
        $300,000
        $200,000
        $100,000
               $0
                      2010       2011       2012      2013       2014       2015      2016
 
1 Data is as of January of each year; sales reported include single family homes and 
condominiums. 
Source:  www.zillow.com, July 2016 
 
                                  
10-36

TABLE 10–16:   MEDIAN HOME SALES PRICES 2015‐20161 
                                             2015               2016        % CHANGE 
                                                                          2015‐2016 
   Carlsbad                              $710,000          $ 740,000               4% 
   Encinitas                             $938,250          $975,000                4% 
   Escondido                             $410,000          $456,750               11% 
   Oceanside                             $420,909          $432,750                3% 
   Poway                                 $547,500          $665,000               22% 
   San Marcos                            $531,000          $543,000                 2% 
   Solana Beach                          $780,000          $970,000               24% 
   Vista                                 $455,000         $ 462,500               ‐2% 
SAN DIEGO COUNTY                         $459,000          $490,000                7% 
 1
   Prices as of May of each year listed.
                                                                                                
 Source: www.dqnews.com, July 2016. 
Rental Market 
Internet resources were consulted to understand the rental housing market in Carlsbad (Table 10‐
17).  Zillow.com indicates that as of August 2016, the year over year rent increase in Carlsbad is 4.7%, 
a figure which is based on the midpoint of estimated rents in the city. Other North County cities’ year 
over  year  rent  increases  as  estimated  by  Zillow.com  include  Encinitas  (0.8%),  Escondido  (4.8%), 
Poway (4.2%), Oceanside (5.3%), San Marcos (5.5%), Solana Beach (2.7%), and Vista (5.6%).  
In addition, websites were searched in July 2016 and rental price information was collected for 10 
apartment complexes within the city.  Rents for studio apartments ranged from $1,480 to $ 2,027 
per month, while one‐bedroom units rented for $1,485 to $ 2,930.  Larger units were slightly more 
expensive; two‐bedroom units were offered at rents ranging from $1,635 to $ 5,090, while three‐
bedroom units ranged from $2,519 to $6,427 per month.  It should be noted that these rental rates 
were  derived  from  units  in  large  apartment  complexes  that  are  often  managed  by  management 
companies.  As such, these units generally command higher rents than units in older and smaller 
complexes. 
                                                                                                     10-37

TABLE 10–17:   APARTMENT RENTAL RATES JULY 2016 
  APARTMENT TYPE                                            RENTAL PRICE RANGE
  Studio                                                           $1,480-2,027
  1-bedroom                                                        $1,485-2,930
  2-bedroom                                                       $1,635-5,090
  3-bedroom                                                        $2,519-6,427
                                                                                                     
 Sources: Apartments.com, Realtor.com, July 2016. 
Housing Affordability by Household Income 
Housing affordability can be inferred by comparing the cost of renting or owning a home in the 
city with the maximum affordable housing costs for households at different income levels.  Taken 
together, this information can generally show who can afford what size and type of housing and 
indicate the type of households most likely to experience overcrowding and overpayment. 
HUD  conducts  annual  household  income  surveys  nationwide  to  determine  a  household’s 
eligibility for federal housing assistance.  Based on this survey, HCD developed income limits that 
can be used to determine the maximum price that could be affordable to households in the upper 
range of their respective income category.  Households in the lower end of each category can 
afford less by comparison than those at the upper end.  The maximum affordable home and rental 
prices for residents of San Diego County are shown in Table 10‐18.  
The market‐affordability of the city’s housing stock for each income group is discussed below.  
Extremely Low Income Households 
Extremely low income households are classified as those earning 30 percent or less of the AMI.  
This group usually includes seniors, homeless, persons with disabilities, farmworkers, and those 
in the workforce making minimum wages.  Based on the rental data presented in Table 10‐17 and 
maximum affordable rental payment in Table 10‐18, extremely low income households of all sizes 
would  be  unlikely  to  secure  adequately  sized  and  affordable  rental  or  ownership  market‐rate 
housing in Carlsbad.  
Very Low Income Households 
Very low income households are classified as those earning between 31 and 50 percent of the 
AMI.  Based on the rental data presented in Table 10‐17 and maximum affordable rental payment 
in Table 10‐18, very low income households of all sizes would be unlikely to secure adequately 
sized  and  affordable  rental  market  rate  housing  in  Carlsbad.    Similarly,  real  estate  data  also 
indicated that very low income households in Carlsbad could not afford the purchase price of any 
adequately sized market‐rate home in the city.  
Low Income Households 
Low income households earn 51 to 80 percent of the AMI.  Based on the sales data provided by 
DataQuick, low income households would have a similar problem as very low income households 
in  purchasing  adequately  sized  and  affordable  housing,  either  single‐family  homes  or 
condominiums. 
10-38

Low income households have a better chance of securing rental market rate housing in Carlsbad 
than very low income households.  However, only the low end of the advertised rental rate ranges 
for two‐bedroom apartments would be affordable for some low income households, indicating 
that securing adequately sized and affordable market‐rate rental housing may be very difficult for 
larger low income households in Carlsbad. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                 
                                                                                           10-39

TABLE 10–18:  AFFORDABLE HOUSING COSTS 2016 
                                         AFFORDABLE PAYMENT                     HOUSING COSTS                 MAXIMUM AFFORDABLE PRICE 
   INCOME  GROUP AND                      MAXIMUM  AFFORDABLE                 UTILITIES     TAXES AND                      SALE               RENT 
   HOUSEHOLD SIZE                    ANNUAL INCOME  PAYMENT                                INSURANCE 
   Extremely Low 
   One‐Person                                $17,850              $446            $50              $100               $68,850                $396 
   Two‐Person                                $20,400              $510            $75              $125               $72,200                $435 
   Four‐Person                               $25,500              $638          $100               $150              $90,350                 $538  
   Five‐Person                              $28,440               $711          $100               $150            $107,300                  $611 
   Very Low 
   One‐Person                               $29,750               $744            $50              $125              $132,500                $694 
   Two‐Person                               $34,000               $850          $100               $150              $139,750                $750 
   Four‐Person                              $42,500             $1,063          $150               $175              $172,150                $913 
   Five‐Person                             $45,900               $1,148         $150               $175              $191,650                $998 
   Low 
   One‐Person                               $47,600             $1,190            $75              $175            $218,850              $1,1,115 
   Two‐Person                                $54,400           $ 1,360           $125             $200            $ 240,950                $1,235 
   Four‐Person                              $68,000           $ 1,700           $200              $225             $296,850                $1,500 
   Five‐Person                             $73,450             $ 1,836          $200              $225             $328,500               $1,636  
   Moderate 
   One‐Person                              $ 63,750             $1,595          $100              $225             $295,500               $1,494 
   Two‐Person                               $72,900             $1,823           $175             $275             $319,700               $1,648 
   Four‐Person                              $91,100          $   2, 278         $250              $325             $396,750                $2,028 
   Five‐Person                               $98,400           $ 2,460          $250              $325             $438,920               $2,210 
     Notes: 
     1.   2016 Area  Median  Income (AMI)  = $75,900 
  
     2.   Utility costs for renters assumed at $50‐$250 per month 
  
     3.   Monthly affordable rent based on payments of no more  than 30% of household income 
  
     4.   Property taxes and insurance based on averages for the region 
  
     5.   Calculation of affordable home  sales prices based on a down  payment of 20%, annual  interest rate of 5%,  30‐year mortgage, and 
          monthly payment of 30% gross household income. 
     Sources: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban  Development, FY 2016, and state Department of Housing and Community Development, 
     2016. 
Moderate Income Households 
Moderate income households are classified as those earning between 81 and 120 percent of the AMI.  
Based  on  income‐affordability,  moderate  income  households  could  afford  low  and  mid‐range 
market‐rate  rental  units  in  the  city,  except  for  three‐bedroom  units.    Regarding  for‐sale  units, 
DataQuick reports median sales prices for condominium resales averaging $540,750 in May 2016. 
While this is substantially lower than the resales of single‐family homes which averaged $862,500 
10-40

that month, it indicates that many condominiums would likely be out of reach of moderate income 
households.   
Overcrowding 
Overcrowding is typically defined as more than one person per room.  Severe overcrowding occurs 
when  there  are  more  than  1.5  persons  per  room.    Overcrowding  can  result  when  there  are  not 
enough adequately sized units within a community, or when high housing costs relative to income 
force  too  many  individuals  to  share  a  housing  unit  than  it  can  adequately  accommodate. 
Overcrowding  also  tends  to  accelerate  deterioration  of  housing  and  overextend  the  capacity  of 
infrastructure and facilities designed for the neighborhood. 
In 2014, fewer than 2 percent of Carlsbad households lived in overcrowded or severely overcrowded 
conditions (Table 10‐19).  Overcrowding disproportionately affected renters (2.3 percent of renters 
versus 0.8 percent of owners), indicating overcrowding may be the result of an inadequate supply of 
larger‐sized and affordable rental units.  While approximately 33 percent of occupied housing units 
in the city had more than three bedrooms (the minimum size considered large enough to avoid most 
overcrowding issues among large households), only a small portion of these units (11 percent or 
nearly 1,600 units) were renter‐occupied. 
    TABLE 10–19:         OVERCROWDING CONDITIONS 2014 
  TYPE                                                                   OWNER-OCCUPIED              RENTER-OCCUPIED         TOTAL
  Total Occupied Units                                                                      26,617             15,899       42,516
  Overcrowded Units (> 1 person/room)                                                            186             238           424
  % Overcrowded                                                                                 <1%             1.5%          <1%
  Severely Overcrowded Units                                                                      27             127           154
  (>1.5 persons/room)
  % Severely Overcrowded                                                                        <1%             <1%           <1%
                                                                                                                                    
 Sources:  2014 ACS estimates. 
  
Overpayment 
A household is considered to be overpaying for housing (or cost burdened) if it spends more than 30 
percent of its gross income on housing.  Severe housing cost burden occurs when a household pays 
more than 50 percent of its income on housing.  The prevalence of overpayment varies significantly 
by income, tenure, household type, and household size.  
According to the 2013 CHAS data, approximately 42 percent (17,648 households) of all households 
were overpaying for housing (Table 10‐20).  Overall, more owners than renters experienced a cost 
burden; among lower income households the opposite was true. Extremely low‐income households 
were more likely to have a cost burden of more than 50 percent; compared to other income levels, 
this suggests that they are not finding affordable housing options and that they have less income 
available for other needs.  Additionally, a high percentage of renters overpaying for housing in the 
moderate and above moderate income categories were likely to have a cost burden between 31 and 
50 percent.                                                                                    
                                                                                                                      10-41

TABLE 10–20:   HOUSING ASSISTANCE NEEDS OF ALL HOUSEHOLDS 
  HOUSEHOLD BY TYPE, INCOME                RENTERS (with cost burden) OWNERS (with cost burden)                  TOTAL
  AND HOUSING PROBLEM
  Extremely Low Income (0-30% AMI)                             1,460                     1,120                   2,580
     % with cost burden 31-50%                                    5%                        5%                     5%
     % with cost burden > 50%                                    95%                      95%                     95%
  Very Low Income (31-50% AMI)                                 1,680                       840                   2,520
     % with cost burden 31-50%                                   27%                      39%                     31%
     % with cost burden > 50%                                   73%                       61%                     69%
  Low Income (51-80% AMI)                                      2,354                     1,300                   3,654
     % with cost burden 31-50%                                   51%                      30%                     43%
     % with cost burden > 50%                                    49%                      70%                     57%
  Total Lower Income Households                                5,494                     3,260                   8,754
     % with cost burden 31-50%                                   32%                      24%                     29%
     % with cost burden > 50%                                    68%                      76%                     71%
  Moderate Income (81-100% AMI)                                 1,029                    1,070                   2,099
     % with cost burden 31-50%                                  91%                       50%                     70%
     % with cost burden > 50%                                     9%                      50%                     30%
  Above Moderate Income (> 100%)                               1,495                     5,300                   6,795
     % with cost burden 31-50%                                   86%                      79%                     81%
                                                                                                                     1
     % with cost burden > 50%                                    14%                      21%                     19%
  Total All Incomes                                            8,018                     9,630                  17,648
  % with cost burden 31-50%                                      49%                      57%                     54%
  % with cost burden > 50%                                       51%                      43%                     46%
                                                                                                                        
 Source:  2013 CHAS data. 
Inventory of Affordable Housing and At‐Risk Status 
Developing new affordable housing has become increasingly costly, due to the escalating land values, 
labor and construction costs, as well as market pressure.  Therefore, an important strategy for the 
City of Carlsbad is to ensure the long‐term affordability of existing affordable housing.  This section 
assesses  the  potential  conversion  of  publicly  assisted,  affordable  rental  housing  into  market‐rate 
housing  between  2013  and  2020.    Projects  can  be  “at‐risk”  of  conversion  due  to  expiration  of 
affordability restrictions or termination of subsidies. 
Inventory of Affordable Housing 
Through April 30, 2016, Carlsbad had 18 multi‐family rental projects that offer a total of 1,682 units 
affordable  to  lower  income  households  via  various  federal,  state,  or  local  programs.    The  city’s 
Inclusionary Housing Ordinance is responsible for producing 1,485 of Carlsbad’s affordable housing 
units in 15 developments as shown in Table 10‐21.  
10-42

In  addition,  Table  10‐21  identifies  four  affordable  projects  not  produced  through  inclusionary 
requirements.  One is the city‐owned Tyler Court that offers 75 affordable units to extremely low and 
very  low  income  seniors;  the  three  other  non‐inclusionary  affordable  housing  developments  are 
Cassia Heights, Tavarua, and an existing 16‐unit apartment complex acquired by Solutions for Change 
as part of its program to solve family homelessness.  All three projects, totaling 197 units, are rent‐
restricted and have been constructed or acquired through various funding mechanisms, including 
Community Development Block Grants, the city Housing Trust Fund, Housing Reserve Fund and then‐
Redevelopment Agency housing set‐aside proceeds. 
At‐Risk Status  
The  city’s  Inclusionary  Housing  Ordinance  requires  that  all  inclusionary  units  maintain  their 
affordability for a period of 55 years.  Since the units were all constructed after 1990, these units are 
not considered to be “at risk” of converting to market‐rate housing.  The Tyler Court senior apartment 
complex is owned by the city and if sold, would be required to maintain affordability restrictions for 
55  years;  these  restrictions  also  apply  to  Cassia  Heights,  Tavarua  and  the  Solutions  for  Change 
apartment complex.  The only project within the City that has been considered as at risk is Santa Fe 
Ranch, which was approved prior to the effective date of the city's inclusionary housing ordinance 
and thus not subject to the 55‐year restriction.  Instead, Santa Fe Ranch was subject to tax exempt 
bonds that, when repaid, would enable 64 affordable units to convert to market rate.  Upon bond 
repayment and following a one‐year notice to tenants, the units converted to market rate rents in 
2016. 
In 1985, the City Council issued Multifamily Housing Revenue Bonds to provide construction financing 
for the 320‐unit Santa Fe Ranch Apartments.  The incentive to the City to participate in this project 
was the restriction of 64 units to rents affordable to lower income households (80 percent of County 
area median income or below). 
In May of 1993, the City Council agreed to assist with the refinancing of the outstanding bonds for 
the subject project and allow the owner to take advantage of lower interest rates.  At that time, the 
City issued its Variable Rate Demand Multifamily Housing Revenue Refunding Bonds, which had an 
outstanding principal balance of $15.9 million.  The affordability restrictions on the 12 one‐bedroom 
and 52 two‐bedroom units remained in place for 30 years, or as long as the bonds were outstanding. 
Once  the  bonds  were  paid  in  full,  the  regulatory  agreement  with  the  City  expired,  enabling  the 
property owner to increase the rents. 
                                      
                                                                                                        10-43

       TABLE 10–21:            INVENTORY  OF ASSISTED RENTAL HOUSING 
PROJECT NAME                               QUADRANT        ASSISTED UNITS RESTRICTING PROGRAM1              EARLIEST DATE OF CONVERSION     
Archstone Pacific View                     Northwest                   111  Inclusionary Housing            Year 2058                           
5162 Whitman Way 
Bluwater Apartments                        Northeast                    12  Inclusionary Housing            Year 2064                           
6797 Embarcadero Lane 
Cassia Heights                             Southeast                    56  Regulatory Agreement  Year 2060                                     
2029 Cassia Way 
Glen Ridge                                 Northeast                    78  Inclusionary Housing            Year 2062                           
3555 Glen Avenue 
Hunter’s Pointe                            Southeast                  168  Inclusionary Housing             Year 2061                           
7270 Calle Plata 
Laurel  Tree                               Southwest                  138  Inclusionary Housing             Year 2055                           
1307 Laurel  Tree Lane 
Costa Pointe                               Southwest                     9  Inclusionary Housing            Year 2066                           
 7600 Sitio Del Mar  
La Paloma                                  Southeast                  180  Inclusionary Housing             Year 2060                           
1953 Dove Lane 
Marbella                                   Northeast                    29  Inclusionary Housing            Year 2061                           
2504 Marron  Road 
Mariposa/Calavera Hills                    Northeast                  106  Inclusionary Housing             Year 2059                           
4651 Red Bluff Place 
Poinsettia Station                         Southwest                    92  Inclusionary Housing            Year 2055                           
6811 Embarcadero Lane 
Rancho Carrillo                            Southeast                   116  Inclusionary Housing            Year 2055                           
6053 Paseo Acompo 
Solution for Change                        Northwest                    16  Regulatory Agreement           Year 2069                          
945 Chestnut Avenue 
Sunny Creek                                Northeast                    50  Inclusionary Housing            Year 2057                           
5420 Sunny Creek Road 
Tavarua Senior Apt.                        Northwest                    50  Regulatory Agreement  Year 2067                                     
3658 Harding  Street 
The Traditions                             Southwest                    24  Inclusionary Housing            Year 2060                           
1901 Cassia Way 
Tyler Court                                Northwest                    75  City Owned                      If sold, city would require         
3363 Tyler Street                                                                                           55 ‐ year restriction on  all 
                                                                                                            units 
Villa  Loma                                Southwest                  344  Inclusionary Housing             Year 2051                           
6421 Tobria  Terrace 
Vista Las Flores                           Southwest                    28  Inclusionary Housing             Year 2056                          
6408 Halyard  Place 
TOTAL                                                               1,682                                                                       
  1 Units restricted through the city’s Inclusionary Housing program require  55‐year rent restrictions. 
          Sources: City of Carlsbad, 2016. 
         
         
     10-44

     TABLE 10–22:           RENT SUBSIDY ANALYSIS 
   SANTA FE RANCH APARTMENTS                             UNIT MIX               MARKET RENT1                 AFFORDABLE RENT2                         REQUIRED SUBSIDY
   One-bedroom                                                     12                       $1,159                                   $1,156                                  $36
   Two-bedroom                                                     52                       $1,520                              $1,384                                   $7,072
   Total Monthly Required Subsidy                                                                                                                                        $7,108
   Total Annual Required Subsidy                                                                                                                                      $85,296
   1
    Market rent based on City of Carlsbad 2012 Fair Market Rent Payment Standards
   2
     M o n t h l y maximum rents as of Sept. 2013 (80% AMI).
                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Source: City of Carlsbad, Housing and  Neighborhood Services 
  
While  the  owner  had  the  option  to  pay  off  bonds  at  any  time  subject  to  provisions  in  bond 
documents, the city had no knowledge of owner interest in doing so, and considered prepayment to 
be  unlikely  since  market  rate  rent  values  were  not  significantly  higher  than  affordability  levels.  
However, as described in the Appendix A review of Program 1.5 (Preservation of at‐risk housing), the 
city monitored the status of the Santa Fe Ranch Apartments to ensure continued affordability as long 
as possible and also assisted in rent negotiations to enable 26 ( 40%) of the affected tenants to stay. 
As part of its monitoring efforts, the city had previously considered the options of preservation and 
replacement  of  the  affordable  units  at  Santa  Fe  Ranch  Apartments.    Details  regarding  each  are 
discussed below and in Tables 10‐22 and 10‐23, which were prepared in 2013.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                         
Preservation 
Preserving the affordability of existing housing is a primary goal of the City of Carlsbad. One option 
to preserve the affordability of the at‐risk units is to provide an incentive package to the owners to 
maintain the units as affordable housing.  Incentives could include writing down the interest rate on 
the remaining loan balance, and/or a lump sum payment.  
Another option would be for the city to provide a rent subsidy.  The subsidy amount would equal the 
difference  between  market  rent  and  affordable  rent.    As  shown  in  Table  10‐22  above,  annual 
subsidies of about $85,300 would be required to bridge the “affordability gap” of the at‐risk units at 
Santa Fe Ranch. 
Replacement 
One option for replacing the 64 units at Santa Fe Ranch would be to purchase similar units in Carlsbad 
and maintain them as long term affordable housing.  Using rule‐of‐thumb assumptions, the market 
value of the at‐risk units is estimated at $10.6 million, as shown in Table 10‐23 below.  
Construction of Replacement Units 
Another replacement option would be to construct new units.  The cost of developing new housing 
depends on a variety of factors such as density, size of units, location and related land costs, and type 
of construction.  Assuming an average development cost of $230,000 per unit for multi‐family rental 
housing, replacement of the 64 at‐risk units would require approximately $14.7 million.  This cost 
estimate includes land, construction, permits, on‐ and off‐site improvements, and other costs. 
 
                                                                                                                                                             10-45

  TABLE 10–23:  MARKET VALUE OF AT‐RISK HOUSING UNITS1 
  SANTA  FE RANCH  APARTMENTS                                                                                 REQUIRED SUBSIDY 
  One‐bedroom                                                                                                                     12 
  Two‐bedroom                                                                                                                     52 
  Total Units                                                                                                                     64  
  Annual  Operating Costs                                                                                                  $273,000  
  Gross Annual  Income                                                                                                    $1,179,360 
  Net Annual  Income                                                                                                       $847,392 
  Market Value                                                                                                         $10,592,400 
  1 Market value  for the project is estimated with the following assumptions: 
          Average  unit size: One‐bedroom = 650 square feet; Two‐bedroom = 900 square feet 
          Average  market rent (at $1.80/square foot): One‐bedroom unit = $1,170; Two‐bedroom = $1,620 
          Vacancy rate: 5% 
          Annual  operating expenses: $5.0/square foot 
          Net annual  income:  gross annual  income  less annual  operating costs less vacancy allowance 
          Market value:  net annual  income  times multiplication factor (12.5 for a building in  good/excellent condition) 
Cost Comparisons 
The above analysis attempts to estimate the cost of preserving the at‐risk units under various options. 
In  general,  providing  additional  incentives/subsidies  to  extend  the  affordability  covenant  would 
require the least funding over the long run, whereas the construction of new units would be the most 
costly option.  Over the short term, providing rent subsidies would be least costly but this option does 
not guarantee the long‐term affordability of the units. 
Summary – Santa Fe Ranch 
Santa Fe Ranch had a rent restriction requirement for low income households for 30 years due to the 
tax exempt bonds.  Unfortunately, the City had no other jurisdiction to extend any rent restrictions 
on the Santa Fe Ranch development and the property owner did not seek to extend the term of the 
bonds.  The property also was not made available for purchase and the owner sought no land use 
permits or additional financing from the city that may have given the city legal authority to add any 
additional years to the rent restrictions.  
Despite the loss of affordable units at Santa Fe Ranch, the city's Housing and Neighborhood Services 
Division helped negotiate rents so 26 of the 64 households affected could remain in their homes even 
with the rent increases.  Each household assisted was a Section 8 client.  In addition, since completion 
of Santa Fe Ranch, nearly 2,500 affordable units have been developed in Carlsbad; as noted in Table 
10‐21,  none  of  the affordable  rental  projects  in  Carlsbad are  at  risk of  converting  to  market‐rate 
housing.    Nevertheless,  the  city  acknowledges  that  demand  for  affordable  housing  far  exceeds 
supply. 
Resources for Preservation 
While not an issue in this housing cycle, preservation of at‐risk housing requires not only financial 
resources but also administrative capacity of nonprofit organizations.  These resources are discussed 
in Section 10.3 of this Housing Element. 
10-46

10.3 Resources Available  
This section summarizes land, financial, administrative, and energy conservation resources available 
for development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing in Carlsbad.  The analysis includes:  an 
evaluation of the adequacy of the city’s land inventory to accommodate the city’s share of regional 
housing needs for the 2013‐2021 planning period; a review of financial resources to support housing 
activities; a discussion of the administrative resources available to assist in implementing the housing 
programs contained in this Housing Element; and a description of the requirements and resources 
Carlsbad has to encourage energy efficient and healthy households. 
Residential Development Potential 
State law requires local jurisdictions to plan their residential land and standards to ensure adequate 
housing is available to meet the expected population growth in the region.  Specifically, a jurisdiction 
must  demonstrate  in  the  Housing  Element  that  its  residential  land  inventory  is  adequate  to 
accommodate its Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA).  This section assesses the adequacy 
of Carlsbad’s vacant and underutilized land inventory in meeting future housing needs. 
Future Housing Needs 
The State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) projected a need for 161,980 
new  housing  units  in  the  San  Diego  region  for  an  11‐year  period  between  January  1,  2010  and 
December  31,  2020.    The  San  Diego  Association  of  Governments  (SANDAG)  is  responsible  for 
allocating  this  housing  need  to  the  19  jurisdictions  within  the  county.    In  this  capacity,  SANDAG 
developed a RHNA that determines each jurisdiction’s “fair share” of the region’s projected housing 
need through 2020, based on factors such as recent growth trends, income distribution, and capacity 
for future growth.  
The City of Carlsbad’s share of the RHNA is 4,999 units, which is about 3 percent of the overall regional 
housing need.  The city must demonstrate availability of residential sites at appropriate densities and 
development standards to accommodate these units according to the following income distribution: 
               Very Low Income:1                               912 units (18 percent) 
               Low Income:                                     693 units (14 percent) 
               Moderate Income:                                1,062 units (21 percent) 
               Above Moderate Income:                          2,332 units (47 percent) 
Progress toward Meeting the RHNA 
While the Housing Element is an eight‐year plan (2013‐2021), the RHNA is based on HCD’s 11‐year 
																																																													
1
 According to 2013 CHAS data, 59 percent of the City’s very low income households fall within the extremely low income
  category (also see Table 10-9). Therefore the City’s RHNA of 912 very low income units may be split into 538 extremely
  low and 374 very low income units.
                                                                                                                  10-47

housing  need  planning  period  (2010‐2020).  Therefore,  housing  units  constructed,  under 
construction, or entitled since January 1, 2010 can be credited toward satisfying the city’s RHNA, even 
though those units were constructed or entitled prior to the planning period covered by this Housing 
Element.  Table 10‐24 provides a detailed accounting of the affordable units, including moderate‐
income units, approved, under construction or built between January 1, 2010 and April 30, 2016.  
Units Constructed and Under Construction  
As part of the city’s Inclusionary Housing program, affordable units have been constructed (or are 
under construction) in Carlsbad since January 1, 2010 (Table 10‐24).  Specifically, 46 very low income 
and 53 low income units have been constructed or are under construction and are subsidized through 
the inclusionary program or otherwise affordable due to anticipated rent.  Three of the low income 
units are second dwelling units whose owners have identified rents affordable to that income group.  
In addition, 62 units have been or will be produced for moderate income households, including 58 
second  dwelling  units,  through  anticipated  market  rents.    At  the  market  rate  level  for  above 
moderate income households, 1,766 dwelling units have been constructed since January 1, 2010 or 
are under construction. 
Units Approved 
In addition to units constructed, several residential development projects have been approved by the 
city (Table 10‐24).  These approvals include 266 dwelling units available for low income households 
and 120 units for moderate income households, based on the city’s inclusionary housing program or 
anticipated rent.  
                                    
10-48

  TABLE 10–24:       HOUSING PRODUCTION JANUARY 1, 2010 THROUGH  APRIL 30, 2016 
                                                    HOUSEHOLD INCOME
   PROJECT NAME                          VERY   LOW   MODERATE      ABOVE  TOTAL SUBSID Y/NOTES
                                         LOW                     MODERATE
  Completed/Under Construction                                                    See notes below
                                             46   53         62      1,766  1,927
  Various Market Rate                                                       1,766 n/a
                                                                     1,766
  Costa Pointe Condominiums                                                        Affordable agreement with
                                                    9                           9
                                                                                   City recorded
  Tavarua Senior Apartments                                                        Affordable agreement with
                                             35    15                          50 City recorded
  Smerud Duplex                                                                    Based on anticipated rent
                                                               2                2
  Roosevelt Gardens                                                                Affordable agreement with
                                             11                                11 City recorded
  Juniper Apartments                                           2                2 Based on anticipated rent
  Second Dwelling Units (non-                                                      Based on anticipated rent;
  inclusionary)                                     3                              those in “low” category
                                                             58                61
                                                                                   based on owner survey.
  Second Dwelling Units (inclusionary)                                             Affordable agreements with city
                                                   20                          20
                                                                                   recorded.
  Seagrove                                                                         Affordable agreement with city
                                                    6                           6
                                                                                   recorded.
                                                                                                                    
                                        
                                                                                                   10-49

  TABLE 10–24:            HOUSING PRODUCTION JANUARY 1, 2010 THROUGH, APRIL 30, 2016  
   
                                                           HOUSEHOLD INCOME
    PROJECT NAME                           VERY     LOW MODERATE          ABOVE   TOTAL SUBSID Y/NOTES
                                           LOW                         MODERATE
    Approved but not yet built                       266           120        347    733
    Encinas Creek Apartments (fka                                                        Inclusionary (Low) and
    Cantarini/Holly Springs)                                                             anticipated rent (Mod);
                                                       63           64               127 project density is 20.5
                                                                                         du/ac
    Dos Colinas (Senior)                               24                             24 Inclusionary
    State Street Mixed Use 30                                                            Inclusionary
                                                         2                             2
    Seascape                                                                             Second dwelling units;
                                                         2                             2 inclusionary
    Lumiere Carlsbad Village                             2                             2 Inclusionary
    State Street Mixed Use                               1                             1 Inclusionary
    Robertson Ranch Planning Areas 7 and 8            101           56               157 Inclusionary; master plan
                                                                                         requirement
    Quarry Creek Planning Area R-1                                                       Affordable agreement with city
                                                       64                             64 recorded
    Beachwalk at Roosevelt                               2                             2 Inclusionary
    Cascada Verde                                        5                             5 Inclusionary
    GRAND TOTAL                               46                   182      2,108
                                                      319                          2,655
Source: City of Carlsbad, 2016. 
 
Summary 
Table 10‐25 summarizes the city’s progress toward meeting the RHNA based on the data in Table 10‐
24.  Overall, the city has a remaining RHNA of 1,240 lower income and 8 880 moderate income units; 
the  city  must  demonstrate  the  availability  of  residential  sites  at  appropriate  densities  to 
accommodate these units. 
  TABLE 10–25:  PROGRESS TOWARD MEETING  THE RHNA 
   
                                                     HOUSEHOLD INCOME 
                                              VERY LOW          LOW     MODERATE   ABOVE MODERATE          TOTAL 
      Completed/Under  Construction                  46           53          62             1,766         1,927 
      Approved                                        0          266         120             347             733 
      Total                                          46          319         182             2,113         2,660 
      RHNA                                          912          693       1,062             2,332        4,999 
      RHNA Remaining                               866           374         880               219        2,339 
  Source: City of Carlsbad, 2016. 
10-50

Assumptions for Sites Inventory 
This section describes assumptions for how the sites inventory was determined, particularly as it 
relates  to  sites  appropriate  for  lower  income  households.    This  includes  reasonable  capacity, 
appropriate densities (General Plan land use designations), site conditions, and locations.  Unique 
site conditions exist in certain areas, namely the Village and Barrio; these are discussed below. 
Reasonable Capacity Assumptions 
Reasonable capacity is calculated for each site based on environmental constraints, site size, and the 
minimum permitted density.  
              Environmental Constraints.  Deductions are made for site constraints, which include steep 
               slopes, water bodies, and San Diego Gas and Electric transmission corridors. 
                     50  percent  of  the  land  area  on  25‐40  percent  natural  slopes  are  assumed  to  be 
                      available for development 
                     Natural slopes greater than 40 percent are excluded from capacity calculations 
                     Areas within the 100‐year flood zone are excluded from capacity calculations 
              Multiple Land Use Categories.  The acreage of any unentitled or underutilized parcel with 
               more than one General Plan designation (e.g. R‐15/L) is appropriately adjusted so unit 
               yields are based only on the portion of acreage reflective of the residential designation.  
              “Underutilized” Sites.  These are sites not developed to their full potential, such as an 
               older residence on a large lot designated for multi‐family residential.  The city considers 
               a property underutilized if its improvement value is less than its land value, with values 
               as determined by the San Diego County Assessor.2  Other factors considered and reflected 
               in  the  city’s  sites  selection  include  absentee  ownership  and  the  condition/age  of  the 
               structure on the property (greater than 55 years). 
              Parcel Size (outside the Village and Barrio).  With the exception of parcels in the Village 
               and the Barrio area, which have the highest densities allowable, all sites that have been 
               assumed  to  have  additional  development  potential  for  lower  and  moderate  income 
               housing  are  at  least  0.24  acre  in  size—a  threshold  where  infill  development  and 
               redevelopment have occurred in recent years, as shown in Table 10‐26.  
              Existing Units to Remain.  Any existing units on underutilized parcels are also deducted 
               before determining unit yields, resulting in a “net” unit value.3 
              General Plan Land Use Designation and Corresponding Zoning District.  Allowed density is 
               based on the General Plan land use designation and its corresponding minimum density, 
																																																													
2
    Many economic development experts use an improvement-to-land value of 2.0 or less for identifying underutilized
    properties for mixed use development. The city’s use of a ratio of less than 1.0 represents a relatively conservative
    assumption.
3
    When developing the RHNA, SANDAG has already included a replacement factor – an estimated number of existing
    units that may be demolished to make way for new construction. Therefore, the RHNA is a gross production requirement.
    The city’s sites inventory accounts for a net production capacity by discounting the existing units on site. Therefore,
    again, the city’s estimate of capacity is more conservative compared to the RHNA.
                                                                                                                    10-51

          as  described  in  the  sites  inventory  and  the  “Relationship  between  Affordability  and 
          Density”  subsection  below.    The  zoning  district  specifies  other  site  regulations  such  as 
          parking and lot coverage requirements. 
 TABLE 10–26:       A PPROVED MULTI‐FAMILY PROJECTS ON SMALL SITES 
   PROJECT                         SITE SIZE (IN ACRES)  UNITS       DENSITY (DU/AC)           APPROVAL DATE 
   Acacia Estates                                 0.32       4                    13                   2005 
   Tamarack Beach Lofts                           0.22       4                    18                   2006 
   Chestnut 5 Condos                              0.27       5                  18.5                   2008 
   Walnut Condos                                  0.80     15                   18.8                   2008 
   Seabreeze Villas                               0.69     12                   17.4                    2011 
   La Costa Bluffs                                1.56     24                   15.4                    2011 
   Vista La Costa                                 0.88     19                   21.6                   2012 
   201 Walnut Townhomes                           0.78     14                   17.9                   2013 
   Beachwalk at Juniper                           0.20       4                  19.8                   2013 
   Juniper Apartments                             0.21       4                    19                   2015 
 
 
         Assumed Density.  Each of the city’s residential land use designations specifies a density 
          range  that  includes  a  minimum  density,  maximum  density,  as  well  as  a  Growth 
          Management  Control  Point  (GMCP)  density  (the  GMCP  density  ensures  residential 
          development does not exceed the number of dwellings permitted in the city per the city’s 
          Growth Management Plan).  In the sites inventory, the minimum density is the assumed 
          “reasonable” density for the purposes of accommodating housing affordable to lower and 
          moderate income households.  
         Residential on Commercial Sites (Mixed Use).  The General Commercial, Local Shopping 
          Center  and  Regional  Commercial  land  use  designations  represent  the  city’s  mixed  use 
          districts that permit residential uses as part of a mixed use development.  Capacity on 
          these sites is assumed at a minimum of 15 units per acre on 25 percent of the developable 
          site area (the other 75 percent is assumed for non‐residential uses).  These sites are listed 
          in Appendix B (Table B‐5) of the inventory since they support the General Plan vision and 
          are good residential sites for moderate income households.  However, the General Plan 
          does not designate residential capacity to these sites (an excess dwelling unit allocation 
          is required) and they are not necessary to meet the RHNA; therefore, these sites are only 
          included in the Appendix B as additional possible residential sites. 
         Infrastructure Availability.  Sites are only included if necessary infrastructure is available 
          or planned.  Any exceptions are described below.  
Reasonable Capacity in the Village 
The Village is the densest district in Carlsbad with the best access to shopping, services, and public 
transit.    Because  of  this  accessibility,  it  represents  a  good  opportunity  for  the  development  of 
affordable housing for a range of income levels. 
10-52

In addition to the general assumptions above, in the Village, the minimum parcel size included in the 
sites inventory is 0.13 acre, which is the minimum deemed feasible for multi‐family development; 
the average size is 0.40 acre.  This relatively smaller parcel size is appropriate in the Village because: 
1. Village  development  standards  such  as  reduced  setbacks  and  parking  requirements,  and 
     increased lot coverage, are relatively flexible and in some cases  less stringent than similar 
     standards for properties elsewhere. 
2. Planned residential densities are higher in the Village, a minimum of 18 or 28 units per acre 
     (maximum of 23 or 35 units per acre), depending on the district, allowing at least two units 
     on a 0.13‐acre site. 
3. The  Village  land  use  designations  permit  mixed‐use  development,  in  which  residences  are 
     likely  to  be  smaller  apartments  or  condominiums  on  the  upper  floors.    While  the  city 
     encourages  mixed‐use  projects  in  the  Village,  development  of  stand‐alone  high‐density 
     residential projects is also permitted and would yield even more units.  To account for non‐
     residential uses, a conservative 50 percent of the potential capacity of units is assumed, while 
     the other 50 percent of developable area could be used for non‐residential uses.  
Reasonable Capacity in the Barrio 
The  Barrio  is  an  existing,  well‐established  neighborhood  just  south  of  the  Village  and  west  of 
Interstate 5.  A mix of older single‐family homes, condominiums, and apartments exist in the Barrio, 
and  a  number  of  the  properties  are  underutilized  and  absentee‐owned.    Furthermore,  the 
connection between the Barrio and the commercial services in the Village, as well as easy access to 
nearby train and bus services and Interstate 5, make the Barrio area appropriate for more dense 
residential uses. 
Though  property  values  in  the  Barrio  area  remain  high,  the  neighborhood  could  benefit  from 
additional investment.  Since 2000, the city has made a number of substantial public improvements 
in the area totaling more than $28 million, including utility undergrounding, storm drain and street 
improvements, and park and senior center enhancements.  In early 2018, the city will complete a 
new  community  center  and  community  garden  in  the  area  as  well,  an  additional  $8.6  million 
investment.  Carlsbad considers the area appropriate for redevelopment at standards and densities 
similar to the maximum densities approved for the Village.  Therefore, the city believes consideration 
of a lot size smaller than 0.24 acre, as is the minimum in locations outside the Village and Barrio areas, 
is acceptable.  In the Barrio, the minimum parcel size included in the sites inventory for lower and 
moderate income housing is 0.16 acre, except for the Harding Street Neighbors, LP parcels described 
below, and the average is 0.44 acre. 
Harding Street Neighbors, LP (Pacific Wind) 
On  January  29,  2013,  the  City  Council  authorized  financial  assistance  ($7.4  million)  to  assist  a 
developer acquire existing duplex units located in an area of the Barrio comprised of 27 parcels along 
Harding  Street,  Carol  Place  and  Magnolia  Avenue,  generally  north  of  Tamarack  Avenue,  south  of 
Magnolia  Avenue,  east  of  Jefferson  Street  and  west  of  Interstate  5.    The  intent  of  the  property 
acquisition is to consolidate the parcels and construct a new, high density (minimum 23 dwelling 
units/acre (du/ac)) lower income affordable housing development.  This project, "Pacific Wind," was 
                                                                                                          10-53

formally submitted to the city in 2015 and proposes 93 units.  
Twenty‐six of the 27 parcels associated with the property acquisition have been acquired and all units 
have undergone minor rehabilitation and are rent‐restricted; twenty‐one (80%) of the parcels are 
smaller (.13 to .15 acre) than the minimum parcel size for the Barrio (.16 acre); however, based on 
the approved funding agreement and intent to consolidate the lots for the purpose of constructing 
affordable  housing,  23  of  the  26  acquired  parcels  are  included  together  in  the  sites  inventory 
(Appendix B, Table B‐3) and combined can accommodate 93 lower income housing units, based on 
the proposed site plan.  The funding agreement calls for redevelopment of the site to be completed 
by December 31, 2018. 
Due to challenges created by the one parcel not acquired, three of the lots the developer did acquire 
will not be redeveloped at this time, and existing duplexes on them are planned to be substantially 
rehabilitated instead.  Acquisition of the remaining parcel may enable a second construction phase 
on this and the three parcels on which units will be rehabilitated.  This will potentially add 21 to 25 
lower income units to Pacific Wind, or a total of 114 to 118 units. 
Other Lot Consolidation Opportunities  
In addition to the Harding Street Neighbors, LP project described above, the city will encourage the 
consolidation of other small parcels in order to facilitate larger‐scale developments. Specifically, the 
city will continue to make available an inventory of vacant and underutilized properties to interested 
developers, property owners, market infill and redevelopment opportunities throughout the city, 
particularly  in  the  Village  and  Barrio,  and  meet  with  developers  to  identify  and  discuss  potential 
project sites.  For the Barrio, the city shall encourage the consolidation of parcels and enhance the 
feasibility of affordable housing through application of standards modifications, non‐conforming use 
regulations, and updates to the city’s Zoning Ordinance. 
Relationship between Affordability and Density 
For  Carlsbad  and  other  jurisdictions  considered  to  be  urban  metropolitan  areas,  California 
Government Code Section 65583.2 states that a density of 30 units per acre is appropriate to enable 
lower income housing.  However, the city can specify a lower density to accommodate lower income 
housing,  provided  the  city  can  demonstrate  how  sites  designated  at  the  lower  density  can 
accommodate  the  city’s  RHNA.    Such  analysis  may  include,  but  is  not  limited  to,  factors  such  as 
market  demand,  financial  feasibility,  or  information  based  on  development  project  experience.  
While the city acknowledges that the availability of higher density residential sites is directly related 
to the achievement of higher density housing, experience has demonstrated that in Carlsbad, the 
private housing market would not develop affordable housing solely because of the availability of 
high density land; instead, market intervention by local government is required. 
Accordingly,  in  the  early  1990s  the  City  of  Carlsbad  implemented  a  comprehensive  and  rigorous 
affordable  housing  program  (i.e.,  the  Inclusionary  Housing  Ordinance,  Carlsbad  Municipal  Code 
Chapter  21.85)  that:  1)  established  a  minimum  15  percent  inclusionary  lower‐income  housing 
mandate for all residential projects; 2) offered unlimited density increases for affordable projects; 3) 
allowed  for  modifications  to  development  standards  to  accommodate  higher  densities;  and  4) 
10-54

provided significant financial subsidies for affordable housing. 
Carlsbad has tailored its existing housing program to increase housing affordability.  A key component 
of the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance is to allow increased density on any residential site, provided 
there is an increase in the affordability of the development. 
As discussed in Section 10.4, the city maintains a voter‐initiated Growth Management Plan that limits 
the  amount  of  residential  development  in  the  city,  and  ensures  availability  of  adequate  public 
facilities  and  services  to  serve  all  new  development.  Residential  development  cannot  exceed  the 
GMCP density (unless there are “excess dwelling units” available).  Where development occurs below 
the GMCP density, the number of remaining units that otherwise would have been built on that site 
are “excess dwelling units” that are available to other residential developments to enable densities 
higher than the GMCP density.  Residential projects must meet specific city criteria to be eligible for 
“excess units.” Such criteria include development of affordable housing (in addition to that required 
by the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance). 
Market Demand 
SANDAG’s 2050 Regional Growth Forecast anticipates a substantial shift in housing types in Carlsbad 
during the next 30 years as the city approaches buildout and the population ages. SANDAG forecasts 
that from 2011 through 2040, the percentage of single‐family dwellings will decrease from 76 percent 
to 55 percent of new residential development.  Higher density infill development and a reduction in 
the amount of new residential development in Carlsbad during the next 30 years will be factors in 
these shifts. 
A market demand study prepared for the recent General Plan update confirmed this trend, finding 
that the projected population shifts by age group between 2008 and 2020 result in an increasing 
demand for multifamily housing over time, particularly from young professionals without children 
and empty nesters. 
Financial Feasibility 
During 2009‐2015 public outreach activities undertaken as part of the Housing Element, developers 
of both market rate and affordable housing were consulted, as described in Section 10.1.  Several 
developers  remarked  that  23‐25  du/ac  was  typically  the  threshold  for  constructing  a  housing 
development  in  Carlsbad  with  surface  parking.    Above  25  du/ac,  in  order  to  meet  parking 
requirements,  developments  would  typically  need  to  be  designed  with  subterranean  or  podium 
parking, which may render the project infeasible without significant subsidy. 
Recent Experience 
Most of the city’s affordable housing developments have been developed at a density between 10 
and  20  units  per  acre,  as  shown  in  Table  10‐27,  which  lists  the  city’s  recent  affordable  housing 
projects and their associated densities (notably, Tavarua Senior Apartments did exceed 20 units per 
acre,  since  40  of  the  50  units  are  one‐bedroom  units).    These  development  projects  reveal  that 
affordable housing for lower income households can be achieved on land designated at a density less 
than 30 units per acre. 
                                                                                                           10-55

            
            TABLE 10–27:  RECENT AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECTS 
             
  PROJECT1                              NUMBER  OF  STATUS                                         PROJECT   AFFORDABILITY   AVERAGE 
                                         AFFORDABLE                                     DENSITY (DU/AC)2                     SUBSIDY/UNIT 
                                         UNITS                                                                               (AB#)3 
  The Bluffs (ownership)                                10  Completed 2007                               15  100%  Lower     $20,000 
                                                                                                             Income          (AB 18,542) 
  Cassia Heights                                        56  Completed 2007                               21  100%  Lower     $50,523 
                                                                                                             Income          (AB 18,025) 
  Hunter’s Pointe                                    168  Completed 2007                                 11  100%  Lower     $11,500 
                                                                                                             Income          (AB 18,251) 
  Lumiere                                                 2  Approved  2008                            22.2  Low Income      Inclusionary 
  Seascape                                                2  Approved  2009                             4.3  Low Income      Inclusionary 
  Roosevelt Gardens                                     11  Completed 2010                               20  100%  Lower     $141,993 (AB 
  (ownership)                                                                                                Income          19,183) 
  Poinsettia Commons/                                   12  Completed 2010                             18.6  100%  Lower     Inclusionary 
  Bluewater                                                                                                  Income 
  Robertson Ranch/                                      78  Completed 2010                               16  100%  Lower     $13,000 
  Glen Ridge                                                                                                 Income          (AB 397) 
  Smerud Duplex                                           2  Completed 2012                            14.3  100%            n/a 
                                                                                                             Moderate 
                                                          9  Completed 2013                            11.5  16%  Low/84%    Inclusionary 
  Costa Pointe                                                                                               Market 
  Tavarua Senior                                        50  Completed 2013                               56  100%  Lower     $75,000 
  Apartments                                                                                                 Income          (AB 418) 
  State Street Mixed  Use                                 1  Approved  2011                            32.1  Low Income      Inclusionary 
  Seagrove (ownership)                                    6  Under construction                        24.9  13% Low/87%      Inclusionary 
                                                                                                             Market 
  Robertson Ranch Planning Areas 7                    157  Under construction               18.8 and 22.7  36% Moderate, 64% Inclusionary 
  and 8                                                                                                      Low 
  Dos Colinas                                           24  Approved  2012                              n/a  Low Income      Inclusionary 
  Encinas Creek                                       127  Approved  2013                              20.5  50%  Low/       Inclusionary 
  Apartments                                                                                                 50%  Moderate 
  (fka Cantarini/ 
  Holly  Springs) 
  Quarry Creek                                          64  Approved 2016                              20.2  Low Income      $20,000 (AB 
  Planning Area R‐1                                                                                                          22,248) 
  Robertson Ranch                                       20  Approved 2016                                20  20% Low/80%     Inclusionary 
  Planning Areas 22                                                                                          Market 
  and 23G 
1  All projects are rentals unless otherwise noted.  
2  “du/ac” is dwelling units/acre. 
3  AB# identifies the City Council agenda  bill  number  from which  the subsidy amount was obtained. 
                                                                
           10-56

Assumed Densities 
In summary, the density of 30 units per acre, which is specified by Government Code Section 65583.2 
as appropriate for lower income housing, is higher than the densities at which affordable housing is 
typically built in Carlsbad and which is deemed to be feasible by potential developers.  As a result, 
the sites inventory recognizes that densities as low as 12 units per acre are appropriate for moderate 
income housing and 20 units per acre for lower income housing. 
Table  10‐28  identifies  the  land  use  designations  that  generally  correspond  to  various  household 
income  levels  for  the  purposes  of  the  sites  inventory.    The  minimum  and  maximum  densities 
permitted are displayed along with the GMCP density.  The sites inventory assumes the minimum 
density permitted by the General Plan land use designation and is thus a conservative estimate of 
realistic  capacity.    For  R‐1.5  and  R‐4  designated  sites,  the  GMCP  densities  are  assumed  in  the 
inventory. 
   TABLE 10–28: L AND USE DESIGNATIONS AND AFFORDABILITY 
 
   GENERAL PLAN  LAND  USE                              IMPLEMENTING                             DENSITY  RANGE                      GROWTH  APPROPRIATE 
   DESIGNATION                                          ZONING DISTRICT                        (MINIMUM  AND                  MANAGEMENT   INCOME LEVELS2 
                                                                                          MAXIMUM)  (DU/AC)                  CONTROL POINT 
                                                                                                                                      (DU/AC) 
   R‐1.5 Residential                                    R‐1, R‐A, P‐C1,                                    0 ‐ 1.5                             1  Above 
                                                        RMHP                                                                                      Moderate 
   R‐4 Residential                                      R‐1, R‐A, P‐C1,                                       0 ‐ 4                         3.2 
                                                        RMHP 
   R‐8 Residential                                      R‐1, R‐2, RD‐M, P‐                                    4 ‐ 8                           6 
                                                        C1, RMHP 
   R‐15 Residential3                                    R‐3, RD‐M, P‐C1,                                    8 ‐ 15                         11.5 
                                                        RMHP 
   R‐23 Residential4                                    R‐3, RD‐M, R‐W, P‐                               15 ‐ 23                             19  Moderate 
                                                        C1, RMHP,  R‐P 
   General Commercial  (GC)                             C‐2                                              15 ‐ 30                          n/a5 
   Local Shopping Center (L)                            C‐L                                              15 ‐ 30                          n/a5 
   Regional  Commercial  (R)                            C‐2                                              15 ‐ 30                          n/a5 
   Village  (V)                                         V‐R                            District 5‐9: 18 ‐ 23                              n/a5 
   R‐30 Residential                                     R‐3, RD‐M, P‐C1,                                 23 ‐ 30                             25  Extremely Low, 
                                                        RMHP,  R‐P                                                                                Very‐Low,  Low 
   Village  (V)                                         V‐R                            District 1‐4: 28 ‐ 35                              n/a5 
   1 S u b j e c t  to an approved  master plan. 
  2 Applies to sites where  no project is approved  that provides affordable housing; approved  affordable housing projects may be located 
      within any residential designation, since the affordable housing provided by the project is typically achieved through the city’s 
      Inclusionary Housing requirements. 
  3Sites designated R‐15 are assumed available  for moderate income  housing if the property is subject to a master plan  that establishes a 
      minimum density of 12 or more  units per acre. 
  4Sites designated R‐23 are assumed available  for low  income  housing if the property is subject to a master plan  that establishes a minimum 
      density of 20 or more  units per acre. 
   5R e q u i r e s  an allocation of “excess dwelling units”; 759“excess dwelling units” are currently reserved for the Village  and are included  in  the 
      estimated General Plan residential capacity. 
 
                                                                                                                                                    10-57

The  General  Plan’s  R‐30  and  Village  designations  accommodate  lower  incomes.    The  R‐30 
designation requires a minimum of 23 units per acre and permits up to 30 units per acre.  When 
a density bonus is applied to the R‐30 designation, the maximum density can potentially reach 40 
units  per  acre  (at  a  maximum  density  bonus  of  35  percent  under  state  density  bonus  law).  
Additionally, the city’s ordinances allow for density increases that exceed state density bonus law, 
as illustrated by the Tavarua Senior Apartments shown in Table 10‐27. 
These  designations  may  also  be  appropriate  for  extremely  low  income  households,  such  as 
agricultural workers, seniors earning fixed incomes, homeless seeking transitional or supportive 
housing, and other one‐bedroom housing types. 
The  R‐23  designation  is  assumed  to  accommodate  moderate  income  households.    Its  density 
range permits between 15 and 23 units per acre. Commercial designations are also appropriate 
for  moderate  incomes.    Above  moderate  income  housing  may  be  appropriate  in  any  density 
category, but is assumed for R‐15 and lower density residential designations. 
Residential Sites Inventory 
The following residential  sites inventory represents sites  that have densities  and conditions to 
accommodate the city’s remaining RHNA.  These sites are illustrated in Figure 10‐1 and described 
in  detail  in  Appendix  B.    The  sites  inventory  is  divided  into  two  categories:    Vacant  Sites  and 
Underutilized Sites (these sites exclude vacant or underutilized sites with an approved, but not 
yet built, development project listed in Table 10‐24). 
Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing 
Vacant  
Table  10‐29  provides  a  summary  of  the  vacant  sites  that  can  accommodate  development  of 
housing appropriate for lower and  moderate income levels (the  complete inventory of sites is 
provided in Appendix B).  Allowed density is equivalent to the minimum density as stated in the 
General  Plan  and  Table  10‐28.    In  total,  vacant  sites  can  accommodate  112  housing  units 
appropriate  for  very‐low,  376  units  for  low  income  households,  and  580  units  appropriate  for 
moderate income households. 
Underutilized 
In addition, there are opportunities to meet the RHNA through redevelopment of “underutilized” 
sites, which include sites with transitional uses such as agriculture or surface parking, residential 
uses developed at a density lower than the minimum density allowed, or where the value of the 
structure/improvement is less than the land value.  The recent  General Plan update identified 
land with the greatest potential to accommodate future development.  Many of the sites permit 
multi‐family housing in residential and mixed‐use locations (such as the Village and Barrio) that 
are close to transit and services. 
                                        
10-58

  TABLE 10–29: HOUSING SITES INVENTORY SUMMARY  
                                                  HOUSEHOLD INCOME  
  TYPE                   VERY LOW              LOW                      MODERATE                    ABOVE MODERATE                                   TOTAL 
  Vacant                        112              376                                   575                                      881                    1,944 
  Underutilized                                    96                                  399                                      374                    1,893 
                              1,024 
  TOTAL                                                                                                                                                           
                              1,136              472                                   974                                   1,255                     3,837 
                                                                                                                                                                  
  Note:  Sites in the Village are included in the “vacant” and “underutilized “categories. 
  Source:  City of Carlsbad, 2016.                                                                                                                                  
Table 10‐29 summarizes the capacity of underutilized housing sites.  The underutilized inventory 
in Appendix B documents two categories of underutilized sites: 
         The first category includes sites where the existing use is surface parking or agricultural 
          land appropriate for transition to residential uses (Table B‐2 in Appendix B).  These sites 
          result in 282 housing units appropriate for very‐low income households and 149 units for 
          moderate income households. 
         The second category of underutilized sites include sites where there is a structure(s) on 
          site,  but  the  use  is  built  below  the  allowed  minimum  density,  or  the  value  of  the 
          structure/improvement is less than the land value (Table B‐3 in Appendix B).  These sites 
          could accommodate an additional 838 units appropriate for lower income housing and 
          250 units for moderate income households.  
Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Housing 
As described in Table 10‐28, sites appropriate for market rate housing are found in the following 
land use districts: R‐1.5, R‐4, R‐8 and R‐15.  These land use designations typically permit single‐
family and medium density multi‐family dwellings that are likely only affordable for households 
earning  above  moderate  incomes.    The  sites  inventory  includes  343  acres  of  vacant  land  with 
these  land  use  designations,  which  can  accommodate  an  estimated  881  housing  units.    The 
inventory also includes 165 acres of underutilized land—primarily residential uses that are built 
at a lower density than the designation allows.  These underutilized sites could accommodate an 
additional 374 units. These sites are identified in Appendix B (Table B‐4). 
                                         
                                                                                                                                                            10-59

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 10-1: Housing Element Sites
                                                                                               78
                                            OCEANSIDE
                                               City of
                                                                                               }                                                                                                                                                                                        Inventory
                                                  Oceanside                                  RRO N          RD
                                                                                           MA
                                                                                                                DR
                                                                  Buena                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 78
                                                                  Vista                        VI
                                                                                                LL
                                                                                                  AG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                }                    Va ca nt Site s forLowe ra nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mod e ra te Incom e Hous ing
                                                                  Lagoon                                               EL                                                                   Calavera
                                                                                           D
                                                                                         BA                                                                                                 Lake
                                                                                       LS
                                                                                      R                                    INO                                                                                                                                                       Und e rutil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ize d Site s forLowe r
                                                                                    CA                                  CAM                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a nd Mod e ra te Incom e Hous ing
                                                                                                                                          AR
                                                                                                                                            ACK                                                                                                                                      – Ca te gor y1(  Pa r kingLot a nd
                                                                                                                               AL               AV                                                                                                                                   Agr icultural Site s )
                                                                                                       E                     RE
                                                                                                     AV                                    M
                                                                                                                                         TA
                                                                                                  ACK                                                                                                                                                                                Und e rutil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ize d Site s forLowe r
                                                                                                 R
                                                                                               MA                                                                             RD
                                                                                             TA                                                                O N                                                                                                                   a nd Mod e ra te Incom e Hous ing
                                                                                                                                                             NN
                                                                                                                                                          CA                                                                                                                         – Ca te gory2(   O the r
                                                                                                                                                             EL                                                           Squires                                                    Und e rutil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ize d Us e s )
                                                                                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                                                                                       MI
                                                                                                                                                                        NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                                                        RE                                                                                           Va ca nt a nd Und e rutil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ize d Site s
                                                                                                                                                                                          AL                                                                                         forAbov   e Mod e ra te I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nc om e
                                                                                         AD
                                                                                                        Ag ua
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAN MARCOS             Hous e hol  ds
                                                                                       SB
                                                                                                            Hed io nda
                                                                                     RL                           L ago on
                                                                                                                                                                FAR                                                                                 City of
                                                                                   CA                                                                                AD   A                                                                          Vista
                                                                                                                                                                           Y
                                                                                                                     CANN                                                          AV                                                                                                Ha r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d ingStr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e e t Ne ighbor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             s ,LPPr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ope r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ty
                        P a c i f i c                                                     BLVD
                                                                                                                         O N R
                                                                                                                              D                                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Highwa ys
                          O c e a n                                                                                                                                                                                PALO MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R AI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RT RD                                               Ma jorStr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             eet
                                                                                                                                                                                        MCCLELLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                         PALO MAR                                                                                    Ra il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         roa d
                                                                                                                                                                                         AIRPO RT                                                               City of
                                                                                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                          RPO T RD
                                                                                                                                         AI                                                                                                                   San Marcos             CityLim its
                                                                                                                              PALO MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                            O BLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                C       DA R
                                                                                                                                                                                                       VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                    NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                 AM I                                A LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TTI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PO
                                                                                                                                                               LN
                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                             TTI                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                           SE                                                                                        A R
                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                         I                                                                                        ALG
                                                       LAGUNADR                                                                                       PO                 AV
                                                                                                                                                                           IAR
                                                                                                                              AD
                                                                                                                                                                              A
                                   ST
                                                                                                                           LSB
                              SO N
                                                                                                                                                                                        P
                           ER
                                                                                                                        CAR
                     JE FF
                              ST
        E
                                                                                                  VE
                            N
      AV
                      DISO
                                                                                                                                                                                           Y
                                                                                                KA
                   MA
                                                                                                                                                                                        KW
                                 ST
    IC                       ELT
   F
  CI                                                                                          OA
                      O SEV
PA
                   RO
                         E  ST
                      AT
                                                                DR
                    ST
                                                                                                    E                            D
                                                                                                                             BLV
                                                    E
                                                 AV           E                    5             AV
      N                                       AND
                                                          L
                                                         VI
                                                           LAG                    §
                                                                                  ¦
                                                                                  ¨           P
                                                                                               NE
                                                                                               I
    EA            AY                        GR        AD
  OC             W                                  B
              H               AY                   S
            EC               W                   RL
                        N                      CA
      ST
          BE          SE                                                                                                                                                            Lago o n
                    AN
                    I                                      VE                                                                                                B a tiq ui tos
                   T
                  S
                 RI                                      KA                                                                                                             LA     CO STA
                                                                                                                                                                                      AVE
                              AD                        A                                                                                                                                                                                     A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STA V
               CH                                     O
                            SB                                                     NG
                          RL                                   AV
                                                                  E             RD
                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ACO
                        CA                                                    HA                                                                                                                                                      L             E
                                                            NE
                                                            I
                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MI
                                                                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                CA
                                                                          E
                                        N
                                              N
                                                                     AV
                                      OL
                                            SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RD
                                                                   UT
                                    NC
                                                                  N                                                                                                             City of                      EL                                                                                                  500ACRES
                                              DI E
                                   LI                           AL        VE
                                                                                                                                                  O                                                                                       S
                                                               W
                                                GO
                                                                                                                                                                               Encinitas
                                                                                                                                             DIEG
                                 VD                                     TA
                                BL                                     U             E                                                                                                                                                     AN
                                                                                                                                         SAN
                                                          RN
                                                                     TN           AV
                                                     RT
                                                        HE
                                                                   ES           M                                                                                                                                                            TA F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                  H            L                                                                                                                                     AL
                                        ST        NO             C           PA                                                                                                                                    RE                                                                                          100
                                         TA
                                           VE                                                                                                               ¦5
                                                                                                                                                            §
                                                                                                                                                            ¨                                                                                 O                                                               ACRES
                                                                                                                                                    RN
                                                         RR
                                        U
                                                                                                                                                THE
                                       N                                                                                                                                                                                              R
                                     AL                                                                                                                                                                                                AN
                                                                                                                                             NOR
                                    W                                         MAGNO LI
                                                                                     AAVE                                                                                                                                                CH
                                                 ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0          0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5           1                         2
                                                D
                                              EL
                                              I               VE
                                            RF              AA
                                                                                                                                                  RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         es
                                          GA              CI
                                                         A
                                                       AC                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ce :Cityof Ca r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ls ba d ,2016;Dye tt &Bha tia ,2013.
                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ENCINITAS
                                                                                Harding Street Neighbors,
                                                                                LP Property
Document Path: J:\cbgis\data\GP_Update_Graphics\Fig 10-1 Housing Element Sites Inventory\v103\Fig 10-1 Housing Element Sites Inventory_RevisedDec2016.mxd                                                                                                                                                                10-60


Commercial Mixed Use 
Commercial  designated  sites  where  residential  uses  are  appropriate  and  supported  by  the 
General Plan vision, are also documented in Appendix B, Table B‐5.  These sites can accommodate 
357  moderate  income  households.    However,  the  General  Plan  does  not  designate  residential 
capacity to these sites (excess dwelling units are required) and they are not necessary to meet the 
RHNA; therefore, these sites are only included in Appendix B as additional possible residential 
sites. 
Infrastructure Constraints 
Services will be constructed in tandem with residential development as required by the city’s Local 
Facilities Management Plans, to ensure adequate provision of infrastructure facilities.  As of April 
2013 with the approval of the Quarry Creek Master Plan, all required Local Facilities Management 
Plans have been prepared and approved.  The adequacy of facilities is monitored annually as part 
of the city’s Growth Management Plan.  The city’s Growth Management Monitoring Report (FY 
2014‐2015) concluded that all monitored facilities are adequate to serve existing development, 
and that with planned improvements, will be adequate to serve new development through build‐
out. 
Adequacy of Sites Inventory in Meeting RHNA 
As the sites inventory demonstrates, the city has the capacity to accommodate the RHNA. This 
inventory accommodates potential development of 1,182 very low,  791 low,  1,156 moderate, 
and 3,363 above moderate income units. Combined, the city has land resources and programs to 
accommodate the RHNA at all income levels. 
TABLE 10–30:  ADEQUACY OF SITES IN MEETING RHNA, BY HOUSEHOLD INCOME 
  SITE TYPE               VERY LOW         LOW           MODERATE             ABOVE          TOTAL 
                                                                         MODERATE 
  Development                    46         319                 182           2,108          2,655 
  Projects1 
  Vacant2                       112         376                 575             881          1,944 
  Underutilized2              1,024          96                399              374          1,893 
  TOTAL                      1,182          791              1,156            3,363          6,492 
  RHNA                          912         693              1,062            2,332          4,999 
  Surplus/Deficit               270          98                  94           1,031          1,493 
    1
      Per Table 10‐24 
    2
      Per Table 10‐29 
 Source:  City of Carlsbad, 2016. 
                                      
10-62

Financial Resources 
Providing  for  an  adequate  level  of  housing  opportunities  for  Carlsbad  residents  requires  creative 
layering of funding.  Often one single source of funding is inadequate to address the extensive needs 
and depth of subsidies required.  The city must program the uses of limited funding effectively to 
maximize the number of households that can be assisted. 
For the last several decades, the city’s Redevelopment Housing Set‐Aside Fund was one of the city’s 
major sources of funding for affordable housing.  However, following state legislation eliminating all 
redevelopment agencies in California, the Carlsbad Redevelopment Agency was dissolved effective 
February 1, 2012 and along with it this source of affordable housing funding. 
The city’s Affordable Housing Trust Fund remains the primary source of housing funding, though the 
city is exploring a housing impact fee on rental units as described below and in Section 10.7 (Program 
3.7).  In addition, the city reserves a portion of the U.S. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) 
and HOME Program funds for affordable housing development.  Other supplemental sources include 
Section  108  loan  guarantee  and  Section  8  rental  assistance.    Another  funding  source,  the  city’s 
Agricultural Conversion Mitigation Fee program, has been used to build farmworker housing. 
The city’s policy is to leverage, to the maximum extent feasible, the use of funds available in the 
development of affordable housing.  The city supports the use of CDBG funds for predevelopment 
activities and “gap financing” of developments by private and nonprofit entities. 
Affordable Housing Trust Fund 
With the implementation of the city’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance, the city established a Housing 
Trust  Fund  to  collect  fees  generated  from  the  Inclusionary  Housing  In‐Lieu  Fee  and  the  sale  of 
affordable housing credits to satisfy a developer’s inclusionary housing obligation.  All fees collected 
are  used  exclusively  to  facilitate  the  construction,  preservation,  and  maintenance  of  affordable 
housing pursuant to the City’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance. As of July 31, 2016, the Housing Trust 
Fund had an unencumbered balance of $14.1 million. 
The Inclusionary Housing In‐Lieu Fee is the single largest contributor to the Housing Trust Fund. The 
city’s  Inclusionary  Housing  Ordinance  requires  15  percent  of  new  residential  development  to  be 
reserved as affordable to lower income households.  Developers of small projects with no more than 
six units have the option to pay a fee in lieu of providing on‐site affordable units.  At the discretion of 
the city, other options to providing units on‐site, such as dedicating land, may also be possible. 
Housing Reserve Fund (CDBG/HOME) 
The CDBG Program is administered by HUD.  Through this program, the federal government provides 
funding to jurisdictions to undertake community development and housing activities. The primary 
CDBG objective is the development of viable urban communities, including decent housing and a 
suitable living environment, and expanding economic opportunity, principally for persons of low‐and 
moderate‐income.  The City of Carlsbad receives an allocation of approximately $500,000 in CDBG 
funds annually.  Recently, the City allocated nearly $170,000 in CDBG funds to complete accessibility 
                                                                                                       10-63

improvements in the Barrio, primarily along Chestnut Avenue.  In 2014, the city awarded CDBG funds 
($452,000) and Housing Trust Funds ($2.4 million) to Solutions for Change to acquire an existing 16‐
unit  apartment  complex  in  the Barrio  and  convert  it  to  affordable  housing  for  graduates of  their 
academy that helps homeless families find permanent housing. 
The  HOME  Program  provides  federal  funds  for  the  development  and  rehabilitation  of  affordable 
rental and ownership housing for households with incomes not exceeding 80 percent of area median 
income.  The city participates in the San Diego County HOME Consortium.  The HOME Program is 
administered by the San Diego Housing Commission under contract with the County of San Diego.  
Previously, the city received on average about $211,000 per year in HOME Program funds from the 
County consortium for eligible projects and programs within Carlsbad.  The HOME consortium funds 
are now used by the County to fund the county‐wide down payment assistance program, for which 
Carlsbad residents are eligible to participate. 
The  city  has  established  a  Housing  Reserve  Fund  with  allocations  from  its  CDBG  Program  to 
accumulate funds for creating additional affordable housing opportunities in Carlsbad.  Funds are 
used  to  help  identify  appropriate  properties  for  possible  acquisition  and/or  development  of 
affordable  units.    Once  an  appropriate  property  is  identified,  Housing  Reserve  Funds  may  be 
reallocated for acquisition and/or development of a specific property. 
CDBG Section 108 Loans 
In the 1990s, the city received approximately $1.2 million in a CDBG Section 108 loan to assist in the 
land acquisition for a 21‐acre site for the construction of the Villa Loma Apartments.  The city may 
pursue  additional  Section  108  loan  guarantees  to  expand  affordable  housing  opportunities  in 
Carlsbad, as appropriate. 
Section 8 Tenant‐Based Rental Assistance Program 
The Housing Choice Voucher Program (Section 8) is funded by HUD and administered by the City of 
Carlsbad  Housing  Authority.    The  city  spends  approximately  $7  million  annually  on  the  Section  8 
Rental Assistance Program, serving an average of 575 families per month.  An additional 549 families 
are on the waiting list, which has been closed since October 1, 2005. 
Agricultural Conversion Mitigation Fee Program  
As certain, often historic, coastal agricultural lands develop, a mitigation fee of $10,000 per acre is 
paid to the city.  In 2005, Carlsbad established an ad hoc citizen’s committee to advise the City Council 
on  how  the  collected  fees  should  be  spent,  which  by  that  time  had  reached  over  $6  million. 
Subsequently,  the  committee  solicited  and  evaluated  funding  proposals  from  organizations 
according to specific criteria.  These criteria focus on restoration, preservation and enhancement of 
Carlsbad’s  natural  and  agricultural  environment.    To  this  end,  an  eligible  funding  category  is  the 
development of farmworker housing. 
In 2008, the city awarded a $2 million grant from the collected fees to Catholic Charities to rebuild 
and expand the current La Posada de Guadalupe homeless shelter to provide farmworker housing.  
10-64

This  facility,  completed  in  2013,  features  50‐70  beds  specifically  for  farmworkers,  which  are  in 
addition to the 50‐beds that currently serve farmworkers and homeless men. 
Currently,  the  Agricultural  Conversion  Mitigation  Fee  Program  has  an  approximate  balance  of 
$441,000.   It  is expected  this  fee  could  grow  by another $1  million  to $1.5  million  as  designated 
properties continue to develop. 
Proposed Rental Housing Impact Fee 
In 2010, the city removed the mandatory inclusionary requirement for rental developments so it 
would  comply  with  the  2009  court  decision  Palmer/Sixth  Street  Properties,  L.P.  v.  City  of  Los 
Angeles.  In response, and pursuant to City Council direction, the city has completed a nexus study 
(initially in 2013 and updated in 2016) that analyzes the connection between the construction of 
new  market‐rate  rental  development  and  the  need  for  affordable  housing.    The  nexus  study 
recommends a fee that rental housing developers would pay to mitigate the impacts of market‐
rate  rental  projects  on  the  need  for  affordable  housing.  The  study  and  fee  information  are 
available  at  http://www.carlsbadca.gov/cityhall/clerk/meetings/boards/housing.asp.  Fees 
generated would be deposited into the Housing Trust Fund.  As residential construction trends 
point to increased multi‐family building as noted in Section 10.2, the proposed impact fee could 
generate funds to help build affordable housing. 
Throughout preparation of the nexus study, the city and Building Industry Association of San Diego 
County (BIA) have discussed the study and proposed fee. The city is now seeking the BIA’s input 
on alternatives to the fee that could be included in the fee ordinance. 
The city will continue to explore the feasibility and adoption of a rental housing impact fee as 
identified  in  Program  3.7.    However,  passage  of  state  legislation  that  could  restore  a  local 
government’s  ability  to  apply  inclusionary  housing  standards  to  rental  projects  may  make 
adoption of such a fee unnecessary. 
Administrative Capacity 
The institutional structure and administrative capacity established to implement programs contained 
in the Housing Element include the City of Carlsbad, other public entities, and private developers, 
both  for‐profit  and  non‐profit.    The  city  works  closely  with  private  developers  to  construct, 
rehabilitate, and preserve affordable housing in the city. 
City of Carlsbad 
The City of Carlsbad’s Housing and Neighborhood Services Division, Planning Division, and Building 
Division will be the lead divisions in implementing a variety of programs and activities outlined in this 
Housing Element. 
Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
The  Housing  and  Neighborhood  Services  Division  has  the  following  responsibilities  related  to  the 
Housing Element: 
                                                                                                        10-65

        Administering the CDBG program – the division oversees this program’s implementation; 
         a substantial amount of CDBG funds during the Housing Element period will be allocated 
         to  projects  that  address  the  affordable  housing  needs  of  lower  and  moderate  income 
         households. 
        Administering rental and financial assistance – the division offers programs for rental and 
         down payment assistance as well as minor home repair grants. 
        Administering  the  Section  8  Housing  Choice  Voucher  program  –  the  division  provides 
         approximately 575 Section 8 vouchers to eligible households. 
        Providing neighborhood outreach and code enforcement services. 
        Implementing Housing Element programs – the division works with developers to create 
         affordable housing opportunities for low income households. 
    Code  enforcement  is  primarily  complaint‐driven.  In  limited  instances,  the  city  also  will 
    proactively enforce codes, such as when a health and safety violation is known or when other 
    violations are observed when responding to a complaint.   
Planning Division 
Related to housing, principal responsibilities of the Planning Division include: 
        Preparing ordinances and policies to facilitate and encourage housing development for 
         all income groups in Carlsbad. 
        Assisting in the development of affordable housing. 
        Tracking the number and affordability of new housing units built. 
        Reviewing and guiding applications for development of housing through the entitlement 
         process. 
Building Division 
The principal responsibility of the Building Division is to protect those who live and work in Carlsbad 
by  enforcing  building  codes  and  standards  regarding  safety,  energy  efficiency,  and  disabled 
accessibility.  This includes identifying existing housing units that are substandard or deteriorating. 
Housing Developers 
Non‐Profit Organizations 
The city works with a number of for‐ and non‐profit developers to create affordable housing using 
the Housing Trust Fund and other housing funds.  The following affordable housing developers have 
expressed interest in developing and/or preserving affordable housing in San Diego County: 
        Affirmed Housing 
        Affordable Housing People 
        Alpha Project 
10-66

        Bridge Housing Corporation 
        C&C Development 
        Chelsea Investment Corporation 
        Chicano Federation of San Diego County 
        Community Housing Group 
        Community Housing of North County 
        Community Housing Works 
        Habitat for Humanity 
        Housing Development Partners of San Diego 
        Innovative Housing Opportunities 
        Jamboree Housing 
        MAAC Project 
        Meta Housing 
        Solutions for Change 
        South Bay Community Services 
        Wakeland Housing 
For‐Profit Developers 
Private,  for‐profit  developers  will  assist  in  the  effort  of  creating  affordable  housing  in  Carlsbad 
through  the  city’s  Inclusionary  Housing  Ordinance.    Per  the  ordinance,  at  least  15  percent  of  all 
housing units approved for any master plan community, specific plan, or qualified subdivision must 
be affordable to lower income households. 
The city maintains open lines of communication with the BIA, which represents non‐profit and for‐
profit developers and others involved in the building trade throughout San Diego County.  As noted, 
the BIA and city have discussed and continue to work on the proposed rental housing impact fee.  
Both  organizations  maintain  open  lines  of  communication  to  discuss  issues  that  may  arise.    Past 
discussions have focused on density, inclusionary housing, development review process, and deferral 
of impact fees, the latter two discussed in Section 10.4. 
Opportunities for Energy Conservation 
Energy costs directly affect housing affordability through their impact on the construction, operation, 
and maintenance of housing.  There are many ways in which the planning, design, and construction 
of residential neighborhoods and homes can reduce energy costs while at the same time produce an 
environmental  benefit.    Techniques  for  reducing  energy  costs  include  construction  standards  for 
energy  efficiency,  site  planning,  land  use  patterns,  and  the  use  of  natural  landscape  features  to 
reduce energy needs. Sustainable development also encompasses the preservation of habitat and 
species, improvement of air, and conservation of natural resources, including water and open space. 
                                                                                                           10-67

Residential Building Standards 
The city uses the California Building Code and the Green Building Standards Code (CALGREEN) to 
review proposed development and renovations.  The purpose of the code is to improve public health, 
safety and general welfare by enhancing the design and construction of buildings in the following 
categories:  1)  planning  and  design,  2)  energy  efficiency,  3)  water  efficiency  and  conservation,  4) 
material  conservation  and  resource  efficiency,  and  5)  environmental  air  quality.    In  addition  to 
CALGREEN standards, the city implements the following energy conservation programs related to 
building design, construction and improvement: 
Solar and Other Energy Related Improvements 
The city requires all new residential units to include plumbing specifically designed to allow the later 
installation of a system that utilizes solar energy as the primary means of heating domestic potable 
water. 
The  city  joined  the  CaliforniaFIRST,  California  HERO  and  Figtree  programs  to  allow  residents  and 
business owners to obtain low‐interest financing for energy related improvements and repay the 
loans through an assessment on their property tax bills.  Known as PACE, or “Property Assessed Clean 
Energy,”  the  programs  are  voluntary,  and  the  owners  of  residential,  commercial,  and  industrial 
properties  in  Carlsbad  are  eligible.    Along  with  solar  electric  and  water‐heating  systems,  energy 
efficient improvements such as dual‐paned windows, tank‐less water heaters, and insulation are also 
eligible for funding under the programs. 
Green Building 
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) is an internationally‐recognized rating system 
for certifying the design, construction, and operation of high performance buildings. City policy calls 
for  new  city  facilities  to  strive  for  LEED  “Silver”  certification  or  its  equivalent  and  to  generate  a 
minimum of 10 percent of its energy demand onsite, whenever practicable and within a reasonable 
cost/benefit ratio. In addition, at the private level, several recent development projects have elected 
to obtain certification for green buildings.  According to the LEED Certified Project Directory, there 
are eleven LEED‐certified projects in Carlsbad. 
Water Recycling, Conservation, and Desalination 
Under  the  recycled  water  retrofit  project,  the  city  installs  recycled  water  lines  to  serve  existing 
development in areas of the city where recycled water is available.  The Carlsbad Municipal Water 
District does not provide recycled water to residential customers; however, it does provide it to the 
common landscaped areas of residential developments.  Each year, the district distributes nearly 1.35 
billion  gallons of recycled  water to  local  irrigation  customers.  Recycled  water  costs  customers  15 
percent  less  than  potable  irrigation  water.    In  2015,  the  city  began  planning and  constructing an 
expansion of its water recycling system, including new distribution pipes, a storage reservoir, and a 
capacity increase of the Carlsbad Water Recycling Facility by 75 percent, or from 4 million gallons a 
day to 7 million gallons a day. 
To assist homeowners in reducing costs, the city participates in regional water conservation programs 
10-68

that  allow  Carlsbad  Municipal  Water  District  customers  to  receive  rebates  for  purchasing  water 
efficient  clothes  washing  machines  and  toilets,  free  on‐site  water  use  surveys,  and  vouchers  for 
weather‐based  irrigation  controllers.    The  district  is  a  signatory  to  the  California  Urban  Water 
Conservation  Council  Memorandum  of  Understanding,  which  seeks  to  implement  14  best 
management  practices  that  have  received  a  consensus  among  water  agencies  and  conservation 
advocates  as  the  best  and  most  realistic  methods  to  produce  significant  water  savings  from 
conservation. 
In  addition,  in  2010,  the  city  adopted  a  water‐efficient  landscape  ordinance  to  promote  water 
conservation through design, installation and maintenance of more efficient landscape and irrigation 
systems.  The city revised the ordinance in 2016 to comply with updated state regulations. 
A nearly $1 billion, 50‐million gallon a day seawater desalination plant began operation in Carlsbad 
in December 2015. It supplies the San Diego region with approximately 10 percent of its drinking 
water needs, and Carlsbad with about 12.5 percent of its drinking water needs.  The project is the 
largest of its kind in the Western Hemisphere. 
In 2020, the city projects its water supply portfolio will consist of 59 percent imported water (from 
the  San  Diego  County  Water  Authority),  29  percent  recycled  water,  and  12  percent  desalinated 
water. 
General Plan Goals and Policies 
Other elements in the General Plan discuss policy measures to reduce energy consumption through 
land use, transportation, and conservation efforts. 
         The  General  Plan  Land  Use  and  Community  Design  Element  seeks  development  of 
          pedestrian‐oriented  shopping  centers  that  are  located  to  maximize  accessibility  from 
          residential neighborhoods. Where appropriate, these centers would also include high and 
          medium density housing surrounding the retail uses or integrated in mixed‐use buildings. 
         The General Plan Mobility Element seeks to reduce reliance on driving by promoting safe 
          walking  and  biking  access.    The  plan  outlines  improvements  to  pedestrian  and  bicycle 
          systems.  Opportunities for a safe pedestrian crossing across the railroad and Chestnut 
          Avenue will be explored.  Pedestrian priority zones around key centers and other places—
          such as schools—are outlined, to foster pedestrian comfort and safety. 
         The  General  Plan  Open  Space,  Conservation,  and  Recreation  Element  supports 
          continuation  of  the  open  space  and  park  planning  efforts  by  the  city.    Any  future 
          development located in areas adjacent to sensitive biological resources, such as lagoons 
          and  hillsides,  must  comply  with  the  city’s  Habitat  Management  Plan  and  open  space 
          regulations to ensure that habitats are preserved and open space is provided. 
         Sustainability is an integral part of the General Plan, and related polices are included in 
          the different elements as appropriate.  The General Plan Sustainability Element provides 
          an overarching framework, and includes polices focused on topics central to sustainability 
          not covered in other elements, such as climate change and greenhouse gasses reduction; 
                                                                                                        10-69

         water conservation, recycling, and supply; green building; sustainable energy and energy 
         security; and sustainable food. 
Climate Action Plan 
    Concurrently with the 2015 General Plan Update, the city adopted a citywide Climate Action Plan 
    (CAP) that outlines the city’s strategy for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and climate 
    change impacts.  The CAP includes specific, enforceable GHG‐reducing measures and actions, 
    including actions to improve energy efficiency in existing and new residential construction, and 
    to increase supply of renewable energy, such as through rooftop photovoltaic systems.  The CAP 
    identifies specific GHG reduction targets to be achieved by each measure, and identifies potential 
    existing  funding  sources  and  incentive  programs  to  help  achieve  CAP  goals.    Additionally, 
    implementation of CAP measures will occur through local ordinances, the development review 
    process, and city‐initiated programs, incentives and operations. 
10-70

10.4 Constraints and Mitigating Opportunities  
A variety of factors can encourage or constrain the development, maintenance, and improvement of 
housing in Carlsbad, particularly for low and moderate income households.  The city’s coastal location 
and mesa/canyon topography imposes physical and regulatory constraints, and results in high land 
costs that present challenging market constraints. 
This section provides an analysis of various potential and actual constraints to housing development 
and preservation in Carlsbad.  When an actual constraint is identified, the Housing Element must 
consider actions and opportunities that can mitigate the constraint.  While certain factors, such as 
construction/labor costs, may increase the costs of housing, their impacts are similar throughout the 
region  and  therefore  do  not  impose  disadvantages  on  the  city.    These  factors  are  considered 
potential, but not actual constraints. 
Market Constraints 
Land costs, construction costs, and market financing contribute to the cost of housing investments 
and can potentially hinder the production of new affordable housing. 
Land Cost 
In most cities, land costs vary with site location, availability of infrastructure, and offsite conditions.  
In  Carlsbad,  location  is  the  single  greatest  factor  determining  land  prices.    Carlsbad  is  a  highly 
desirable place to live and many properties have coastal views. Proximity to freeway access, public 
facilities, and community image also contribute to the high land costs in the city. 
As of August 2016, there were only a small number of for‐sale listings for land zoned for residential.  
According to LoopNet, a commercial real estate website (Loopnet.com), a 0.39 acre property with a 
single‐family residence, zoned RD‐M and marketed for multi‐family construction, was listed for $1.79 
million. 
As shown in Table 10‐31, available land zoned for single‐family homes averaged $1.46 million per 
acre based on information from another website, Zillow.com.  The lack of availability and the cost of 
vacant  residential  land  in  Carlsbad  is  a  substantial  market  constraint  to  the  production  of  new 
affordable housing. 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
                                                                                                           10-71

    TABLE 10–31:          VACANT LAND PRICES AUGUST 2016 
   TYPE                                      LOT SIZE (ACRES)         ADVERTISED PRICE
   Single-Family                                          0.50                  $425,000
                                                          0.35                  $ 650,000
                                                          0.28                  $790,000
                                                          0.64                 $ 650,000
                                                          0.73                  $749,000
                                                          0.44                  $850,000
                                                          1.08                $ 1,750,000
   Average per Acre                                       1.00                $ 1,458,706
                                                                                           
  
 Source:  Zillow.com, accessed August 2016. 
 
Mitigation Opportunities 
The  city  offers  several  opportunities  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  land  costs  on  affordable  housing 
development. Specifically: 
             Adequate Sites Inventory:  The city ensures, through land use planning actions, that an 
              adequate  supply  of  residential  sites  is  available  to  meet  the  city’s  projected  housing 
              needs.  This discussion is contained in Section 10.3, Resources Available. 
             Density Bonus/Increase:  The city offers density bonuses for qualified projects, pursuant 
              to  state  law,  to  increase  the  yield  (number  of  units)  that  can  be  achieved  above  the 
              maximum of the density range on a property.  Also, through the city’s ordinances, the city 
              offers density increases to assist in providing affordable housing. Density bonuses and 
              increases reduce the per‐unit land cost. 
             Land Banking/Surplus Land:  The city may acquire land and reserve it for future residential 
              development.  In addition to privately‐held properties, surplus land owned by the city and 
              other public agencies offers additional opportunities for affordable housing.  The acquired 
              land can be resold with entitlement to a nonprofit developer at a reduced price to provide 
              housing affordable to lower‐income households.  The city may also accept land as an in‐
              lieu contribution by a developer to fulfill the inclusionary housing requirement. 
Construction and Labor Costs 
The  International  Code  Council  (ICC)  provides  estimates  on  labor  and  material  costs  by  type  of 
construction.  According to 2015 ICC (San Diego Area Chapter) estimates, the average per‐square‐
10-72

foot cost for “good” quality housing is approximately $124 per square foot for multi‐family housing 
and $140 for single‐family homes in San Diego County.  Estimates are based on “good” quality Type 
VA, wood‐frame construction, providing materials and fixtures well above the minimum required by 
state  and  local  building  codes.    For  San  Diego  County,  RSMeans  estimates  for  2013  are  slightly 
higher—at $146‐$159 for a one‐to‐three story apartment, assuming either open shop or union labor, 
respectively. 
Historically, labor costs are relatively stable and fixed in comparison to land and improvement costs.  
However, in January 2002, Senate Bill 975 expanded the definition of public works and the application 
of the state’s prevailing wage requirements to such projects.  It also expanded the definition of what 
constitutes public funds and captured significantly more projects beyond just public works (such as 
housing) that involve public/private partnerships.  Except for self‐help projects, per SB 972, payment 
of prevailing wages are required for most private projects constructed under an agreement with a 
public  agency  providing  assistance  to  the  project.    As  a  result,  the  prevailing  wage  requirement 
substantially  increases  the  cost  of  affordable  housing  construction  (though  it  also  increases  the 
income of the worker who may seek housing in Carlsbad or elsewhere in the region). 
Mitigating Opportunities  
Both construction and labor costs are similar throughout the region.  While these costs add to the 
overall cost of housing, they do not pose an actual constraint to housing development in Carlsbad.  
Nevertheless,  the  city  offers  a  number  of  incentives  and  assistance  to  help  reduce  the  cost  of 
construction for affordable housing. These include: density bonuses/incentives, and direct financing 
assistance using the Housing Reserve Fund and the Housing Trust Fund. 
Home Financing 
Although interest rates have reached historically low levels over the past few years, access to credit 
has tightened in the wake of the financial crisis of 2007‐08 and finance reform.  The new lending 
environment can have a substantial impact on prospective purchasers.  An additional obstacle for 
homebuyers continues to be the down payment required by lending institutions.  These factors often 
affect demand for ownership housing, driving up or depressing housing prices. 
Under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), lending institutions must disclose information on 
the disposition of loan applications by the income, gender, and race of the applicants.  This applies 
to all loan applications for home purchases and improvements, whether financed at market rate or 
through government‐backed programs.  The primary concern in a review of lending activity is to see 
whether home financing is generally available to all income groups in the community. 
Subsidies 
Given  the  market  conditions  in  southern  California,  particularly  in  the  San  Diego  region,  housing 
affordable to lower‐income households cannot be accommodated by the market without some form 
of financial subsidy (affordable housing projects shown in Table 10‐27 were achieved with financial 
subsidies from the city.)  Based on a survey of 22 projects for which the city has provided financial 
assistance  from  the  1990s  to  the  present,  the  average  per‐unit  subsidy  of  subsidized  units  was 
                                                                                                          10-73

approximately $29,500.  This level of subsidy is modest and less than that for most affordable housing 
projects in the north San Diego County area at densities around 20 units per acre. 
As discussed with developers during a 2011 developer forum held as part of the General Plan and 
Housing  Element  update  process,  development  above  23‐25  units  per  acre  would  typically 
necessitate  subterranean  parking,  which  substantially  increases  the  average  subsidy  required  to 
make the units affordable to lower‐income households.  The cost savings from economies of scale 
for  housing  production  do  not  usually  break  even  until  the  density  is  substantially  increased  to 
beyond  30  units  per  acre.    To  expand  the  capacity  for  additional  development,  at  appropriate 
locations, the city permits development in the Village at up to 35 units per acre and within the R‐30 
land use designation density bonuses/increases can be granted to allow densities above 30 units per 
acre. 
Conventional Lending  
Overall, 4,473 households applied for mortgage loans for homes in Carlsbad in 2014, over two‐thirds 
of  which  were  refinancing  applications.    Of  the  applications  for  conventional  mortgage  loans, 
approximately 77 percent were approved (Table 10‐32), slightly above the 76 percent approval rate 
for conventional loans in the San Diego‐Carlsbad MSA, which comprises San Diego County.  The denial 
rate  was  10  percent,  while  13  percent  of  the  applications  were  withdrawn  or  closed  for 
incompleteness. 
Among the 139 applications for home improvement loans in 2014, 64 percent were approved, 20 
percent were denied, and 16 percent were withdrawn or closed for incompleteness.  Approval rates 
were slightly lower, at 57 percent, for the San Diego‐Carlsbad MSA as a whole. 
Government‐Backed Lending 
In addition to conventional mortgages, HMDA tracks loans for government‐backed financing (e.g. 
FHA, VA, or FSA/RHS).4  To be eligible for these loans, households must meet established income 
standards and homes must be under a maximum sales price.  However, home prices in Carlsbad often 
exceed the maximum home values established by these government‐backed programs, which makes 
it difficult for households to take advantage of these types of loans. 
In  2014,  220  households  applied  for  government‐backed  home  mortgage  loans  for  properties  in 
Carlsbad (Table 10‐32).  Of these applications, 78 percent were approved, 9 percent were denied, 
and 13 percent were withdrawn or closed for incompleteness.  This in an improvement over 2011 
figures, when 144 applications for a government‐backed home mortgage loan were processed and 
103, or 72 percent, were approved.  The approval rate for Carlsbad was the same, at 78 percent, for 
the San Diego‐Carlsbad MSA as a whole in 2014. 
 
																																																													
4
    Government-backed financing includes those backed by the Department of Veteran Affairs (VA), Federal Housing
    Administration (FHA), and Farm Service Agency/Rural Housing Services (FSA/RHS). Down payment assistance, silent
    second, and other mortgage assistance programs offered by local jurisdictions are not tracked by HMDA.
10-74

TABLE 10–32:                DISPOSITION OF HOME  PURCHASE AND HOME IMPROVEMENT LOAN APPLICATIONS IN 
                            CENSUS TRACTS PARTIALLY OR WHOLLY  WITHIN CARLSBAD 2014 
 
                                           GOVERNMENT BACKED                           CONVENTIONAL       HOME IMPROVEMENT 
     HOUSING UNIT TYPE                               #                     %                #          %         #            % 
     Approved1                                    171                  78%             1,741         77%     139            64% 
     Denied                                        21                   9%                227        10%        44          20% 
     Other   2
                                                   28                  13%                307        13%        35          16% 
     TOTAL                                        220                                   2,275                 218               
     APPLICATIONS 
     1 “ Approved” includes loans originated or approved,  but not accepted. 
 
     2 “ Other” includes files closed for incompleteness, and applications withdrawn. 
  Source: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA),  2014. 
Mitigating Opportunities  
To  address  potential  private  market  lending  constraints  and  expand  homeownership  and  home 
improvement opportunities,  the  city  offers and/or  participates  in a variety of  home  buyer,  down 
payment assistance, and rehabilitation assistance programs.  These programs assist extremely‐low, 
very‐low,  low,  and  moderate‐income  residents  by  increasing  access  to  favorable  loan  terms  to 
purchase or improve their homes. 
Government Constraints  
Local policies and regulations can affect the price and availability of housing. Land use controls, the 
Growth Management Plan, development standards, site improvements, fees and exactions, permit 
processing  procedures,  and  other  issues  may  present  potential  and  actual  constraints  to  the 
maintenance, development, and improvement of housing. 
Land Use Controls  
The Land Use and Community Design Element of the General Plan sets forth policies for guiding local 
development.    The  distribution  of  land  use  designations  within  the  city  are  based  on  several 
geographical and locational constraints.  These constraints include:  McClellan/Palomar Airport, the 
Encina  Power  Station  and  San  Diego  Gas  &  Electric  transmission  corridors,  Encina  wastewater 
treatment plant, regional commercial areas along Interstate 5 and Highway 78, open space reserves, 
habitat, beaches and lagoons, as well as the city’s overall mesa/canyon topography.  The airport, 
power  plant  and  wastewater  treatment  plant  could  preclude  residential  development  in  close 
proximity due to potential public health and safety concerns.  The natural constraints such as hilly 
topography,  beaches  and  lagoons  also  limit  the  extent  and  density  of  residential  uses  due  to 
environmental factors. 
Carlsbad’s  Land  Use  and  Community  Design  Element  establishes  six  residential  designations 
(excluding the Village) ranging in density from 1.0 dwelling unit per acre to 30.0 dwelling units per 
acre (Table 10‐33).  The R‐30 land use designation was added to the General Plan in February 2013 
and allows up to 30 dwelling units per acre. 
                                                                                                                    10-75

In the Village, a separate land use designation applies (V – Village). This designation permits both 
residential  and  non‐residential  uses.    Depending  on  the  district  within  the  Village,  the  minimum 
density is 18 units per acre (districts 5‐9) or 28 units per acre (districts 1‐4) and the maximum density 
permitted is 23 or 35 units per acre, respectively. 
To further ensure that development adheres to the densities specified, the Land Use and Community 
Design Element requires development at or above the minimum density specified in Table 10‐33. 
As discussed below, the Growth Management Control Point (GMCP) density ensures adherence to 
the  residential  dwelling  unit  limits  established  by  Carlsbad’s  Growth  Management  Plan.  Certain 
findings regarding the provision of adequate facilities and the densities of neighboring developments 
must be made to allow residential development to exceed the GMCP density. 
  TABLE 10–33:                  LAND USE DESIGNATIONS AND IMPLEMENTING ZONES 
 
  LAND  USE DESIGNATION                     ALLOWED DENSITY  (DU/AC)               GMCP (DU/AC)           IMPLEMENTING ZONE 
  R 1.5 – Residential                                                0.0 – 1.5                     1.0  R‐1, R‐A, R‐E, PC1, RMHP 
  R 4 – Residential                                                  0.0 – 4.0                     3.2  R‐1, R‐A, PC1, RMHP 
  R 8 – Residential                                              4.01 – 8.00                       6.0  R‐1, R‐2, RD‐M, PC1, RMHP 
  R 15 – Residential                                            8.01 – 15.00                     12.0  R‐3, RD‐M, PC1, RMHP,  R‐P 
  R 23 – Residential                                            15.0 – 23.00                     20.0  R,3, RD‐M, PC1, RMHP,  R‐P, R‐W 
  R 30 – Residential                                         23.01 – 30.00                       25.0  R,3, RD‐M, PC1, RMHP,  R‐P 
  V – Village                                             Dist. 1‐4: 28‐35                        n/a2  V‐R 
                                                    Dist. 5‐9: 18‐23 max 
  1  S u b j e c t  to an approved  master plan. 
  2  R e q u i r e s  an allocation of “excess dwelling units”; 759 “excess dwelling units” are currently reserved for the Village. 
  Source: Carlsbad General Plan, September 2015, and city data as of July 2016. 
Growth Management Plan 
In the mid‐1980s, Carlsbad experienced a construction boom.  Annual growth rates exceeded ten 
percent and developers completed the most homes in the city’s history prior to that time – 2,612 – 
in 1986.  Further, Carlsbad’s General Plan, in effect at that time, established a residential capacity 
exceeding 100,000 units, which potentially meant over 80,000 more homes could be built.  With the 
above in mind, residents expressed concern over the loss of small town identity, disappearance of 
open space, and potential for growth to outstrip public facilities and services. 
Aware  that  development  was  creating  public  facility  impacts  on  the  community,  the  city  began 
working on its Growth Management Plan.  Among the first actions taken was reduction of the General 
Plan’s  residential  capacity  by  approximately  one‐half  in  1985.    Subsequent  actions  included  the 
adoption  of  a  series  of  interim  ordinances  to  restrict  development  while  the  formal  Growth 
Management Plan was finalized.  In 1986, Carlsbad adopted a citywide Facilities and Improvements 
Plan that established much of the foundational aspects of the program.  That year, the program was 
permanently enacted by ordinance. 
The Growth Management Plan ensures that adequate public facilities and services are guaranteed at 
all  times  as  growth  occurs.    This  program  establishes  performance  standards  for  eleven  public 
10-76

facilities.    The  eleven  public  facilities  addressed  are  city  administration,  library,  waste‐water 
treatment,  parks,  drainage,  circulation,  fire,  open  space,  schools,  sewer  collection,  and  water 
distribution.    The  program  requires  that  the  appropriate  public  facilities  must  be  available  in 
conformance with the adopted performance standards in an area when new development occurs. 
Unless each of these eleven public facility standards has been complied with, no new development 
can occur. 
Compliance with the Growth Management Plan is planned for and provided through a three‐tiered 
or phased planning process: 
         Citywide  Facilities  and  Improvements  Plan,  which  adopted  eleven  public  facility 
          performance standards, defined the boundaries of 25 local facility management zones, 
          and detailed existing public facilities and projected the ultimate public facility needs. 
         Local Facilities Management Plans are prepared in each of the 25 zones and implement 
          the provisions of the Growth Management Plan.  These plans phase all development and 
          public facilities needs in accordance with the adopted performance standards, provide a 
          detailed financing mechanism to ensure public facilities can be provided, are reviewed by 
          city staff for accuracy, and are approved by the City Council after a public hearing. 
         Individual Projects must comply with the provisions of the Local Facilities Management 
          Plans,  as  well  as  implement  provisions  of  the  citywide  plan.  The  third  phase  of  the 
          program  includes  the  review  of  individual  projects  to  ensure  compliance  with  all 
          performance standards prior to the approval of any development permits.  
The 1986 Citywide Facilities and Improvements Plan estimated the number of dwelling units that 
could be built as a result of the application of the General Plan density ranges to individual projects. 
For the entire city at buildout, the estimate was 54,599 dwelling units (21,121 existing units plus 
33,478 future units), which resulted in an estimated buildout population of 135,000. The plan further 
divided the estimated future dwelling units among four city quadrants (the axis of the quadrants is El 
Camino Real and Palomar Airport Road), as follows:  
Northwest  Quadrant–5,844  units;  Northeast  Quadrant–6,166  units;  Southwest  Quadrant–10,667 
units; Southwest Quadrant–10,801 units.   
The purpose of this estimate was to provide an approximate ultimate number of future dwelling units 
and  population  citywide  and  for  each  quadrant  for  facility  planning  purposes.  The  city’s  Capital 
Improvement  Plan,  Growth  Management  Plan,  and  public  facilities  plans  are  all  based  on  this 
estimate. To ensure that all necessary public facilities will be available concurrent with the need to 
serve new development, it was necessary to set a limit on the number of future residential dwelling 
units which can be constructed in the city based on the estimate.  
On November 4, 1986, Carlsbad voters passed Proposition E, which ratified the Growth Management 
Plan and “locked in” the maximum future dwelling units in each of the four city quadrants per the 
estimates specified in the Citywide Facilities and Improvements Plan. Proposition E also mandated 
that the city not approve any General Plan amendment, zone change, tentative subdivision map or 
other discretionary approval that could result in future residential development above the dwelling 
unit limit in any quadrant.  This mandate will remain in effect unless changed by a majority vote of 
                                                                                                       10-77

the Carlsbad electorate.  
Local Facilities Management Plan  
To  facilitate  effective  implementation  of  the  Growth  Management  Plan,  the  city  is  split  into  25 
different facility zones, each of which requires the preparation of a Local Facilities Management Plan 
(LFMP)  prior  to  approving  development  in  the  affected  zone.  The  LFMP  seeks  to  ensure  that 
development does not occur unless adequate public facilities and services exist or will be provided 
concurrent with new development. These plans are not seen as a constraint to development, but 
rather  as  a  vehicle  to  provide  information  upfront  about  the  capacity  and  availability  of 
infrastructure. LFMPs have been adopted for all 25 facility zones.  
Growth Management Control Point Density  
Before Proposition E was drafted in 1986, one major concern was how best to link development to 
the provision of public facilities and also assure that once the facilities were installed subsequent 
development would not exceed their capacities. When Proposition E was drafted, it created for each 
residential general plan designation a “Growth Management Control Point” (GMCP) density (dwelling 
units per acre) at approximately the mid‐point of the associated density range (Table 10‐33).  
The purpose of the GMCP density is to ensure residential development does not exceed the dwelling 
unit caps established for each quadrant. A development may not exceed the GMCP density unless 
the following three findings can be made:  
         The project will provide sufficient public facilities for the density in excess of the GMCP to 
          ensure  that  the  adequacy  for  the  city’s  public  facilities  plans  will  not  be  adversely 
          impacted;  
         There have been sufficient developments approved in the quadrant at densities below 
          the GMCP to cover the units in the project above the control point so that approval will 
          not result in exceeding the quadrant dwelling unit limit; and 
         All  necessary  public  facilities  required  by  the  Growth  Management  Plan  will  be 
          constructed or are guaranteed to be constructed concurrently with the need for them 
          created by the development and in compliance with adopted city standards. 
The Growth Management Plan does not prohibit densities that exceed the maximum of the R‐30 
designation; instead the program requires the findings above to be made. 
Excess Dwelling Units  
To  ensure  dwelling  unit  caps  in  each  of  the  quadrants  are  not  exceeded,  Carlsbad  developed  a 
tracking system to account for projects approved both below and above the GMCP. Projects that 
have developed below the GMCP, for example, generate “excess dwelling units.” Likewise, proposals 
approved at a density above the GMCP can use these excess units as long as the use of excess units 
does not cause the quadrant dwelling unit limit to be exceeded. City Council Policy Statement No. 43 
specifies that residential projects must provide the minimum amount of affordable housing required 
by the city’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance to be eligible for an allocation of excess dwelling units. 
10-78

An allocation of excess dwelling units is considered an incentive and, therefore, the council’s policy 
is applicable to both ownership and rental housing projects. Limiting the use of excess dwelling units 
to projects that provide affordable housing supports the city’s ability to achieve the programs of this 
Housing Element.   
The following projects approved over the past several years provide a good representation of the 
developments that have contributed and utilized excess dwellings: 
        Ocean Street Residences (2008).  A 35 unit condominium project; approved below the 
         GMCP of 11.5 du/ac; required  to  purchase credits  for 7 units in an affordable housing 
         project; created 15 excess dwelling units. 
        Seascape  (2008).    Twelve  lot  single  family  residential  subdivision  that  included  two 
         affordable  housing  units;  approved  above  the  GMCP  of  3.2  du/ac;  utilized  five  excess 
         dwelling units. 
        Tabata Ranch (2009).  General Plan amendment changed the land use designation from 
         RM (4‐8 du/ac) to RLM (0‐4 du/ac); created 12 excess dwelling units. 
        Tavarua Senior Apartments (2011).  A 50 unit affordable senior housing project; approved 
         at 55.5 du/ac, above the GMCP of 6 du/ac; utilized 44 excess dwelling units. 
        Dos  Colinas  (2012).    A  305  unit  continuing  care  community  including  24  affordable 
         housing units; created 111 excess dwelling units. 
        Rancho Milagro (2012).  A 19 unit single family subdivision; required to construct three 
         affordable  dwelling  units  or  purchase  credits  for  three  units  in  an  affordable  housing 
         project; approved below the GMCP of 3.2 du/ac; created 34 excess dwelling units. 
        Vista La Costa Apartments (2012).  A 19 unit apartment project approved at 21.6 du/ac, 
         above the GMCP of 19 du/ac; required to purchase credits for three units in an affordable 
         housing project; utilized 2.59 excess dwelling units. 
        Housing Element Program 2.1 Barrio (2013).  General Plan amendment and zone change 
         to increase allowed densities throughout the Barrio area; included the creation of the R‐
         30  (23‐30  du/ac)  land  use  designation;  implemented  Program  2.1  of  the  2005‐2010 
         Housing Element; utilized 574 excess dwelling units. 
        Quarry Creek Master Plan (2013).   General Plan amendment, zone change and master 
         plan  to  allow  for  the  development  of  327  dwelling  units  at  a  density  of  21.3  and  21.5 
         du/ac, 95 units at 16.7 du/ac, and 214 units at 13.7 du/ac; implemented Program 2.1 of 
         the 2005‐2010 Housing Element; utilized 343 excess dwelling units. 
As the above list demonstrates, excess dwelling units are created (when development is approved 
below  the  GMCP)  and  utilized  (when  development  is  approved  above  the  GMCP);  the  list  also 
demonstrates  that  affordable  housing  can  be  achieved,  including  through  purchase  of  affordable 
housing credits, even when a project is approved at a density below the GMCP, due to the city’s 
Inclusionary Housing Ordinance.  Prior to 2004, development below the GMCP was primarily due to 
housing market conditions, including the desirability of building low density projects.  Other reasons 
for developing below the GMCP include environmental constraints, such as topography and sensitive 
habitat.  However, approving densities below the GMCP is now more difficult due to Government 
Code Section 65863, which incorporates state legislation (SB 2292) passed in 2004.  More details 
about this law may be found in the section below on mitigating opportunities. 
                                                                                                        10-79

Mitigating Opportunities 
The capacity (number of units) for each site appropriate for lower and moderate income housing 
identified in the sites inventory in Section 10.3 assumes development will take place at the minimum 
density  of  the  density  range  or  at  the  minimum  density  specified 5 .    Therefore,  and  except  for 
properties  designated  "V  ‐  Village,"  none  of  the  sites  require  the  use  of  excess  dwelling  units  to 
accommodate the RHNA. In the Village, since all residential development requires an allocation of 
excess  dwelling  units,  the  city  has specifically  reserved  759  excess  units  (as  of  July  2016)  for  this 
purpose.  As a result, the Growth Management Plan and GMCP density do not serve as constraints 
to development. 
As  shown  in  Table  10‐34,  the  capacity  of  the  General  Plan,  including  the  sites  inventory  for  this 
Housing Element, does not exceed the dwelling unit limits established by the Growth Management 
Plan and Proposition E.  General Plan capacity in Table 10‐34 is based on the GMCP density for all 
sites, including those that can accommodate the RHNA; as mentioned above, the capacity used for 
the  sites  inventory  for  this  Housing  Element  is  based  on  minimum  density,  which  further 
demonstrates that the sites can accommodate the RHNA and not be constrained by the dwelling unit 
limits in each quadrant. 
 TABLE 10–34:                  ANALYSIS OF IDENTIFIED SITES COMPARED TO QUADRANT DWELLING UNIT LIMITS 
 
  QUADRANT                     EXISTING UNITS                 GENERAL PLAN       QUADRANT DWELLING       REMAINING FUTURE 
                                                                 CAPACITY1                 UNIT  LIMIT2             UNITS 
  Northwest                               12,308                    15,113                     15,370                 257 
  Northeast                                6,112                     8,939                       9,042                103 
  Southwest                              10,142                      11,109                    12,859               1,750 
  Southeast                              16,335                    16,667                      17,328                 661 
    1 I n c l u d e s  existing units and undeveloped General Plan capacity (based on GMCP). 
    2 B a s e d  on Proposition E (1986). 
 Source:  City of Carlsbad, July 2016. 
Government Code 65863 
California  Government  Code  Section  65863  prohibits  local  governments,  with  certain  exceptions, 
from approving residential projects at a density below that used to demonstrate compliance with 
Housing Element law.  For Carlsbad, this Housing Element utilizes the minimum density (for lower 
and moderate income sites) to demonstrate compliance with Housing Element law. 
If a reduction in residential density for any parcel would result in the remaining sites identified in the 
Housing Element not being adequate to accommodate the city’s share of the regional housing need, 
the city may reduce the density on that parcel provided it identifies sufficient additional, adequate, 
and available sites with an equal or greater residential density so that there is no net loss of residential 
unit capacity. 
																																																													
5	See	Table	10‐28	footnotes	and	Tables	B‐1	and	B‐2	in	Appendix	B	for	information	and	properties	with	specified	
    minimum	densities.	
10-80

Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types  
Carlsbad’s Zoning Ordinance accommodates a range of housing types in the community.  Housing types 
permitted include standard single‐family and multi‐family housing, mobile homes, second units, mixed‐
use opportunities, as well as housing to meet special housing needs, such as farm labor housing, and 
housing for persons with disabilities.  Table 10‐35 summarizes and the following text describes the types 
of housing permitted in each residential and commercial zone. 
      TABLE 10–35:              HOUSING TYPES BY ZONING CATEGORY 
 
      USES                                        E‐A      R‐E    R‐A    R‐1      R‐2      R‐3      R‐P        R‐W  RD‐M  R‐T             RMHP  C‐1, C‐2, C‐L  PC 
                                                                                                            
      Single Family Homes                         A        P      P      P        P        P 
                                                                                            3
                                                                                                    P1,2,4
                                                                                                               P 
                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                      P1,2       P                             P 
      (detached) 
      Single Family Homes                                                P3       P        P        P4         P      P          P                             P 
      (attached) 
      Two‐Family Home                                                             P        P        P4         P      P          P                             P 
      Multi‐Family Housing                                                        P  
                                                                                   5,6
                                                                                           P 6
                                                                                                    P4,6       P 6
                                                                                                                      P 6
                                                                                                                                 P                 P 7
                                                                                                                                                               P 6 
      Second Dwelling Units                                A 8    A 8    A 8      A 8      A 8      A4,8  A8          A 8        A 8                           A 8 
      Mobile  Homes                               A        P      P      P        P        P1       P1,4       P1     P1         P        P                    P 
                                                                                                      4 
      Large Residential Care                                                               C        C                 C                                        C 
      Facility (>6 persons) 
      Small Residential Care                      A        P      P      P        P        P        P4         P      P          P        P        P           P 
      Facility (≤6 persons) 
      Supportive Housing                                   P 9    P 9    P 9      P 9      P 9      P4,9       P 9    P 9        P 9      P 9      P 9         P 9 
      Transitional Housing                                 P 9    P 9    P 9      P 9      P 9      P4,9       P 9    P 9        P 9      P 9      P 9         P 9 
      A=Permitted Accessory Use; P=Permitted Use; C=Conditionally Permitted Use 
 
  1  S i n g l e ‐family dwellings are permitted when  developed  as two or more  detached units on one lot. Also, one single ‐family dwelling 
  shall be permitted on any legal  lot that existed as of September 28, 2004, and which  is designated and zoned  for residential use. 
  2  W h e n   the zone implements the R‐8 land  use designation. 
  3  S u b j e c t  to approval  of a planned  development permit. 
  4  W h e n   the zone implements the R‐15 or R‐23 land  use designation. 
  5  A  multi‐family dwelling with a maximum  of four (4) units may be erected when  the side lot line  of a lot abuts R‐P, commercial  or industrial 
  zoned lots, but in  no  case shall the property consist of more  than one lot, or be more  than 90 feet in  width. 
  6  D e v e l o p m e n t  of more than four   multi‐family dwellings requires approval  of a site development plan. 
  7  P e r m i t t e d  when  located above the ground  floor of a multistory commercial  building and subject to approval  of a site development plan. 
  8  A c c e s s o r y  to single‐family dwelling only. 
  9  A s  adopted by the City Council, October 2, 2012 and April 2014.  
  Source:  City of Carlsbad Municipal Code, 2016 . 
Multi‐Family Units  
Multi‐family units comprise roughly 30 percent of Carlsbad’s housing stock and are permitted in six 
of the city’s residential zones and the P‐C zone as provided through master plans.  Two‐family units 
are permitted in the R‐2, R‐3, RD‐M, R‐W, R‐T and PC zones, while multi‐family uses up to four units 
are permitted in the R‐2 zone when the side lot line of a lot abuts R‐P, commercial, or industrial zoned 
lots.  Larger multi‐family projects are permitted in the R‐3, RD‐M, R‐P, R‐W, R‐T, and PC zones with 
approval of a Site Development Plan. 
                                                                                                                                                     10-81

Second Dwelling Units  
Second dwelling units are permitted as an accessory use to a one‐family dwelling in the R‐E, R‐A, R‐
1, R‐2, R‐3, R‐P, R‐W, RD‐M, and R‐T zones. Second dwelling units may be constructed to satisfy up 
to fifteen units of a development’s total inclusionary housing requirement.  
Manufactured Housing and Mobile Homes 
State housing law requires communities to allow manufactured housing by right on lots zoned for 
single‐family dwellings.  However, the city can regulate the architectural design of a manufactured 
home or mobile home.  The city’s current requirements for manufactured housing and mobile homes 
comply with state law.  Mobile home parks are also permitted in the RMHP zone. 
Transitional Housing and Supportive Housing  
Transitional housing is a type of housing used to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and 
families to permanent housing.  Transitional housing can take several forms, including group quarters 
with beds, single‐family homes, and multi‐family apartments and typically offers case management 
and support services to return people to independent living (usually between 6 and 24 months). 
Supportive housing has no limit on length of stay and is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist 
the  supportive  housing  resident  in  retaining  housing,  improving  his  or  her  health  status,  and 
maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.  Target population 
includes adults with low incomes having one or more physical or development disability, including 
mental  illness,  HIV  or  AIDS,  substance  abuse,  or  other  chronic  health  conditions.    This  may  also 
include  families  with  children,  elderly  persons,  young  adults  aging  out  of  the  foster  care  system, 
individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, or homeless people. 
Similar to transitional housing, supportive housing can take several forms, including group quarters 
with beds, single‐family homes, and multi‐family apartments.  Supportive housing usually includes a 
service component either on‐ or off‐site to assist the tenants in retaining the housing, improving his 
or  her  health  status,  and  maximizing  his  or  her  ability  to  live  and,  when  possible,  work  in  the 
community. 
In  order  to  implement  Program  3.15  of  the  2005‐2010  Housing  Element,  and  to  meet  the  full 
requirements of SB2, the City Council adopted Zoning Ordinance amendments in October 2012 and 
April 2014 to allow transitional housing and supportive housing in all zones allowing residential uses, 
subject only to the same limitations that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the 
same  zone.    Table  10‐35  identifies  the  zones where  transitional  and  supportive  housing  uses are 
permitted.  The city has not identified any additional barriers to the development of transitional or 
supportive housing. 
Emergency Shelters 
An emergency shelter is a facility that houses homeless persons on a limited short‐term basis. In 
order to implement Program 3.14 of the 2005‐2010 Housing Element and comply with SB2, the city 
adopted a Zoning Ordinance amendment in September 2012 to permit emergency shelters by right 
10-82

in the industrial zones, which are well served by major transportation and bus routes and have some 
commercial services.  (The La Posada de Guadalupe homeless shelter discussed below is in the Heavy 
Industrial (M) Zone.)  In these zones, year‐round shelters with up to 30 persons or beds are permitted 
by right; larger shelters are conditionally permitted.  The amendment also provided basic standards.  
The Coastal Commission approved the amendment in early 2014. 
Within the Planned Industrial (P‐M) and M zones there are at least 30 acres that may be appropriate 
for  emergency  shelters.    These  sites  are  vacant  and  not  constrained  by  airport  noise  and  safety 
hazards; or private conditions, covenants, and restrictions or a zoning overlay that prohibit residential 
uses.  In addition, following a period of significant office and industrial construction in the early 2000s 
and a building resurgence since approximately 2014, the city has higher total vacancy rates for both 
office and industrial uses than neighboring cities (20.4 percent and 7.1 percent, for Carlsbad office 
and industrial space, respectively, versus an average 10.7 percent and 3.1 percent for neighboring 
cities)6, providing an opportunity for emergency shelters to locate in vacant buildings.  Nevertheless, 
the overall demand for office and industrial space throughout San Diego County is strong, indicating 
a  potential  shrinking  supply  and  higher  lease  rates.  While  the  existing  La  Posada  de  Guadalupe 
homeless/farmworker housing facility accommodates the current estimates of homeless persons in 
the city (108 in 2016, as described in Section 10.2), there may be additional need (e.g., for women 
and families) in the future that can be accommodated on these sites. 
As with all uses locating in the P‐M or M zones, siting an emergency shelter will require consideration 
be given to the presence of surrounding industrial uses that may employ chemicals or hazardous 
materials or procedures that could pose a threat.  Such surrounding uses may render a potential 
emergency shelter location as unsuitable or may require additional building requirements.  It is not 
possible to determine if such conditions exist until a specific site is identified. 
In  2012,  Catholic  Charities  began  construction  to  rebuild  and  expand  the  current  year‐round  La 
Posada  de  Guadalupe  homeless  shelter  to  provide  additional  farmworker  housing.    The  project, 
funded  in  part  by  a  Community  Development  Block  Grant  and  a  $2  million  grant  from  the  city’s 
Agriculture Conversion Mitigation Fund (see Section 10.3 for more information), was completed in 
2013.  This facility  features 50‐70 beds for farmworkers in addition to the 50‐beds that currently 
serve  farmworkers  and  homeless  men.    Additionally,  the  city’s  funding  grant  stipulated  that  the 
farmworker  portion  of  the  shelter  expansion  be  converted  to  accommodate  homeless  persons, 
including families, should agriculture in Carlsbad ever diminish to the point that farmworker housing 
is unnecessary. 
The  city  has  also  provided  funding  to  Solutions  for  Change  (Solutions)  to  assist  them  in  the 
development of affordable housing to be used by families graduating from their homeless prevention 
program.  Approximately 10 Carlsbad residents are served by the prevention program each year.  In 
2012, the City Council authorized Solutions to use city allocated funds to assist them in acquiring an 
existing 47 unit apartment complex in the City of Vista (the high cost of land made it difficult to find 
																																																													
6
    Colliers International, "Research & Forecast Report" for San Diego County industrial and office markets, 2nd quarter
    2016. "Neighboring cities" include Escondido, Oceanside, San Marcos and Vista and, for office uses only, the "North
    County I-5 Corridor."
                                                                                                                 10-83

a cost effective site in Carlsbad).  Solutions completed the rehabilitation of the apartments in Vista 
and is moving formerly homeless families into the complex.  In 2014, the city allocated $452,000 in 
CBDG funds and a $2,438,000 loan from the Housing Trust Fund to help Solutions acquire an existing 
16‐unit apartment complex in the Barrio. In 2015, formerly homeless families who graduated from 
the organization's Solutions University program began moving into the complex. 
The city also participates in regional homeless programs. Most recently, Carlsbad supported through 
funding the multi‐jurisdictional North County Regional Winter Shelter Program.  One of the shelters 
participating in this Program is La Posada de Guadalupe.  Carlsbad is also served by other homeless 
shelters and programs as identified in Table 10‐13. 
Farm Labor Housing 
The city permits agriculture as a permitted use in many zones, including: 
         Exclusive Agricultural (E‐A) 
         Residential Agricultural (R‐A) 
         Rural Residential Estate (R‐E) 
         One‐Family Residential (R‐1) 
         Two‐Family Residential (R‐2) 
         Multiple‐Family Residential (R‐3) 
         Open Space (O‐S) 
While the city has established a zoning district of Exclusive Agricultural (E‐A), there are no properties 
zoned E‐A.  The city anticipates eliminating this zoning district as part of its zoning ordinance update 
underway. 
Pursuant  to  the  State  Employee  Housing  Act  (Section  17000  of  the  Health  and  Safety  Code), 
employee housing for agricultural workers consisting of no more than 36 beds in a group quarters or 
12  units  or  spaces  designed  for  use  by  a  single  family  or  household  is  permitted  by  right  in  an 
agricultural land use designation.  Therefore, for properties that permit agricultural uses by right, a 
local jurisdiction may not treat employee housing that meets the above criteria any differently than 
an agricultural use. 
Furthermore, any employee housing providing accommodations for six or fewer employees shall be 
deemed a single‐family structure with a residential land use designation, according to the Employee 
Housing Act.  Employee housing for six or fewer persons is permitted where a single‐family residence 
is permitted.  No conditional or special use permit or variance is required. 
To comply with Health and Safety Code Section 17021.6 and implement Program 3.13 in the 2005‐
2010 Housing Element, a Zoning Ordinance amendment was adopted by the City Council in October 
2012.  The amendment permits farmworker housing by right or conditionally where agricultural uses 
are  also  permitted  by  right  or  conditionally,  respectively.    The  Coastal  Commission  approved  the 
amendment in early 2014. 
10-84

Alternative Housing  
State  law  requires  housing  elements  to  identify  zoning  to  encourage  and  facilitate  housing  for 
extremely low income households, including single‐room occupancy units (SROs). 
To implement Program 3.13 in the 2005‐2010 Housing Element and expand housing opportunities 
for extremely‐low‐income households, in September 2012 the City Council approved an amendment 
to the Village Master Plan and Design Manual to conditionally permit and establish standards for 
"managed living units” in certain districts of the Village area.  A managed living unit is designed and 
intended  for  transient  occupancy  of  daily,  weekly  or  longer  tenancy  or  permanent  residency, 
providing sleeping or living facilities for one or two persons, in which a full bathroom and a partial 
kitchen are provided. 
The amendment fulfilled program objectives by providing standards for a viable housing option for 
lower‐income persons.  The Coastal Commission approved the amendment in early 2014.  The city 
has not identified any additional barriers to the development of alternative housing solutions for very 
and extremely low income housing. 
Licensed Community Care Facilities 
The California Health and Safety Code requires that certain community care facilities serving six or 
fewer persons be permitted by right in residential zones.  Moreover, such facilities cannot be subject 
to requirements (development standards, fees, etc.) more stringent than single‐family homes in the 
same district.  The Carlsbad Zoning Ordinance states that residents and operators of a residential care 
facility serving six or fewer persons are considered a “family” for purposes of any zoning regulation 
relating to residential use of such facilities.  Therefore, small residential care facilities are permitted 
under the same conditions and in the same locations as detached and attached single‐family and 
multi‐family  dwellings.    Residential  care  facilities  serving  more  than  six  persons  are  conditionally 
permitted in the R‐3, R‐D‐M zones and the R‐P zone when that zone implements the R‐15, R‐23, or 
R‐30 land use designation. 
The city has no distance requirements for residential care facilities.  For facilities serving more than 
six persons, conditions for approval relate to setback and parking requirements, compatibility with 
surrounding  uses,  ingress/egress,  consistency  with  the  General  Plan  and  other  city  plans,  and 
compliance  with  State  Department  of  Social  Services  licensing  requirements.  Furthermore,  the 
Zoning Ordinance provides that, on appeal, the City Council may modify these requirements provided 
that the modifications would not impact the peace, health, safety and general welfare.  The city’s 
conditions for approval have not served to constrain the development of residential care facilities in 
Carlsbad.    According  to  the  State  Department  of  Social  Services  Licensing  Division,  31  licensed 
residential care facilities for elderly and adults are located in Carlsbad, providing over 2,200 beds. 
Among these facilities, nine have more than six beds. 
Housing for Persons with Disabilities 
The State Housing Element law requires a jurisdiction review its policies and regulations regarding 
housing for persons with disabilities. 
                                                                                                          10-85

Zoning  and  Land  Use.    The  city  of  Carlsbad  complies  with  the  State  law,  allowing  small  licensed 
community care facilities for six and fewer persons by right.  Facilities serving more than six persons 
are conditionally permitted in the R‐3, RD‐M, and R‐P zones (see discussion above under “Licensed 
Community Care Facilities”). 
Furthermore, the Carlsbad Zoning Ordinance provides for the development of multi‐family housing 
in the R‐2, R‐3, R‐P, R‐W, RD‐M, R‐T and P‐C (as provided through master plans) zones. Regular multi‐
family housing for persons with special needs, such as apartments for seniors and the disabled, are 
considered regular residential uses permitted by right in these zones.  The city’s land use policies and 
zoning provisions do not constrain the development of such housing. 
Definition  of  Family.    Although  the  city  does  not  differentiate  between  related  and  unrelated 
individuals living together in its definition of “family,” HCD commented in the last Housing Element 
update  that  the  terms  in  the  definition,  “reasonable  number  of  persons”  and  “bona  fide 
housekeeping  unit”,  posed  a  constraint  to  housing  and  were  potentially  discriminatory.    The  city 
removed  these  terms  from  the  definition  of  “family”  to  eliminate  any  potential  or  perceived 
constraint to development.  The amendment was adopted by City Council in 2010 and approved by 
the Coastal Commission in 2011. 
Building Codes.  The city enforces Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations that regulates the 
access and adaptability of buildings to accommodate persons with disabilities.  No unique restrictions 
are  in  place  that  would  constrain  the  development  of  housing  for  persons  with  disabilities.  
Compliance  with  provisions  of  the  Code  of  Regulations,  California  Building  Standards  Code,  and 
federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is assessed and enforced by the Building Division as a 
part of the building permit submittal. 
Reasonable  Accommodation  Procedure.  Both  the  Fair  Housing  Act  and  the  California  Fair 
Employment and Housing Act direct local governments to make reasonable accommodations (i.e. 
modifications  or  exceptions)  in  their  zoning  laws  and  other  land  use  regulations  when  such 
accommodations  may  be  necessary  to  afford  disabled  persons  an  equal  opportunity  to  use  and 
access housing.  To provide individuals with disabilities such reasonable accommodation, the city 
adopted a Zoning Ordinance amendment in 2011 to establish a procedure for requests for reasonable 
accommodation.  The amendment was approved by the Coastal Commission in March 2013. 
Mitigating Opportunities 
The city recognizes the importance of providing a variety of housing options to meet the varied needs 
of its residents.  With respect to emergency shelters, the city will continue to participate financially 
in regional programs, such as the North County Regional Winter Shelter Program, which utilizes the 
La  Posada  de  Guadalupe  men’s  homeless/farmworker  shelter  in  Carlsbad  and  other  emergency 
shelters to provide emergency shelter in the local area.  The city’s regulations do not represent a 
constraint to development of the other housing types described above. 
Residential Development Standards 
Carlsbad regulates the type, location, appearance, and scale of residential development primarily 
through  the  Zoning  Ordinance.  Zoning  regulations  are  designed  to  maintain  the  quality  of 
10-86

neighborhoods, protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, and implement 
the  policies  of  the  city’s  General  Plan.    Table  10‐36  summarizes  the  residential  development 
standards in Carlsbad. 
Overall,  the  city’s  development  standards  are  typical  and  consistent  with  a  community  that  is 
constrained by its hilly topography.  Density is regulated by the General Plan land use designation as 
demonstrated  in  Table  10‐28,  which  also  identifies  the  zones  that  implement  the  various 
designations‐. 
TABLE 10–36:                    BASIC RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
   CHARACTERISTIC OF LOT,                         R‐E           R‐A      R‐1      R‐2        R‐3         RD‐M       R‐W        R‐T       R‐P        RMHP    V‐R 
   LOCATION  AND  HEIGHT 
   Minimum Net Lot Area                         43,560  7,500 or  6,000 or  6,000;         7,500       6,000;     5,000    –           7,500      3,000;    – 
   (in  square feet)                                          more  more  7,500                        10,000                                     3,500 
   Minimum Lot Width                              100’          60’‐     60’‐     60’‐       60’         60’        40’        –         60’‐       50’     n/a 
   (feet)                                                       80’      80’      80’                                                    80’ 
   Maximum  Lot Coverage                          20%           40%      40%      50%        60%         60%        75%        –         60%        75%     50‐ 
                                                                                                                                                            100%8 
   Minimum Setbacks (feet)                                                                                                                                 
                  Front                           70’           20’  1
                                                                         20’  1
                                                                                  20’  1
                                                                                             20’  1
                                                                                                         20’  3
                                                                                                                    10’        20’       20’  1
                                                                                                                                                    5’      0’‐20’8 
                  Side                            15’‐          5’‐      5’‐      5’‐        5’‐         0’‐        4’‐8’6  5’‐          5’‐        3’      0’‐10’8 
                                                  50’           10’2     10’2     10’2       10’2        10’5                  10’7      10’2 
                  Rear                            30’           10’‐     10’‐     10’‐       10’‐        10’        8’         20’       20’4       3’      0’‐15’8 
                                                                20’      20’      20’        20’ 
   Maximum  Height                                35’           24’‐     24’‐     24’‐       35’         35’        35’        35’       35’        –       30’‐ 
   (in  feet)                                                   35’      35’      35’                                                                       45’8 
1  F o r  key lots and lots which  side upon  commercially  or industrially zoned  property, the minimum setback is 15 feet. 
2  I n t e r i o r  lot side yards must have a minimum setback of 10 percent of the lot width, but not less than 5 feet and need not exceed 10 feet.  
Corner  lot side yards facing the street must be 10 feet and extend the length of the lot. 
3 A  minimum of 15‐foot setback permitted providing carport or garage  openings do not face the front yard: a minimum of 10 feet permitted, 
pro‐  vided  carport or garage  openings do not face the yard and that the remaining front yard is landscaped with a combination of flowers, 
shrubs, trees, and irrigated with a sprinkler system. 
4 E q u a l  to 20 percent of lot width, need not exceed 20 feet. 
5 I n t e r i o r  lot side yards must have a minimum setback of 5 feet. Corner lot side yards facing the street must be a minimum of 10 feet; 
exceptions can be made to allow  a 0‐foot interior side yard setback and 5‐foot street side yard setback on a corner  lot. 
6 I n t e r i o r  lot side yards must have a minimum setback of 4 feet. Corner lot side yards facing the street must be a minimum of 8 feet. 
7 I n t e r i o r  lot side yards must have a minimum setback of 10 feet on one side of the lot and a minimum of 5 feet on the other side. Corner lot 
side yards facing the street must be 10 feet and extend the length of the lot. 
8 In the Village  Review (V‐R) Zone, development standards vary by district. Additionally, the City Council may modify standards on a case‐by‐case 
basis, in  order  to facilitate affordable housing or promote “green building” (e.g., LEED certification) design. 
Source:  City of Carlsbad, 2016. 
Parking 
Parking requirements in Carlsbad vary depending on housing type and anticipated parking needs 
(Table 10‐37).  The city’s parking standards are the same as or lower than many communities in the 
San Diego region and therefore do not serve to constrain residential development.7 Furthermore, the 
																																																													
7
      Parking standards for the cities of Escondido, Oceanside, San Marcos, Santee, and Vista, and the County of San Diego
      were reviewed. These communities have adopted parking standards that are similar, indicating fairly consistent parking
      requirements in the region.
                                                                                                                                                   10-87

city has a demonstrated history of making concessions (i.e. reduced parking requirements) in order 
to facilitate affordable housing development.  The city has also approved reduced parking standards 
and increased densities to foster redevelopment in the Village.  For example, in portions of the Village 
outside the Coastal Zone, one parking space is required for studio and one bedroom units and two 
spaces are required for two or more bedroom units; there is no requirement for guest parking and 
no distinction between rental and ownership units. 
TABLE 10–37:             PARKING REQUIREMENTS (OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE) 
  USE                                                       PARKING REQUIREMENT
  Detached and attached single family dwellings in          2 spaces per unit in a garage.
  R-1, R-A, E-A and RE Zones
  Planned Unit Developments or Condominiums                 Detached or attached single family dwellings: 2
                                                            spaces per unit in a garage.
                                                            Condominiums:
                                                               - Studio and 1-bedrom: 1.5 spaces per unit (one
                                                               covered)
                                                               - 2+Bedrooms: 2.0 spaces per unit (one garaged)
                                                            Guest parking: 0.3 spaces per unit (<10 units); 0.25
                                                            spaces per unit (over 10 units)
  Apartments                                                Studio and 1-bedroom: 1.5 spaces per unit
                                                            2+ Bedrooms: 2.0 spaces per unit
                                                            Guest parking: 0.3 spaces per unit (<10 units); 0.25
                                                            spaces per unit (over 10 units)
  Mobile homes in mobile home parks                         2.0 spaces per mobile home plus 1.0 guest space per
                                                            4 units.
  Second dwelling units                                     1.0 space per unit.
  Residential care facilities                               2.0 spaces plus one space per three beds.
  Housing for seniors                                       1.5 spaces per unit plus one guest space per five
                                                            units and one space for any manager’s unit.
                                                                                                                  
Source:  City of Carlsbad Municipal Code, 2016. 
 
Inclusionary Housing Ordinance 
Since  1993,  the  city  has  had  an  Inclusionary  Housing  Ordinance  that  requires  a  minimum  of  15 
percent  of  all  ownership  and  qualifying  rental  residential  projects  of  seven  or  more  units  to  be 
restricted and affordable to lower income households.  This program requires an agreement between 
all residential developers subject to this inclusionary requirement and the city which stipulates: 
            The number of required lower income inclusionary units; 
            The designated sites for the location of the units; 
            A phasing schedule for production of the units; and  
            The term of affordability for the units. 
For all ownership and qualifying rental projects of fewer than seven units, payment of a fee in lieu of 
inclusionary units is permitted.  The fee is based on a detailed study that calculated the difference in 
10-88

cost to produce a market rate rental unit versus a lower‐income affordable unit. As of 2016, the in‐
lieu fee per market‐rate dwelling unit was $4,515.  In‐lieu fees collected are deposited in the Housing 
Trust Fund to assist in the development of affordable units.    
The  city  will  apply  Inclusionary  Housing  Ordinance  requirements  to  rental  projects  if  the  project 
developer agrees by contract to limit rent as consideration for a “direct financial contribution” or 
other form of assistance specified in density bonus law; or if the project is at a density that exceeds 
the applicable GMCP density, thus requiring the use of “excess dwelling units,” as described in Section 
10.3 (Resources Available). 
The  Inclusionary  Housing  Ordinance  allows  other  contributions  in  lieu  of  construction,  such  as 
dedication of developable land, rehabilitation and affordable sale or rent restriction of existing units, 
and purchase of housing credits.  
Application  of  the  Inclusionary  Housing  Ordinance  has  produced  nearly  1,500  units  of  affordable 
housing among 15 housing developments throughout Carlsbad. See Table 10‐21, Section 10‐3, for 
further details.  
On‐ and Off‐Site Improvements 
Requirements  for  on‐  and  off‐site  improvements  vary  depending  on  the  presence  of  existing 
improvements,  as  well  as  the  size  and  nature  of  the  proposed  development.    In  general,  most 
residential areas in Carlsbad are served with existing infrastructure. Developers are responsible for 
all on‐site improvements, including parking, landscaping, open space development, walkways, and 
all utility connections.  
On‐ and off‐site improvement standards are specified in the General Design Standards developed by 
the city’s Land Development Engineering Division.  The General Design Standards provide standards 
for:  public streets and traffic; private streets and driveways; drainage and storm drains; sewer lines; 
and grading and erosion controls. 
The city’s fee structure includes some on‐ and off‐site improvements.  Off‐site improvement fees 
include drainage and sewer facility fees, school fees, park land fees, and public facility fees, among 
others.  
Mitigating Opportunities  
The city offers flexibility in meeting its residential development standards to help achieve affordable 
housing  in  a  number  of  ways,  including  through  the  Site  Development  Plan  (SDP),  Inclusionary 
Housing  Ordinance,  and  state  density  bonus  law.  Through  the  SDP  (discussed  in  detail  under 
“Development Review Process” below), for example, less restrictive development standards may be 
applied and densities may be increased.  The discussion on Program 2.2 in Appendix A highlights 
three projects that through the SDP process received standards modifications to facilitate affordable 
housing development. Further, the Tavarua Senior Apartments, listed on Table 10‐27, is an example 
of a project receiving a SDP density increase, which in this particular case was approximately 50 units.  
 
                                                                                                        10-89

Additionally, the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance allows financial, land use, and regulatory offsets 
and  permits  creative  alternatives  as  to  how  the  affordable  housing  is  to  be  achieved.    These 
alternatives include contributions in lieu of construction, such as dedicating developable land and 
partnering  with  a  non‐profit  developer  to  build  affordable  housing  or  rehabilitating  units  and 
restricting their sale prices or rents. Under the city’s inclusionary requirements, developers may also 
choose to construct an affordable product type (i.e., ownership or rental) that is different than the 
market‐rate  housing  product  and  may  group  with  other  developers  to  build  a  single  affordable 
housing development. For small housing developers, paying the in lieu fee or purchasing housing 
credits are available alternatives as well.    
Pursuant to state density bonus law, the city offers density increases above the maximum of the 
density range and/or in‐lieu incentives in order to facilitate the development of housing affordable 
to lower and moderate income households.  Depending on the percentage of affordable units and 
level of affordability, a maximum density bonus of 35 percent may be achieved.  Pursuant to the city’s 
Zoning Ordinance, incentives in‐lieu of density increases may include the following: 
         A  reduction  in  site  development  standards  or  a  modification  of  Zoning  Ordinance 
          requirements  or  architectural  design  requirements  that  exceed  the  minimum  building 
          standards approved by the State Building Standards Commission; 
         Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing development;  
         Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city which 
          result in identifiable cost reductions; 
         Partial or additional density bonus; 
         Subsidized or reduced planning, plan check or permit fees; and  
         Direct financial aid including, but not limited to the city’s Affordable Housing Trust Fund, 
          Community Development Block Grant funding, or subsidizing infrastructure, land cost or 
          construction costs or other incentives of equivalent financial value based upon the land 
          costs per dwelling unit.  
Furthermore, developments meeting state density bonus requirements may use the state’s parking 
standards (inclusive of guest and handicapped parking): 
         Studio and one‐bedroom: one parking space 
         Two‐ and three‐bedroom: two parking spaces 
         Four or more bedrooms: 2.5 parking spaces  
         Alternatively, for qualifying density bonus projects within one‐half mile of a major transit 
          stop, the maximum parking required may be limited to 0.3 spaces per unit to 0.5 spaces 
          per  bedroom,  depending  on  the  type  of  residents  intended  to  be  served  by  the 
          development. 
These requirements include guest and handicapped parking.  
To grant a state density bonus, the city must be able to make the findings specified in state density 
bonus law.  An allocation of excess dwelling units (discussed previously in this section) must also 
10-90

be granted.  To be eligible for a state density bonus, a project must include the development of 
affordable housing; therefore, the project is also eligible for an allocation of excess dwelling units.  
The city’s policy regarding excess dwelling units does not conflict with the city’s ability to grant a 
state density bonus. 
Development Review Process  
City Review  
One  of  the  City  Council’s  four  key  priorities  for  fiscal  year  2011‐2012  was  to  streamline  city 
processes to support faster development review processing times and more efficient handling of 
business requests and services. To that end, the City Council directed city staff to find ways to 
forge a stronger partnership with the development community and improve the efficiency of the 
development review process for the developer, community members, and city staff.  
A working group, including the Building Industry Association of San Diego County (BIA), developed 
a set of initiatives including reducing the time period for project reviews, extending the validity 
period for permits, changing rules for decision‐making, and creating manuals and guidelines to 
clarify and illustrate regulations.  In addition, on important projects, city and developer staff form 
teams as needed to monitor major projects and make sure they stay on track.  
Another city initiative was the consolidation of most of the staff involved in development review 
(Housing and Neighborhood Services, Planning, Land Design Engineering, Building, and Economic 
Development)  into  a  single  department,  Community  &  Economic  Development.    This  clarified 
communication  lines  for  both  project  applicants  and  city  staff.    All  initiatives  have  been 
implemented, including a 2013 amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to streamline and improve 
the city’s development review process. 
Carlsbad’s  review  process  depends  on  the  project  type  and  complexity,  and  whether  a  major 
variation  in  development  standards,  land  use,  or  operating  conditions  is  requested.    If  the 
proposed  project  involves  ownership  units,  then  either  a  tentative  tract  map  or  parcel  map  is 
required.  If condominium ownership is proposed, then a Planned Unit Development (PUD) permit 
is required.  This PUD process allows review of project design features, such as architecture, site 
design,  landscaping,  and  recreation  areas.  Zoning  Ordinance  Chapter  21.45  contains  the 
standards required for projects subject to a PUD; the chapter also provides the necessary approval 
findings and references applicable City Council policies specifying architectural and neighborhood 
design. 
The  discretionary  review  process  for  rental  apartments  is  more  straightforward.    Apartment 
projects with no more than four units are allowed by right in multi‐family zones, provided they 
meet  General  Plan  density  thresholds.  Since  only  a  building  permit  is  required,  apartment 
complexes  with  four  or  fewer  units  provide  an  opportunity  for  infill  of  underutilized  sites. 
Apartment developments with more than four units must submit a Site Development Plan (SDP) 
application that is subject to approval by the Planning Commission.  The Planning Commission 
review of the SDP pertains only to design features of the development since the residential use is 
allowed by right. 
                                                                                                      10-91

According to Zoning Ordinance Section 21.53.120, SDPs are also required for rental or ownership 
affordable housing projects of any size.  “Affordable housing” is defined in the Zoning Ordinance as 
“housing for which the allowable housing expenses for a for‐sale or rental dwelling unit paid by a 
household would not exceed thirty percent of the gross monthly income for target income levels, 
adjusted for household size.”  Review of SDPs for affordable housing projects follows the timeframes 
discussed below.  Processing of SDPs is explained in Zoning Ordinance Chapter 21.06. 
As mentioned previously, review of the SDP focuses only on design features, not the residential use. 
An identification of these design features or development standards is listed in Section 21.53.120 (c) 
as follows: 
        The  development  standards  of  the  underlying  zone  and/or  any  applicable  specific  or 
         master plan, except for affordable housing projects as expressly modified by the SDP. 
        The SDP for affordable housing projects may allow less restrictive development standards 
         than specified in the underlying zone or elsewhere provided that the project is consistent 
         with all applicable policies (such as the General Plan) and ordinances. 
        In the Coastal Zone, any project requiring a SDP shall be consistent with all certified local 
         coastal program provisions, with the exception of density. 
        Through the SDP process, the Planning Commission or the City Council may impose special 
         conditions or requirements that are more restrictive than the development standards in 
         the underlying zone or elsewhere that include provisions for, but are not limited to the 
         following: 
             Density of use; 
             Compatibility with surrounding properties; 
             Parking standards; 
             Setbacks, yards, active and passive open space required as part of the entitlement 
              process, and on‐site recreational facilities; 
             Height and bulk of buildings; 
             Fences and walls; 
             Signs; 
             Additional landscaping; 
             Grading, slopes and drainage; 
             Time period within which the project or any phases of the project shall be completed; 
             Points of ingress and egress; 
             Other requirements to ensure consistency with the General Plan or other adopted 
              documents; and 
             On‐ or off‐site public improvements. 
 
To assist applicant certainty regarding the standards that would be applied, documents such as the 
Zoning  Ordinance  and  other  planning  requirements  applicable  to  multi‐family  developments  are 
available  from  the  Carlsbad  Planning  Division  via  mail,  email,  online,  or  in  person.    Applicable 
provisions as well as application forms and fee information may be found on the division’s website 
at http://www.carlsbadca.gov/services/depts/planning/default.asp. 
Additionally, Zoning Ordinance Section 21.06.020 establishes the approval findings for SDPs. These 
findings are as follows: 
10-92

        That  the  requested  use  is  properly  related  to  the  site,  surroundings  and  environmental 
         settings,  is  consistent  with  the  various  elements  and  objectives  of  the  General  Plan,  any 
         master or specific plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and will not be detrimental to existing uses or 
         to uses specifically permitted in the area in which the proposed use is to be located, and will 
         not adversely impact the site, surroundings or traffic circulation; 
        That the site for the intended use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use; 
        That all of the yards, setbacks, walls, fences, landscaping, and other features necessary to 
         adjust the requested use to existing or permitted future uses in the neighborhood will be 
         provided and maintained, and; 
        That the street system serving the proposed use is adequate to properly handle all traffic 
         generated by the proposed use. 
        The proposed development or use meets all other specific additional findings as required by 
         this title. 
These findings, and the development standards that are applicable to multi‐family development, are 
specific to the design of the project and its site, and the project’s compatibility with its surroundings 
and serving infrastructure.  Furthermore, they are readily available to a project applicant.  Sites for 
high density development in the city are located according to General Plan standards to help ensure 
they are in locations compatible with their surroundings and appropriately located near adequate 
services and transportation networks. 
Carlsbad offers a preliminary review process to potential applicants. For a reduced application fee 
and minimal submittal requirements, applicants will receive detailed information on the standards 
and  processing  applicable  for  their  anticipated  projects,  including  comments  from  the  city’s 
Community and Economic Development Department (Building, Land Development Engineering, and 
Planning Divisions), and Fire Prevention. 
The  timeframe  for  processing  required  permits  can  vary,  depending  on  the  size  and  type  of 
development, permits required, and approving entity (Table 10‐38).  Typical processing time for a 
single‐family home is two to three weeks, while larger subdivisions can take eight to 12 months (from 
the application date to approval date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                         10-93

TABLE 10–38:                  DISCRETIONARY REVIEWS FOR RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS 
   TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT                                PERMITS REQUIRED                           APPROVING ENTITY     PROCESSING TIME 
   Single‐Family House (1 Unit)                       Building Permit                            Building Official    2 – 3 weeks 
   Single‐Family Standard                             Tentative Parcel Map                       City Planner  
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                      3 – 6 months 
   Subdivision (1‐4 Units) 
   Single‐Family Small‐lot                            Tent. Parcel Map  PUD                      City Planner1        4 – 8 months 
   Subdivision (1‐4 Units)                            Permit 
   Single‐Family or  Multi‐family                     Tent. Parcel Map  PUD                      City Planner1        4 – 8 months 
   Condominiums (1‐4 Units)                           Permit 
   Single‐Family or  Multi‐family                     Building  Permit                           Building  Official1  3 – 5 weeks 
   Apartments (1‐4 Units) 
   Single‐Family Standard                             Tent. Tract Map                            Planning Commission  6 – 9 months 
   Subdivision (5+ Units) 
   Single‐Family Small‐lot                            Tent. Tract Map  PUD                       Planning Commission  6 – 11 months 
   Subdivision (5+ Units)                             Permit 
   Single‐Family or  Multi‐family                     Tent. Tract Map  PUD                       Planning Commission  6 – 11 months 
   Condominiums (5+ Units)                            Permit 
   Single‐Family or  Multi‐family                     Site Development Plan                      Planning Commission  6 – 11 months 
   Apartments (5+ Units) 
1 A f f o r d a b l e  housing projects of any size require  approval  of a SDP by the Planning Commission. 
Source:  City of Carlsbad, 2016. 
California Coastal Commission 
The city has obtained Coastal Development Permit jurisdiction for five of the six Local Coastal Plan 
(LCP)  segments  (excluding  the  Agua  Hedionda  LCP  segment)  within  its  boundaries.  Development 
within these five LCP segments of the coastal zone consistent with the Local Coastal Program is not 
required to be reviewed by the Coastal Commission.  As part of its current effort to update its LCP, 
the  city  is  pursuing  jurisdiction  to  issue  Coastal  Development  Permits  in  the  Agua  Hedionda  LCP 
segment.  
Proposed changes to the LCP or ordinances that implement the LCP, such as the Carlsbad Zoning 
Ordinance, require the filing of a LCP amendment with the Coastal Commission after all city approvals 
have  occurred.    The  Coastal  Commission  must  review  and  approve  these  changes  before  they 
become effective in the Coastal Zone.  This additional review may add several months. Since the 
requirement to file a LCP amendment is applicable to all jurisdictions with Coastal Zones, it is not 
unique to the City of Carlsbad and does not constitute an actual constraint to housing development. 
San Diego Regional Airport Authority 
Carlsbad is home to the McClellan‐Palomar Airport, a public aviation facility, owned by the County of 
San Diego.  Pursuant to state law, all GPAs, Zoning Ordinance amendments, and Master and Specific 
Plan amendments that affect land within the airport’s influence area in Carlsbad must be reviewed 
by  the San Diego County  Regional  Airport  Authority  (SDCRAA).    The SDCRAA  has  60  days for  the 
review.  However, the City Council has the authority to override the SDCRAA review with a four‐fifths 
vote.    Since  this  requirement  is  applicable  to  all  jurisdictions  located  near  airports/airfields,  this 
requirement is not unique to the City of Carlsbad and does not constitute an actual constraint to 
10-94

housing development.  Other potential constraints associated more specifically with the airport are 
discussed in this section. 
Mitigating Opportunities 
The city complies with state requirements for streamlining the permit processing procedures.  In 
addition, the city offers priority processing for affordable housing projects, reducing the review time 
for discretionary permits. 
Building Codes 
On January 1, 2014, the 2013 California Building Code and appendices became effective in the city, 
along  with  local  amendments  related  to  administrative  procedures  (e.g.,  permit  expiration  and 
exemptions).    This  includes  applicable  green  building,  electrical,  mechanical,  plumbing  and  fire 
regulations.  Applicants’ plans are reviewed for compliance with the building code before permits are 
issued. 
Fees and Exactions 
The City of Carlsbad collects planning and development fees to cover the costs of processing permits.  
The  city  also  charges  impact  fees  to  recover  the  cost  of  providing  the  necessary  public  services, 
infrastructure, and facilities required to serve new residential development.  Typical permit fees are 
presented in Table 10‐39. 
On average, permit and development impact fees total to $54,400 for a typical single‐family home 
and $20,600 for a multi‐family unit.  (These fee averages, collected in 2013, are maintained to provide 
a reasonable comparison with the fee information collected from other cities below.)   
It is difficult to compare fees across different communities, since they tend to have different types of 
fees.  For example, Carlsbad may have some fees that are higher, but the city does not have a design 
review fee as in most adjacent communities.  Still, a comparative assessment has been undertaken.  
According  to  the  respective  cities’  adopted  (2013)  housing  elements,  the  neighboring  City  of 
Oceanside describes $32,829 ‐ $36,109 for single‐family homes and $22,832 ‐ $23,488 per unit for a 
multi‐family project; in the City of San Marcos, fees are estimated at approximately $55,717 per unit 
in single‐family subdivisions and $33,632 per unit for a typical multi‐family project; and the City of 
Escondido estimates that a developer can expect to pay $39,860 for a typical single‐family dwelling 
unit and $24,247 per unit for a multi‐family project. 
For single‐family and multi‐family construction, the 2013 permit and development impact fees stated 
above for Carlsbad and adjusted for inflation to 2016, represent about 10 percent and 8 percent, 
respectively, of total development costs (“TDC,” or the costs to construct a home, less the developer’s 
profit). TDC for a single‐family home were based on a developer’s estimate to build a 40‐plus unit 
subdivision  in  the  city  with  single‐family  detached  homes  averaging  2,000  square  feet.  TDC  for a 
multi‐family dwelling were based on estimates to develop market‐rate, garden apartments with one 
to  three  bedroom  units  averaging  860  square  feet  in  Carlsbad.  These  multi‐family  estimates  are 
contained  in  Appendix  II  of  the  Affordable  Housing  Impact  Fee  Nexus  Study  prepared  for  the 
                                                                                                          10-95

proposed              rental         housing       impact        fee,        available          at 
http://www.carlsbadca.gov/cityhall/clerk/meetings/boards/housing.asp.       
TABLE 10–39:        DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE 
                                                  
 DEVELOPMENT PROCESSING FEES                                                                     AMOUNT
 Affordable Housing
    Impact                                                                                     $2,915/du
    In-Lieu                                                                                    $4,515/du
Agricultural Conversion Mitigation Fee                                                        $10,000/acre
Coastal Development Permit (outside the Village)
    Single Family Lot                                                                             $1,097
    2-4 units or lots                                                                             $2,222
    5+ Units or Lot Subdivision                                                                   $3,616
 Coastal Development Permit (Village only)                                                          $675
 Environmental Impact Assessment                                                                  $1,760
 Environmental Impact Report                                                                     $20,433
 General Plan Amendment
    0-5 Acres                                                                                     $4,348
    Over 5 Acres                                                                                  $6,271
 Habitat Management Permit
    Minor                                                                                           $562
    Major                                                                                         $3,981
 Hillside Development Permit
    Single Family                                                                                  $1,265
    Other (Multiple Lots)                                                                         $2,559
 Local Coastal Program Amendment                                                                  $6,356
 Local Facilities Management Zone Plan/Amendment           $10,000.00/Fee+ Min. Increments of $5,000.00
 Master Plan                                                                                    $42,566
 Master Plan Pre-Filing Submittal                                                                 $7,239
 Planned Development
    Minor (4 or fewer units)                                                                      $3,071
    Major (5-50 units)                                                                            $8,515
    Major (51+ units)                                                                            $13,454
 Preliminary Review
    Minor (single family dwelling)                                                                   $202
    Major (other)                                                                                    $720
 Review Permit, Major (Village only)                                                               $3,071
 Site Development Plan
    Minor (<4 units)                                                                              $4,550
    Major                                                                                        $11,541
10-96

TABLE 10–39:         DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE 
DEVELOPMENT PROCESSING FEES                                                                       AMOUNT
Special Use Permit
   Flood Plain                                                                                    $3,937
   Scenic Corridor                                                                                $3,555
Specific Plan                                                                                    $35,552
Tentative Parcel Map                                                                              $3,875
Tentative Tract Map (Major Subdivision)
   5-49 Units/Lots                                                                                 $7,947
   50+ Units/Lots                                                                                $15,883
Variance
   Minor                                                                                            $765
   Planning                                                                                       $2,880
Zone Change
   <5 acres                                                                                       $4,994
   5+ acres                                                                                       $6,766
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES                                                                           AMOUNT
Bridge & Thoroughfare Districts
   District 1                                                   $318-$530/unit (varies based on unit type)
   District 2                                    $348-$1,459/Average Daily Trip (varies based on location)
   District 3                                                                      $200/Average Daily Trip
Community Facilities District
   Single Family Detached, Condominium                                                          $2,232/unit
   Apartment                                                                              $0.71/square foot
Habitat Management Plan Mitigation Fee
   Coastal Sage Scrub                                                                         $31,194/acre
   Non-native grassland                                                                       $15,598/acre
   Agricultural/Distributed/Eucalyptus woodland                                                $3,120/acre
Local Facilities Management Zone                                         $310/unit (applies to Zone 6 only)
Master Drainage (“PLDA”) 1                                                             $2,136-$26,906/acre
Park In Lieu                                        $3,696-$7,649/unit (varies based on location, unit type)
Public Facilities                               1.82% (in a CFD) or 3.5% (out of a CFD) of permit valuation
School Fees (residential) 2                                                        $3.48-$4.68/square foot
Sewer Benefit Area                                                $0-$3,347/unit (varies based on location)
Sewer Connection (all areas)                                           $881/equivalent dwelling unit
                                                                                           10-97

  TABLE 10–39:         DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE 
  DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES                                                                                                                         AMOUNT
   Traffic Impact 3
     Single Family Detached                                                                                                            $2,690-$3,160/unit
     Condominium                                                                                                                       $2,152-$2,528/unit
     Apartment                                                                                                                         $1,614-$1,896/unit
   Water   Connection 4
     Single Family Detached                                                                                                                     $10,877/unit
     Multi-family                                                                                                                                $5,181/unit
1
  Fees vary based on location and runoff factor; highest fees generally applicable to non‐residential projects 
2
  Represents range of fees charged by the four school districts serving Carlsbad.  
3
  Fees vary based on location in or out of a community facilities district. 
4Fees based on 3/4‐inch meter for single‐family detached and 2‐inch meter for multi‐family. Multi‐family fees figured over 10 units.  
Source:  City of Carlsbad, September 2015.   
 
Mitigating Opportunities 
Carlsbad’s development fees do not unduly constrain the development of affordable housing in the 
city.  Although the city does not waive fees for affordable housing projects, the city provides financial 
assistance to most affordable housing projects constructed in Carlsbad using a variety of funding 
sources, including the Housing Trust Fund, and CDBG funds. 
Further, and at the request of the BIA, the City Council adopted an ordinance in 2013 that allowed 
developers, for a two‐year period, to choose to defer the payment of specified development impact 
fees  for  certain  projects,  including  residential  developments  of  five  or  more  dwelling  units.    The 
ordinance permitted these fees to be paid prior to a request for final building inspection rather than 
before permit issuance or final map recordation.  A subsequent 2015 ordinance made impact fee 
deferral  a  permanent  developer  option.    This  option  can  be  an  economic  stimulator  as  it  offers 
builders flexibility in how and when certain fees are paid.  At the same time, fee deferral does not 
negatively impact city staff's administration of the fee collection process. 
Environmental Constraints 
Environmental constraints to residential development typically relate to the presence of sensitive 
habitat, water supply, topography, and other environmental hazards that can limit the amount of 
development in an area or increase the cost of development.  This section analyzes these potential 
constraints. 
Endangered Species/Sensitive Habitat  
Carlsbad contains many areas where native habitat hosts endangered or sensitive species.  Protection 
of many of the species is mandated by federal and state laws.  The presence of sensitive or protected 
habitat and/or species can constrain the amount of developable land.  With the high price of land in 
Carlsbad,  this  type  of  constraint  on  otherwise  developable  land  would  make  the  construction  of 
10-98

affordable housing less feasible. 
Mitigating Opportunities 
With the adoption of the Habitat Management Plan (HMP) in 2004, the processing time for housing 
development and associated costs are reduced. 
Water and Sewer Supply 
Although Carlsbad and the San Diego County Water Authority (SDCWA) do not foresee short‐term 
water supply problems, the city cannot guarantee the long‐term availability of an adequate water 
supply.  Recent state law requires that the local water purveyor prepare a water supply assessment 
for  larger  subdivisions  to  ensure  adequate  long‐term  water  supply  for  single‐year  and  multi‐year 
drought conditions prior to issuance of a building permit.  The city also actively implements several 
water  conservation  programs  and  has  an  extensive  network  for  the  collection,  treatment,  and 
circulation  of  recycled  water  for  non‐potable  uses  throughout  the  city.    The  Claude  "Bud"  Lewis 
Carlsbad Desalination Plant provides a portion of the potable water needs of the Carlsbad Municipal 
Water District (CMWD), which serves most of the city.  The CMWD Board has contracted with SDCWA 
to purchase a minimum 2,500 acre‐feet/year of desalinated water.  This represents 12.5 percent of 
the  long‐term  projected  water  demand,  and  is  an  important  component  of  the  water  district’s 
strategy to ensure long‐term water supply under drought conditions. 
Mitigating Opportunities 
Pursuant  to  state  law,  affordable  housing  projects  should  be  given  priority  for  water  and  sewer 
services if supply or capacity becomes an issue. 
The CMWD serves approximately 83 percent of the city, providing sewer service to the same area. 
Both  the  city  and  CMWD  have  adequate  capacity  and  facilities  to  serve  the  portion  of  the  city’s 
remaining RHNA that is within their service areas. 
The portions of Carlsbad not served by CMWD or the city are located in the southeastern part of 
Carlsbad,  including  the  community  known  as  “La  Costa.”    For  much  of  this  area,  the  Leucadia 
Wastewater  District  provides  sewer  service  and  the  Olivenhain  Municipal  and  Vallecitos  water 
districts provide water service (Vallecitos also provides sewer service).  Ten site the city has identified 
to meet its RHNA are located in the Vallecitos service area and about 130 potential units are located 
in the Olivenhain district.  Sites to accommodate approximately 225 units are within the boundaries 
of the Leucadia Wastewater District.  According to the city’s Growth Management Monitoring Report 
(FY 2014‐2015), all districts have indicated their ability to provide sewer and water services to the 
RHNA units within their respective service areas.  
Topography 
Certain topographic conditions can limit the amount of developable land and increase the cost of 
housing  in  Carlsbad.    For  safety  and  conservation  purposes,  Carlsbad’s  Hillside  Development 
Ordinance does not allow significant amounts of grading without regulatory permits.  In addition, 
land that has slopes over 40 percent is precluded from the adequate sites inventory in Section 10.3. 
                                                                                                        10-99

Development on slopes greater than 25 percent but less than 40 percent is permitted on an area 
equivalent to half the site area to ensure safety and avoid erosion. 
Thousands  of  acres  of  land  in  Carlsbad  are  constrained  by  topography.    Where  residential 
development is permitted on moderate slopes, the cost of improvement and construction in these 
areas increases and can affect the end price of the unit.  For safety concerns and the community goal 
of  preserving  the  unique  scenic  qualities  of  hillside  topography,  these  policies  on  hillside 
development are necessary. 
McClellan‐Palomar Airport 
The McClellan‐Palomar Airport is located east of the I‐5 and north of Palomar Airport Road within 
the city limits.  The significant restrictions to residential development are the airport’s safety zones 
(1‐6) and within certain projected noise contour levels.  The safety zones identify areas restricted 
from certain uses due to potential crash hazards.  The projected noise contour levels are used to 
quantify noise impacts and to determine compatibility with land uses. State noise standards have 
adopted the  65 CNEL (Community Noise Equivalent Level) as the exterior noise environment not 
suitable for residential use. 
Mitigating Opportunities 
The Carlsbad General Plan Land Use Element designates the area around the airport primarily for 
industrial and office uses.  Multi‐family residential development may be permitted in Safety Zone 6 
without restriction, and in Safety Zones 3 and 4 provided density is limited to not more than 16 or 20 
dwelling  units  per  acre,  respectively,  and  additional  open  land  is  maintained.    Any  multi‐family 
housing within the 60 CNEL is subject to a noise study and required mitigation measures.  None of 
the city’s sites identified to meet its RHNA are located within a restricted safety zone.  Only one site, 
Aviara Farms, an approximately 9 acre underutilized site with the capacity for 206 very low income 
units (see Appendix B, Table B‐2), is located within the 60 CNEL airport noise contour.  As noted, 
multi‐family housing within this noise contour is acceptable subject to a noise study and mitigation, 
which typically is accomplished through standard construction methods. 
10-100

10.5 Review of Housing Programs 
Before devising the housing plan for the current 2013‐2021 Housing Element, the city reviewed the 
housing programs contained in the previous Housing Element (2005‐2010, extended through April 
29, 2013 by SB 575) for effectiveness and continued appropriateness.  For the 2017 Housing Element 
Update,  the  city  similarly  reviewed  the  current  programs  for  their  effectiveness  and  continued 
appropriateness.  Appendix A documents program achievements to date (2013‐2015). Section 10.7, 
Goals,  Policies,  and  Programs  of  the  Housing  Plan  of  this  2013‐2021  Housing  Element,  were 
developed based on the program‐by‐program review of the previous Housing Element, assessment 
of current demographic and housing conditions in the community (Section 10.2), resources available 
(Section  10.3),  and  constraints  present  (Section  10.4).    The  Housing  Plan  has  subsequently  been 
adjusted to incorporate the results of the 2017 Housing Element Update. 
The following summarizes the achievements of the previous and current Housing Elements in terms 
of housing constructed and preserved. 
Housing Construction and Progress toward RHNA  
The following Table 10‐40 summarizes the city’s progress in housing construction from 2003 through 
2012.  The RHNA for the previous planning period totaled 8,376 dwelling units.  During this time, 
there were 6,534 dwelling units constructed in the city.  Units were constructed at a range of income 
levels,  though  primarily  for  market‐rate  housing.    However,  due  to  the  decline  in  sales  price  in 
Carlsbad since 2006, 99 market rate units constructed from 2010‐2012  were affordable to moderate 
income  households,  as  shown  in  Table  B  of  the  2015  Annual  Housing  Progress  Report,  which 
summarizes residential construction In Carlsbad from 2010‐2015.  Although not reflected in the table 
below,  the  city  also  helped  to  finance  50  to  70  additional  shelter  beds  for  homeless  men  and 
farmworkers. 
   TABLE 10–40:  PROGRESS TOWARD MEETING  THE RHNA:  2003‐2012 
                                          VERY LOW                        LOW  MODERATE      ABOVE               TOTAL
                                                                                         MODERATE
  RHNA                                          1,922                  1,460      1,583       3,411              8,376
  Accomplishments
  Units Constructed                                231                     841      459       5,003              6,534
  Units Rehabilitated                                0                       0        0           0                  0
  Units Conserved                                    0                       0        0           0                  0
  Total                                            231                     841      459       5,003              6,534  
 Source:  City of Carlsbad, 2012 Annual  Housing Element Progress Report. 
 
Table 10‐25 in Section 10.3 summarizes the city’s progress toward meeting the current (2010‐
2020)  RHNA.    From  January  1,  2010  through  April  30,  2016,  2,645  dwelling  units  have  been 
constructed or approved for construction, representing approximately 53% of the overall RHNA 
target.  Units continue to be approved and constructed at a range of income levels as a result of 
market conditions and city housing programs:  365 lower income units, 182 moderate income 
units, and 2,098 above‐moderate income units.  While the overall housing production is keeping 
                                                                                                       10-101

pace with overall need, production of very low and moderate income housing is not.  Therefore, 
it is important that the city continue its efforts to implement the housing plan. 
Housing in the Coastal Zone  
Pursuant to state law, the city monitors housing activities in the Coastal Zone.  According to state law, 
coastal zone demolitions that meet certain criteria are not required to be replaced. One criterion is the 
demolition  of  a  residential  structure  containing  fewer  than  three  dwelling  units  or  the  demolition  of 
multiple  residential  structures  containing  10  or  fewer  total  dwelling  units.    A  total  of  13  units  were 
demolished in Carlsbad’s Coastal Zone during the previous Housing Element period. Among these units, 
none were subject to replacement requirements.  No units have been demolished in the current period 
(through 2015).  
The city’s Inclusionary Housing program resulted in the construction of affordable units in the Coastal 
Zone or within three miles of the Coastal Zone.  Detailed in Table 10‐41 is a tabulation of the housing 
units constructed and demolished in Carlsbad’s Coastal Zone from 1991 through 2015.  Between 
2005 and 2015, 887 housing units were added to the Coastal Zone, of which 25 (three percent) were 
affordable to lower‐income households. 
Between 2013 and 2015, a total of 200 housing units were constructed, including 25 second dwelling 
units, of which five were affordable to lower income households. 
TABLE 10–41:                     COASTAL ZONE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 
                                            SINGLE‐FAMILY               MULTIFAMILY                                      
  DATE                                  ATTACHED     DETACHED      2‐4 UNITS    5+ UNITS    MOBILE      DEMOLITIONS       AFFORDABLE 
                                                                                            HOMES                                UNITS 
  1991‐1999                                    134         2,041         307         366           0               16              344 
  (July 1, 1991 to 
  June 30, 1999) 
  1999‐2005                                     60         2,381         305       4,837           0                 8            4561 
  (July 1, 1999 to 
  June 30, 2005) 
  2005‐2012                                    367             12          82        226           0               13                 25 
  (July 1, 2005 to 
  December 31, 2012) 
  2013‐2015                                    802             52          47        21            0                 0                 5 
  (January 1, 2013 to 
  December 31, 2015 
  1 Includes 17 second dwelling units 
  2 Includes 25 second dwelling units  
     Source: City of Carlsbad, 2016. 
 
	
	
10-102

Housing Preservation  
Overall, the city’s housing stock is new and/or in good condition; therefore, housing preservation 
activities focused primarily on preserving the affordability of the units.  From 2010 to date, the city's 
housing preservation programs have resulted in the following: 
         In 2010, the city approved the conversion of a mobile home park from rental to a resident‐
          owned park.  Affordability of the units is protected pursuant to state law.   
         In 2012, the City Council approved a $7.4 million residual receipts loan from the Housing 
          Trust Fund for the acquisition of 42 1950’s era duplex units in the Barrio (Harding Street 
          Neighbors,  LP).    Eventually,  50  duplexes  units  were  acquired,  with  acquisition  of  all 
          properties  completed  by  2015.  All  units  were  rehabilitated  and  rent‐restricted  for  55 
          years to low income households. The intent of the property acquisition is to consolidate 
          the  parcels  and  construct  a  new  114‐118  unit  high  density  (minimum  23  du/ac)  lower 
          income affordable housing development with an initial phase of 93 units. 
         In 2015, two Minor Home Repair Grants were issued to low‐income homeowners to assist 
          in home repairs.  The city has issued a total of six grants since 2013.  
         In  2016,  the  city’s  Housing  and  Neighborhood  Services  staff  successfully  assisted  in 
          negotiating rents of 26 low income tenants at Santa Fe Ranch so that they could remain 
          in place after the project’s conversion to market rate.  The city also provides Section 8 
          rental assistance to maintain housing affordability for these residents. 
           
                                                                                                  10-103

10.6 Housing Plan Overview 
This section of the Housing Element introduces and describes the city’s Housing Plan.  The Housing 
Plan  consists  of  the  city's  long‐term  housing  goals  and  a  menu  of  shorter‐term  objectives,  policy 
positions, and programs to achieve the long‐term goals.  This section serves as a guide to these goals, 
objectives,  policies,  and  programs,  which  are  contained  in  accompanying  Section  10.7.  Together, 
Sections  10.6  and  10.7  comprise  a  broad‐based  Housing  Plan  for  the  creation  of  housing 
opportunities  throughout  the  city.    Through  this  Housing  Plan  the  city  demonstrates  its 
understanding of housing needs, as well as its commitment of city resources to accommodate those 
needs. 
Fiscal Considerations 
While  the  city  affirms  its  commitment  towards  meeting  the  community’s  housing  needs,  it  is 
nevertheless  incumbent  on  the  city  to  acknowledge  that  the  Housing  Plan  is  but  one  of  a  large 
number of programs competing for the finite fiscal resources of the city.  As such, it is not possible to 
subject this Housing Plan to strict budgetary scrutiny.  In addition, there may be legal requirements 
affecting future encumbrances of funds, as well as demands in other areas requiring the city to make 
difficult decisions on budgetary priorities.  
Defining Goals and Policies 
The Goals, Policies and Programs section (10.7) of the Housing Plan establishes a policy framework 
to guide city decision making to meet identified goals.  The housing programs outlined later represent 
actions the city will undertake to promote housing opportunities for all segments of the community.  
The housing goals are articulated as a general “end condition statement,” which states a desired 
outcome.  The goals do not contain an action verb as they reflect a final statement of what the city 
will hope to achieve.  How the goal will be achieved is established via the subordinate policies and 
programs. 
Policies are statements on the position the city takes to implement an objective.  Policies contained 
in  the  Housing  Element  are  important  statements  as  they  reflect  the  city’s  official  position  on  a 
matter.  Future development must be consistent with these policies.  
Designing Housing Programs 
The housing goals and policies address Carlsbad’s identified housing needs, and are implemented 
through  a  series  of  housing  programs  offered  by  the  city.    Housing  programs  define  the  specific 
actions the city will undertake to achieve the stated goals and policies.  Each program identifies the 
following:  
Funding:  Indicates the sources of funds to be used for each program.  When these funds become 
unavailable, implementation of these programs may not be possible.  
Lead Agency:  Indicates the agency, department, division or authority responsible for the program.  
10-104

When more than one agency is listed it is a joint or cooperative effort.  The City Council functions as 
the Housing Authority in carrying out various housing programs.  Administration and actual staffing 
of housing programs are carried out by the Housing and Neighborhood Services Division. 
Objectives:    Indicates  the  specific  objectives  to  be  achieved.    Whenever  possible,  the  objectives 
would be quantified. 
Time Frame:  Indicates the time span for the programs and target year for specific accomplishments 
or milestones.  Unless otherwise stated, the time frame for program implementation is April 30, 2013 
through April 29, 2021. 
                                                                                                       10-105

10.7 Housing Plan Goals, Policies, and Programs 
Preservation 
Preserving the existing housing stock and avoiding deterioration that often leads to the need for 
substantial rehabilitation is one of the city’s goals. In addition, it is important to preserve affordable 
housing units in the community to maintain adequate housing opportunities for all residents. 
10‐G.1  Carlsbad’s existing housing stock preserved, rehabilitated, and improved with special attention to 
        housing affordable to lower‐income households. 
10‐P.1  Withhold approval of requests to convert existing rental units to condominiums when the property 
        contains households of low and moderate income, unless findings can be made that a reasonable 
        portion of the units will remain affordable after conversion, or the loss of affordable units is mitigated. 
10‐P.2  Set aside approximately 20 percent of the rental units acquired by the city or Housing Authority for 
        rehabilitation purposes for households in the very low income range. 
10‐P.3  Monitor the status of assisted rental housing and explore options for preserving the units “at risk” of 
        converting to market‐rate housing. 
10‐P.4  Seek to reduce or eliminate net loss of existing mobile home rental opportunities available to lower 
        and moderate income households. 
10‐P.5  Aim to retain and preserve the affordability of mobile home parks. 
10‐P.6  Survey residential areas periodically to identify substandard and deteriorating housing in need of 
        replacement or rehabilitation.  
10‐P.7  Provide rehabilitation assistance, loan subsidies, and rebates to lower‐income households, special 
        needs households, and senior homeowners to rehabilitate deteriorating homes. 
10‐P.8  When feasible, acquire rental housing from private owners by utilizing various local, state, and federal 
        funding sources, and rehabilitate deteriorated structures if needed.  If acquisition is not feasible, 
        provide incentives to property owners to rehabilitate deteriorating rental units that house lower 
        income households. 
10‐P.9  Provide a reasonable number of rental units acquired by the city or Housing Authority for 
        rehabilitation purposes to be affordable to households in the extremely and/or very low income 
        range. 
                                      
10-106

Program 1.1: Condominium Conversion 
The city will continue to discourage and/or restrict condominium conversions when such conversions 
would reduce the number of low or moderate income housing units available throughout the city.  
All condominium conversions are subject to the city’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance; the in‐lieu fees 
or actual affordable units required by the ordinance would be used to mitigate the loss of affordable 
rental units from the city’s housing stock. 
Funding:  Housing Trust Fund 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Continue implementation of the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance and impose inclusionary 
         housing requirements on condominium conversions. 
Program 1.2: Mobile Home Park Preservation 
The  city  will  continue  to  implement  the  city’s  Residential  Mobile  Home  Park  zoning  ordinance 
(Municipal  Code  Chapter  21.37)  that  sets  conditions  on  changes  of  use  or  conversions  of  mobile 
home parks, consistent with Government Code Section 66427.5. 
The city will also assist lower income tenants of mobile home parks to research the financial feasibility 
of purchasing their mobile home parks so as to maintain the rents at levels affordable to its tenants. 
One  potential  source  of  financial  assistance  is  the  state’s  Mobilehome  Park  Rehabilitation  and 
Restoration Ownership Program (MPRROP). The purpose of the program is to finance, through loans, 
the preservation of affordable mobilehome parks by conversion to ownership or control by resident 
organizations, nonprofit housing partners, or local public agencies. Loan proceeds may be used to: 
purchase (conversion) a mobilehome park; rehabilitate or relocate a purchased park; purchase by a 
low income resident a share or space in a converted park; or to pay for the cost to repair low income 
residents’ mobilehomes. Effective January 1, 2017, loan proceeds may also be used to replace low 
income residents’ mobilehomes. 
Funding:  Housing Trust Fund, state grants and loans (such as MPRROP) 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division, Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Continue to regulate the conversion of mobile home parks in Carlsbad, as permitted by 
         state law. 
        As  appropriate,  provide  information  to  mobile  home  park  tenants  regarding  potential 
         tenant purchase of parks and assistance available, through programs such as MPRROP. 
Program 1.3:  Acquisition/Rehabilitation of Rental Housing 
The city will continue to provide assistance on a case‐by‐case basis to preserve the existing stock of 
                                                                                                      10-107

lower and moderate income rental housing, including: 
        Provide  loans,  grants,  and/or  rebates  to  owners  of  rental  properties  to  make  needed 
         repairs and rehabilitation. 
        As  financially  feasible,  acquire  and  rehabilitate  rental  housing  that  is  substandard, 
         deteriorating  or  in  danger  of  being  demolished.    Set‐aside  at  least  20  percent  of  the 
         rehabilitated units for extremely‐ and/or very low income households. 
        As appropriate and determined by City Council, provide deferral or subsidy of planning 
         and  building  fees,  and  priority  processing.    Priority  will  be  given  to  repair  and 
         rehabilitation of housing identified by the city’s Building Division as being substandard or 
         deteriorating,  and  which  houses  lower  income  and  in  some  cases  moderate  income 
         households. 
Funding:  State grants and loans, Housing Trust Fund, CDBG 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division, Building Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Assist in the acquisition and/or rehabilitation of 68 rental housing units between 2013 
         and 2021. 
        Contact  nonprofit  housing  developers  annually  to  explore  opportunities  for 
         acquisition/rehabilitation of rental housing. 
        As  appropriate  and  as  financially  feasible,  make  funding  available  to  non‐profit 
         organizations to assist in the acquisition and rehabilitation of existing rental housing. 
Program 1.4:  Rehabilitation of Owner‐Occupied Housing 
As the housing stock ages, the need for rehabilitation assistance may increase.  The city will provide 
assistance  to  homeowners  to  rehabilitate  deteriorating  housing.    Eligible  activities  under  this 
program include such things as repairing faulty plumbing and electrical systems, replacing broken 
windows, repairing termite and dry‐rot damage, and installing home weatherization improvements.  
Assistance may include financial incentives in the form of low interest and deferred payment loans, 
and rebates.  Households targeted for assistance include lower‐income and special needs (disabled, 
large, and senior) households. 
Funding:  Housing Trust Fund, CDBG, state loans and grants 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Continue to implement the city’s Minor Home Repair Program to provide grants to up to 
         10 low income households to help improve their single‐family homes. 
                                     
10-108

Housing Opportunities 
A healthy and sustainable community relies on its diversity and its ability to maintain balance among 
different groups.  The city encourages the production of new housing units that offer a wide range of 
housing types to meet the varied needs of its diverse population.  A balanced inventory of housing in 
terms of unit type (e.g., single‐family, apartment, condominium, etc.), cost, and architectural style 
will allow the city to fulfill a variety of housing needs. 
10‐G.2  New housing developed with diversity of types, prices, tenures, densities, and locations, and in 
         sufficient quantity to meet the demand of anticipated city and regional growth. 
10‐P.10  Ensure the availability of sufficient developable acreage in all residential densities to accommodate 
         varied housing types to meet Carlsbad’s 2010‐2020 Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA), as 
         discussed in Section 10.3 (Resources Available). 
10‐P.11  Ensure that housing construction is achieved through the use of modified codes and standards while 
         retaining quality design and architecture. 
10‐P.12  Provide alternative housing opportunities by encouraging adaptive reuse of older commercial or 
         industrial buildings. 
10‐P.13  Encourage increased integration of housing with nonresidential development where appropriate. 
10‐P.14  Encourage the use of innovative techniques and designs to promote energy conservation in residential 
         development. 
Program 2.1:  Adequate Sites to Accommodate the RHNA 
The city will continue to monitor the absorption of residential acreage in all densities and, if needed, 
recommend the creation of additional residential acreage at densities sufficient to meet the city’s 
housing need for current and future residents.  Any such actions shall be undertaken only where 
consistent with the Growth Management Plan. 
The analysis in Section 10.3 (Resources Available) identifies examples of how housing has been built 
on very small sites, such as in the Village and Barrio. However, to expand opportunities for additional 
affordable housing, the city will encourage the consolidation of small parcels in order to facilitate 
larger‐scale developments that are compatible with existing neighborhoods.  Specifically, the city will 
continue  to  make  available  an  inventory  of  vacant  and  underutilized  properties  to  interested 
developers, market infill and redevelopment opportunities throughout the city, including the Village 
and Barrio, and meet with developers to identify and discuss potential project sites. 
Funding:  Departmental budget and Housing Trust Fund 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division, Planning Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Maintain adequate residential sites to accommodate the 2010‐2020 RHNA. 
        Post  the  inventory  of  vacant  and  underutilized  properties  identified  in  the  Housing 
         Element (Figure 10‐1 and Appendix B) on the city’s website or in a public notification area 
                                                                                                          10-109

         of  the  city’s  Planning  Division  within  one  year  of  Housing  Element  adoption.    The 
         inventory shall be updated annually.  
Program 2.2:  Flexibility in Development Standards 
The  Planning  Division,  in  its  review  of  development  applications,  may  recommend  waiving  or 
modifying certain development standards, or propose changes to the Municipal Code to encourage 
the  development  of  low  and  moderate  income  housing.    The  city  offers  offsets  to  assist  in  the 
development of affordable housing citywide.  Offsets include concessions or assistance including, but 
not limited to, direct financial assistance, density increases, standards modifications, or any other 
financial, land use, or regulatory concession that would result in an identifiable cost reduction.  
Funding:  Department budget 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Continue to  offer flexibility in development standards to facilitate the development of 
         460 lower and moderate income, and senior households, subject to available resources, 
         developer interest, and market conditions. 
        Monitor application of Municipal Code standards for constraints to development of new 
         housing and recommend changes that would minimize such constraints and enhance the 
         feasibility of affordable housing, while maintaining the quality of housing. 
Program 2.3:  Mixed Use 
The  city  will  encourage  mixed‐use  developments  that  include  a  residential  component.    Major 
commercial centers should incorporate, where appropriate, mixed commercial/residential uses. 
Funding:  Departmental budget 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Apply  mixed‐used  development  principles,  standards,  and  incentives  to  facilitate 
         development of 450 dwelling units, subject to available resources, developer interest, and 
         market conditions. 
        Periodically review development standards and incentives that would encourage mixed‐
         use developments. 
        Identify  areas  and  properties  with  potential  for  mixed‐use  development  and  provide 
         information to interested developers. 
Program 2.4:  Energy Conservation 
The  city  has  established  requirements,  programs,  and  actions  to  improve  household  energy 
10-110

efficiency, promote sustainability, and lower utility costs.  The city shall enforce state requirements 
for energy conservation, including the latest green building standards, and promote and participate 
in regional water conservation and recycling programs. 
         Create  a  coordinated  energy  conservation  strategy,  including  strategies  for  residential 
          uses, as part of a citywide Climate Action Plan. 
         In  the  Village,  encourage  energy  conservation  and  higher  density  development  by  the 
          modification of development standards (e.g. parking standards, building setbacks, height, 
          and increased density) as necessary to: 
              Enable developments to qualify for silver level or higher LEED (Leadership in Energy 
               and Environmental Design) Certification, or a comparable green building rating, and 
               to maintain the financial feasibility of the development with such certification. 
              Achieve  densities  at  or  above  the  minimum  required  if  the  applicant  can  provide 
               acceptable  evidence  that  application  of  the  development  standards  precludes 
               development at such densities. 
         Facilitate  resource  conservation  for  all  households  by  making  available,  through  a 
          competitive process, CDBG funds to non‐profit organizations that could use such funds to 
          replace windows, plumbing fixtures, and other physical improvements in lower‐income 
          neighborhoods, shelters, and transitional housing. 
         Encourage  infill  development  in  urbanized  areas,  particularly  in  the  Village  and  Barrio, 
          through implementation of the Village Master Plan and Design Manual and the allowed 
          density ranges in the Barrio. 
 Funding:  Departmental budget, General Fund 
 Lead Agency:  Planning Division; Building Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
         Continue to pursue energy efficient development and rehabilitation of residential units 
          through incentives, funding assistance, and city policies. 
         Continue to explore additional incentives to facilitate energy efficient development. 
Housing Implementation   
The city has a number of programs and resources that can help provide a variety of housing for 
households with different incomes and special needs.  Program implementation must be done in 
light  of  applicable  regulations  and  available  funding  and  monitored  regularly  to  maintain 
compliance and success. 
10‐G.3  Sufficient new, affordable housing opportunities in all quadrants of the city to meet the needs of 
          current lower and moderate income households and those with special needs, and a fair share 
          proportion of future lower and moderate income households. 
10‐P.15  Pursuant to the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance, require affordability for lower income households of 
          a minimum of 15 percent of all residential ownership and qualifying rental projects.  For projects that 
          are required to include 10 or more units affordable to lower income households, at least 10 percent of 
          the lower income units should have three or more bedrooms (lower income senior housing projects 
                                                                                                          10-111

         exempt). 
10‐P.16  Annually set priorities for future lower‐income and special housing needs.  The priorities will be set 
         through the annual Consolidated Plan, which is prepared by the Housing and Neighborhood Services 
         Division with assistance from the Planning Division and approved by the City Council. Priority given to 
         the housing needs for lower‐income subgroups (i.e., handicapped, seniors, large‐family, very‐low 
         income) will be utilized for preference in the guidance of new housing constructed by the private 
         sector and for the use of city funds for construction or assistance to low income projects. 
10‐P.17  Any proposed General Plan Amendment request to increase site densities for purposes of providing 
         affordable housing, will be evaluated relative to the proposal’s compatibility with adjacent land uses 
         and proximity to employment opportunities, urban services or major roads, and other policies 
         applicable to higher density sites that are identified in the General Plan Land Use and Community 
         Design Element.  
10‐P.18  Adhere to City Council Policy Statement 43 when considering allocation of “excess dwelling units” for 
         the purpose of allowing development to exceed the Growth Management Control Point (GMCP) 
         density, as discussed in Section 10.3 (Resources Available).  With limited exceptions, the allocation of 
         excess dwelling units will require provision of housing affordable to lower income households.  
10‐P.19  Address the unmet housing needs of the community through new development and housing that is 
         set aside for lower and moderate income households consistent with priorities set by the Housing and 
         Neighborhood Services Division, in collaboration with the Planning Division, and as set forth in the 
         city’s Consolidated Plan. 
10‐P.20  Encourage the development of an adequate number of housing units suitably sized to meet the needs 
         of lower and moderate income larger households.  
10‐P.21  Ensure that incentive programs, such as density bonus programs and new development programs are 
         compatible and consistent with the city’s Growth Management Plan. 
10‐P.22  Maintain the Housing Trust Fund and explore new funding mechanisms to facilitate the construction 
         and rehabilitation of affordable housing.  
10‐P.23  Consistent with state law, establish affordable housing development with priority for receiving water 
         and sewer services when capacity and supply of such services become an issue. 
10‐P.24  Pursuant to state law, identify and monitor housing units constructed, converted, and demolished in 
         the Coastal Zone along with information regarding whether these units are affordable to lower and 
         moderate income households 
Program 3.1:  Inclusionary Housing Ordinance 
The city will continue to implement its Inclusionary Housing Ordinance, which requires a minimum 
of 15 percent of all ownership and qualifying rental residential projects of seven or more units be 
restricted and affordable to lower income households.  This program requires an agreement between 
all residential developers subject to this inclusionary requirement and the city which stipulates: 
        The number of required lower income inclusionary units; 
        The designated sites for the location of the units; 
        A phasing schedule for production of the units; and  
10-112

        The term of affordability for the units. 
For all ownership and qualifying rental projects of fewer than seven units, payment of a fee in lieu of 
inclusionary units is permitted.  The fee is based on a detailed study that calculated the difference in 
cost to produce a market rate rental unit versus a lower‐income affordable unit. As of 2016, the in‐
lieu fee per market‐ rate dwelling unit was $4,515.  The fee amount may be modified by the City 
Council from time‐to‐time and is collected at the time of building permit issuance for the market rate 
units.  The city will continue to utilize inclusionary in‐lieu fees collected to assist in the development 
of affordable units. 
The  city  will  apply  Inclusionary  Housing  Ordinance  requirements  to  rental  projects  if  the  project 
developer agrees by contract to limit rent as consideration for a “direct financial contribution” or 
other form of assistance specified in density bonus law; or if the project is at a density that exceeds 
the applicable GMCP density, thus requiring the use of “excess dwelling units,” as described in Section 
10.3 (Resources Available). 
The city will also continue to consider other in‐lieu contributions allowed by the Inclusionary Housing 
Ordinance, such as an irrevocable offer to dedicate developable land. 
Funding:  Departmental budget 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division, Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
      Based  on  SANDAG’s  Regional  2050  Growth  Forecast  and  2010  housing  estimates,  the  city 
         anticipates 3,847 new housing units to be developed between 2010 and 2020, potentially 
         generating 577 inclusionary units. 
      Adjust  the  inclusionary  housing  in‐lieu  fee  as  necessary  and  appropriate  to  reflect  market 
         conditions  and  ensure  fees  collected  are  adequate  to  facilitate  the  development  of 
         affordable units. 
Program 3.2:  Excess Dwelling Units 
Pursuant to City Council Policy Statement 43, the city will continue to utilize “excess dwelling units,” 
described in Section 10.3 (Resources Available), for the purpose of enabling density transfers, density 
increases/bonuses and General Plan amendments to increase allowed density. 
Based on analysis conducted in Section 10.4 (Constraints and Mitigating Opportunities), the city can 
accommodate  its  2010‐2020  RHNA  without  the  need  to  utilize  excess  dwelling  units  (except  for 
properties designated “V – Village”) to accommodate the RHNA at each household income level. In 
the Village, since all residential development requires an allocation of excess dwelling units, the city 
has specifically reserved 759 excess units (as of July 2016) for this purpose. 
Funding: Departmental budget 
Lead Agency: Planning Division 
                                                                                                       10-113

Objectives and Time Frame:  
        Consistent  with  City  Council  Policy  43,  continue  to  utilize  the  excess  dwelling  units  to 
         provide affordable housing to lower income households. 
Program 3.3:  Density Bonus 
Consistent with state law (Government Code sections 65913.4 and 65915), the city continues to offer 
residential density bonuses as a means of encouraging affordable housing development.  In exchange 
for setting aside a portion of the development as units affordable to lower and moderate income 
households, the city will grant a density bonus over the otherwise allowed maximum density, and up 
to three financial incentives or regulatory concessions.  These units must remain affordable for a 
period of no less than 55 years and each project must enter into an agreement with the city to be 
monitored by the Housing and Neighborhood Services Division for compliance. 
The  density  bonus  increases  with  the  proportion  of  affordable  units  set  aside  and  the  depth  of 
affordability (e.g. very low income versus low income, or moderate income).  The maximum density 
bonus a developer can receive is 35 percent when a project provides 11 percent of the units for very 
low income households, 20 percent for low income households, or 40 percent for moderate income 
households. 
Financial  incentives  and  regulatory  concessions  may  include  but  are  not  limited  to:  fee  waivers, 
reduction or waiver of development standards, in‐kind infrastructure improvements, an additional 
density bonus above the requirement, mixed use development, or other financial contributions. 
The city's density bonus regulations (Municipal Code Chapter 21.86) incorporate all recent changes 
to state density bonus law (up to and including AB 2222 changes, effective January 1, 2015).  The city 
is currently processing a zoning code amendment to ensure consistency with the latest changes to 
state density bonus law made by AB 744, effective January 1, 2016. 
In 2016, the governor signed several bills that make further changes to state density bonus law: AB 
1934,  AB  2442,  AB  2501,  and  AB  2556.  Some  notable  changes  include:  granting  a  “development 
bonus” to commercial development when in partnership with an affordable housing development; 
granting  a  density  bonus  to  developments  that  include  affordable  housing  to  transitional  foster 
youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons; requiring cities to adopt procedures and timelines for 
processing a density bonus application; and making numerous technical changes to clarify various 
provisions of density bonus law. The city will amend its density bonus ordinance to incorporate all of 
the mandatory changes of the above‐referenced bills. 
Funding: Departmental budget, Housing Trust Fund  
Lead Agency: Planning Division, Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
10-114

        Amend  Carlsbad  Municipal  Code  Chapter  21.86  by  December  31,  2017  to  ensure 
         consistency with all recent changes to state density bonus law, namely, those required by 
         AB 744 (2015), AB 1934, AB 2442, AB 2501, and AB 2556. 
        Apply the city’s Density Bonus Ordinance, consistent with state law. 
        Encourage developers to take advantage of density bonus incentives. 
Program 3.4:  City‐Initiated Development 
The city, through the Housing and Neighborhood Services Division, will continue to work with private 
developers (both for‐profit and non‐profit) to create housing opportunities for low, very low and 
extremely low income households. 
Funding:  Housing Trust Fund, CDBG, and other federal, state and local funding 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division, Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Work with a private, non‐profit affordable housing developers to create at least 70 city‐
         initiated  or  non‐inclusionary  affordable  housing  units  for  lower  income  households 
         between 2013 and 2021. 
Program 3.5:  Affordable Housing Incentives  
The  city  will  consider  using  Housing  Trust  Funds  on  a  case‐by‐case  basis  to  offer  a  number  of 
incentives to facilitate affordable housing development. Incentives may include: 
        Payment of public facility fees; 
        In‐kind infrastructure improvements, including but not limited to street improvements, 
         sewer improvements, other infrastructure improvements as needed; 
        Priority  processing,  including  accelerated  plan‐check  process,  for  projects  that  do  not 
         require extensive engineering or environmental review; and 
        Discretionary consideration of density increases above the maximum permitted by the 
         General Plan through review and approval of a site development plan (SDP). 
Funding:  Departmental budget, Housing Trust Fund, CDBG 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division, Housing and Neighborhood Services Division, Finance Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Assist in the development of 150 affordable units between 2013 and 2021 (inclusive of 
         units to be assisted under Program 3.4 ‐ City‐Initiated Development, and Program 3.10 ‐ 
         Senior Housing).  
                                                                                                      10-115

Program 3.6: Land Banking 
The city will continue to implement a land banking program to acquire land suitable for development 
of  housing  affordable  to  lower  and  moderate  income  households.    The  land  bank  may  accept 
contributions  of  land  in‐lieu  of  housing  production  required  under  an  inclusionary  requirement, 
surplus land from the city or other public entities, and land otherwise acquired by the city for its 
housing  programs.    This  land  would  be  used  to  reduce  the  land  costs  of  producing  lower  and 
moderate income housing by the city or other parties.  
The  city  has  identified  a  list  of  nonprofit  developers  active  in  the  region.  When  a  city‐owned  or 
acquired property is available, the city will solicit the participation of these nonprofits to develop 
affordable housing.  Affordable housing funds will be made available to facilitate development and 
the city will assist in the entitlement process. 
Funding:  CDBG, Housing Trust Fund 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Solicit nonprofit developers when city‐owned or acquired property becomes available for 
         affordable housing. 
        Provide land for development of affordable housing. 
        Consider private‐public partnerships for development of affordable housing. 
Program 3.7:  Housing Trust Fund 
The city will continue to maintain the Housing Trust Fund for the fiduciary administration of monies 
dedicated to the development, preservation and rehabilitation of affordable housing in Carlsbad.  The 
Housing Trust Fund will be the repository of all collected in‐lieu fees, impact fees, housing credits, 
loan repayments, and related revenues targeted for proposed housing as well as other local, state 
and federal funds. 
The  city  will  explore  additional  revenue  opportunities  to  contribute  to  the  Housing  Trust  Fund, 
particularly,  the  feasibility  of  a  rental  housing  impact  fee  to  generate  affordable  units  when 
affordable units are not included in a rental development. 
Funding:  In‐Lieu fees, impact fees, housing credit revenues, HOME/CDBG Housing Reserve, local, 
state and federal funds 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division, Finance Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Explore the feasibility of a rental housing impact fee within one year of adoption of this 
         Housing Element. 
10-116

        Actively pursue housing activities to encumber and disburse monies within the Housing 
         Trust Fund that are specifically designated for the development of affordable housing for 
         low  income  households.  This  means  regularly  meeting  with  market  and  affordable 
         housing  developers  and  non‐profit  organizations  (typically  once  a  month  and  upon 
         request)  to  advise  of  city  resources  and  requirements  and  to  share  and  learn  of 
         development opportunities; keeping abreast of community development and real estate 
         activities, including potential prospects to acquire property; and, recommending property 
         acquisitions and approval of Housing Trust Fund expenditures along with preparing and 
         executing related loan documents.            
Program 3.8:  Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers 
The  Carlsbad  Housing  Authority  will  continue  to  administer  the  city’s  Section  8  Housing  Choice 
Voucher program to provide rental assistance to very low income households.  
Funding:  Federal Section 8 funding 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Continue to provide rental assistance to approximately 575 extremely low and very low 
         income households. 
Program 3.9:  Mortgage Credit Certificates 
The  city  participates  in  the  San  Diego  Regional  Mortgage  Credit  Certificate  (MCC)  Program.    By 
obtaining a MCC during escrow, a qualified homebuyer can qualify for an increased loan amount.  
The MCC entitles the homebuyer to take a federal income tax credit of 20 percent of the annual 
interest paid on the mortgage.  This credit reduces the federal income taxes of the buyer, resulting 
in an increase in the buyer’s net earnings. 
Funding:  San Diego County MCC allocations 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Continue  to  promote  the  MCC  program  with  the  objective  of  assisting  at  least  two 
         households annually. 
Program 3.10:  Senior Housing 
The  city  will  continue  to  encourage  a  wide  variety  of  senior  housing  opportunities,  especially  for 
lower‐income seniors with special needs, through the provision of financial assistance and regulatory 
incentives as specified in the city’s Housing for Senior Citizens Ordinance (Municipal Code Chapter 
21.84).  Projects assisted with these incentives will be subjected to the monitoring and reporting 
requirements to assure compliance with approved project conditions. 
                                                                                                       10-117

In addition, the city has sought and been granted California Constitution Article 34 authority by its 
voters to produce up to 200 senior‐only, low‐income restricted housing units.  The city would need 
to access its Article 34 authority only when it provides financial assistance and regulates more than 
51 percent of the development. 
Funding:  Departmental budget, Housing Trust Fund, Private financing, state public financing 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division, Planning Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Periodically  review  the  senior  housing  provisions  in  Municipal  Code  Chapter  21.84  to 
         expand housing opportunities for seniors. 
        Work with senior housing developers and non‐profit organizations to locate and construct 
         at least 50 units of senior low‐income housing between 2013 and 2021. 
Program 3.11: Housing for Persons with Disabilities  
The  city  has  an  adopted  ordinance  to  provide  individuals  with  disabilities  “reasonable 
accommodation” in land use, zoning and building regulations.  This ordinance seeks to provide equal 
opportunity in the development and use of housing for people with disabilities through flexibility in 
regulations  and  the  waiver of  certain  requirements  in order  to  eliminate  barriers  to  fulfilling  this 
objective. 
The city will continue to evaluate the success of this measure and adjust the ordinance as needed to 
ensure that it is effective.  Moreover, the city will seek to increase the availability of housing and 
supportive  services  to  the  most  vulnerable  population  groups,  including  people  with  disabilities 
through state and federal funding sources, such as HUD’s Section 811 program and CDBG funding. 
Funding:  Departmental budget 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Evaluate the use and effectiveness of the reasonable accommodation ordinance through 
         the annual Housing Element Progress Reports. 
        Continue to provide opportunities for the development of affordable housing for seniors 
         and persons with disabilities. 
Program 3.12:  Housing for Large Families 
In those developments that are required to include 10 or more units affordable to lower‐income 
households, at least 10 percent of the lower income units should have three or more bedrooms. This 
requirement does not pertain to lower‐income senior housing projects. 
Funding:  Departmental budget 
10-118

Lead Agency:  Planning Division; Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
         Continue to implement this requirement as part of the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance. 
         Achieve  the  construction  of  32  dwellings  that  can  accommodate  lower  income  large 
          families. Pursuant to Section 10.2, there are 12,815 lower income households in Carlsbad, 
          710 (5.5 percent) of which are large families.  Five and a half percent of the city’s objective 
          for  construction  of  new  lower  income  dwellings  (577  dwellings  per  Program  3.1)  that 
          could  potentially  result  from  application  of  the  Inclusionary  Housing  Ordinance  is  32 
          dwellings. 
Program 3.13:  Housing for the Homeless 
Carlsbad will continue to facilitate and assist with the acquisition, for lease or sale, and development 
of suitable sites for emergency shelters and transitional housing for the homeless population.  This 
facilitation and assistance will include: 
         Participating in a regional or sub‐regional summit(s) including decision‐makers from north 
          San Diego County jurisdictions and SANDAG for the purposes of coordinating efforts and 
          resources to address homelessness; 
         Assisting  local  non‐profits  and  charitable  organizations  in  securing  state  and  federal 
          funding for the acquisition, construction and management of shelters; and 
         Continuing to provide funding for local and sub‐regional homeless service providers that 
          operate temporary and emergency shelters.  
Funding:  Housing Trust Fund, CDBG 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
         Provide funding for homeless shelter providers through the annual Action Plan process 
          for the use of CDBG funds. 
         Annually participate financially in regional programs, such as the North County Regional 
          Winter Shelter Program, which utilize shelters such as the La Posada de Guadalupe men’s 
          homeless/farmworker shelter in Carlsbad. 
Program 3.14:  Supportive Services for Homeless and Special Needs Groups 
The  city  will  continue  to  provide  CDBG  funds  to  community,  social  welfare,  non‐profit  and  other 
charitable groups that provide services for those with special needs in the north San Diego County 
area. 
Funding:  CDBG 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
                                                                                                      10-119

Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Provide funding for supportive service providers through the annual Action Plan process 
         for the use of CDBG funds. 
Program 3.15:  Alternative Housing 
In 2016, the governor signed legislation that affect how cities and counties can regulate the provision 
of  second  dwelling  units  (now  known  as  accessory  dwelling  units).  AB  2299  and  SB  1069,  which 
became effective on January 1, 2017, are intended to increase housing production by streamlining 
approval of accessory dwelling units, and reduce costs through limiting certain utility fees (e.g., sewer 
connection charges) and development standards (e.g., parking). 
The city will amend its Second Dwelling Unit Ordinance (Carlsbad Municipal Code Section 21.10.015) 
as necessary to comply with the mandatory provisions of SB 1069 and AB 2299. 
The city will continue to implement its Second Dwelling Unit Ordinance and will continue to support 
alternative types of housing, such as hotels and managed living units to accommodate extremely‐low 
income households.  
Funding:  Federal, state, and local loans and grants, private funds 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division, Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        By  June  30,  2017,  amend  Second  Dwelling  Unit  Ordinance  (Carlsbad  Municipal  Code 
         Section 21.10.015) as necessary to comply with the mandatory provisions of AB 2299 and 
         SB 1069. 
        Continue  to  monitor  underutilized  properties  and  sites  in  the  community  that  have 
         potential  for  alternative  housing  options  and  offer  the  information  to  interested 
         developers. 
Program 3.16:  Military and Student Referrals 
The  city  will  assure  that  information  on  the  availability  of  assisted  or  below‐market  housing  is 
provided to all lower‐income and special needs groups.  The Housing and Neighborhood Services 
Division will provide information to local military and student housing offices of the availability of 
low‐income housing in Carlsbad. 
Funding:  Departmental budget 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
        Periodically update the city’s inventory of assisted or below‐market housing and make 
         the information available on print and on the city’s website. 
10-120

Program 3.17:  Coastal Housing Monitoring 
As a function of the building permit process, the city will monitor and record Coastal Zone housing 
data including, but not limited to, the following: 
         The number of housing units approved for construction, conversion or demolition within 
          the coastal zone after January 1, 1982. 
         The  number  of  housing  units  for  persons  and  families  of  low  or  moderate  income,  as 
          defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, required to be provided in new 
          housing developments within the coastal zone. 
         The number of existing residential dwelling units occupied by persons and families of low 
          or moderate income that are authorized to be demolished or converted in the coastal 
          zone pursuant to Section 65590 of the Government Code. 
         The  number  of  residential  dwelling  units  occupied  by  persons  and  families  of  low  or 
          moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code that are 
          required  for  replacement  or  authorized  to  be  converted  or  demolished  as  identified 
          above.  The location of the replacement units, either onsite, elsewhere within the city’s 
          coastal zone, or within three miles of the coastal zone in the city, shall be designated in 
          the review. 
Funding:  Departmental budget 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
         Continue to maintain records and prepare a summary report annually. 
Program 3.18:  Housing Element Annual Progress Report and Mid‐Planning Period 
Housing Element Update 
First, to retain the Housing Element as a viable policy document, the Planning Division will review the 
Housing Element annually and schedule an amendment if necessary.  As required by state law, city 
staff will prepare and submit annual progress reports to the City Council, SANDAG, and California 
Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD). 
Second, Senate Bill 575 requires that a jurisdiction revise its housing element every four years, unless 
it meets both of the following criteria:  (1) the jurisdiction adopted the fourth revision of the element 
no  later  than  March  31,  2010;  and  (2)  the  jurisdiction  completed  any  rezoning  contained  in  the 
element by June 30, 2010.  While implementation of the city’s 2005‐2010 Housing Element satisfied 
the first criterion, it did not meet the second.  Although rezoning was completed before the end of 
the extended Housing Element period (April 30, 2013) to satisfy the adequate sites program, it was 
not completed in time to meet the SB 575 requirement. 
The city will build on the annual review process to develop a mid‐planning period (four‐year) Housing 
Element update that includes the following: 
                                                                                                    10-121

         Review program implementation and revision of programs and policies, as needed; 
         Analysis of progress in meeting the RHNA and updates to the sites inventory as needed;  
         Outcomes from a study session that will be held with the Housing Commission to discuss 
          mid‐period  accomplishments  and  take  public  comment  on  the  progress  of 
          implementation.    The  city  will  invite  service  providers  and  housing  developers  to 
          participate. 
Funding:  Departmental Budget 
Lead Agency:  Planning Division, Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
         Prepare an annual progress report (APR) that reports on implementation of the Housing 
          Element. 
         Submit the APR to the City Council, HCD, and SANDAG. 
         Prepare and complete a mid‐planning period update, including public outreach, by April 
          30, 2017. 
Fair Housing 
Equal access to housing is a fundamental right protected by both state and federal laws.  The city is 
committed to fostering a housing environment in which housing opportunities are available and open 
to all. 
10‐G.4  All Carlsbad housing opportunities (ownership and rental, market and assisted) offered in 
          conformance with open housing policies and free of discriminatory practices. 
10‐P.25  Support enforcement of fair housing laws prohibiting arbitrary discrimination in the development, 
          financing, rental, or sale of housing.  
10‐P.26  Educate residents and landlords on fair housing laws and practices through the distribution of written 
          materials and public presentations.  
10‐P.27  Contract with a fair housing service provider to monitor and respond to complaints of discrimination 
          in housing.  
10‐P.28  Encourage local lending institutions to comply with the Community Reinvestment Act to meet the 
          community’s credit needs and develop partnerships where appropriate. Reevaluate the city’s 
          relationship with lending institutions that are substantially deficient in their CRA ratings.  
10‐P.29  Periodically review city policies, ordinances, and development standards, and modify, as necessary, to 
          accommodate housing for persons with disabilities.  
Program 4.1:  Fair Housing Services 
With assistance from outside fair housing agencies, the city will continue to offer fair housing services 
to its residents and property owners.  Services include: 
         Distributing educational materials to property owners, apartment managers, and tenants; 
10-122

       Making public announcements via different media (e.g. newspaper ads and public service 
        announcements at local radio and television channels);  
       Conducting public presentations with different community groups; 
       Monitoring and responding to complaints of discrimination (i.e. intaking, investigation of 
        complaints, and resolution); and 
       Referring services to appropriate agencies. 
Funding:  CDBG, Section 8 Rental Assistance, Housing Trust Fund 
Lead Agency:  Housing and Neighborhood Services Division 
Objectives and Time Frame: 
       Allocate annual funding for fair housing services through the Action Plan process for the 
        use of CDBG funds. 
       Participate in regional efforts to mitigate impediments to fair housing choice. 
                                   
                                                                                           10-123

  10.8 Quantified Objectives 
  Quantified Objectives by Income 
  The  following  Table  10‐42  summarizes  the  city’s  quantified  objectives  for  the  2010‐2020  RHNA 
  period, by income group. 
  TABLE 10–42:  QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES 2010‐2020 
                                                                 EXTREMELY         VERY LOW         LOW     MODERATE         ABOVE    TOTAL 
                                                                       LOW                                                MODERA
                                                                                                                                 TE 
      RHNA1                                                             538             374         693          1,062       2,332   4,999 
      Units to be Constructed2,3                                         18               93        466            250       3,020   3,847  
      Units to be Rehabilitated                                           0               16          52              0           0     68 
      Units to be Conserved                                               0                0           0              0           0       0  
      Households to be Assisted4                                        230             345            0            10            0    585 
      TOTAL                                                             248              494        518            260       3,020   4,540 
      1   As described in Section 10.2, the city estimates that of the 912 very low  income  households identified for 
          Carlsbad in the RHNA, at least 538 units (59%) should be available  for extremely low  income  and up to 374 units 
          (41%) for very low  income  households. 
 
      2   Affordable units to be constructed are estimated based on SANDAG’s 2050 Regional  Growth Forecast, analysis of 
          recently‐approved and anticipated near‐term development, and land  use designation changes that were part of 
          the  approved 2015 General Plan update. Units to be constructed include 150 city‐initiated affordable housing 
          (Program 3.5, Affordable Housing Incentives) and 427 anticipated inclusionary housing units (Program 3.1, 
          Inclusionary Housing).  Income distribution of these anticipated lower  income  units is based on the same 
          proportions realized  by projects constructed over a previous 8‐year period  (2003‐2010).  A general  assumption of 
          250 moderate income  units is used. 
 
      3   Based on past experience,  the city estimates 130 second units may be developed  during  the planning period  at 
          rates affordable for moderate income  households. Pursuant to City regulations, they are a permitted by right, 
          accessory use to one‐family dwellings. Between 2010 and 2015, a total of 66 second dwelling units were  built in 
          the city. 
      4    S i x t y ‐ t h r e e   percent of the Section 8 voucher  holders are assumed to be extremely low  income  households. 
                                                      
  10-124

 
  10-125

             Appendix A: 2013-2015
                   Accomplishments
CODE KEY
Status:                                                                  Department or Division:
C       Completed   = One-time project for which all work has been       B–      Building Division
                       completed
O       Ongoing     = Completed program, but one that requires recurring CED –   Community and
                       activity                                                  Economic
                                                                                 Development
I       In Process  = Staff work is well under way and program will be   HNS –   Housing and
                       implemented soon (including any necessary                 Neighborhood
                       hearings)                                                 Services Division
P       Pending     = Program for which preliminary work needs to be     P–      Planning Division
                       initiated, or program is in early stages of work
D       Delete      = Program that may no longer be necessary or         F–      Finance Division
                       relevant due to another program, changed
                       circumstances, or policy change

A-2
                                                                                                                                                                       CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
      Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                          Dept.         Progress and Effectiveness in
            Program                          Description                      Status                                                             Appropriateness
                                                                                       Responsible           Meeting Objectives
                            Discourage and/or restrict condominium
                            conversions when such conversions would
                            reduce the number of low or moderate                                     This city has approved two conversion
                            income housing units available throughout                                projects totaling 21units. To offset       The city will
                            the city. All condominium conversions are                                potential impacts to housing               continue to consider
             Condominium
      1.1                   subject to the city’s Inclusionary Housing          O          P         affordability, the payment of              condominium
             Conversion
                            Ordinance; the in-lieu fees or actual                                    inclusionary in-lieu fees and purchase     conversions on a
                            affordable units required by the ordinance                               of affordable housing credits were         case by case basis.
                            would be used to mitigate the loss of                                    required as a condition of approval.
                            affordable rental units from the city’s housing
                            stock.
                            Implement the city’s Residential Mobile
                            Home Park zoning ordinance (Municipal                                                                               The city will
                            Code Chapter 21.37) that sets conditions on                                                                         continue to
                            changes of use or conversions of mobile                                                                             implement the
                            home parks, consistent with Government                                                                              mobile home zoning
             Mobile Home    Code Section 66427.5.                                                    No applications for change in use or
                                                                                                                                                ordinance and
      1.2    Park                                                               O        P, HNS      conversion of a mobile home park have
                                                                                                                                                assist tenants
             Preservation                                                                            been received during this review period.
                            Assist lower income tenants of mobile home                                                                          seeking to purchase
                            parks to research the financial feasibility of                                                                      their mobile homes
                            purchasing their mobile home parks so as to                                                                         with technical
                            maintain the rents at levels affordable to its                                                                      assistance.
                            tenants.

                                                                                            Requests for acquisition/rehabilitation of
                                                                                            rental properties are considered on a
                                                                                            case by case basis.
                                                                                            On November 6, 2012 the City Council
                                                                                            approved a $7.4 million residual
                                                                                            receipts loan from the Housing Trust
                                                                                            Fund to assist with the acquisition of
                                                                                            and rehabilitation of 42 1950’s era
                                                                                            duplex units in the Barrio (known as the
                                                                                            Carol/Harding project) and in 2013,
                                                                                            acquisition of the property was
                                                                                            completed. The rehabilitated units were
                             Provide loans, grants, and/or rebates to                       rent-restricted for 55 years to low
                             owners of rental properties to make needed                     income households (50-60% AMI). In
                             repairs and rehabilitation.                                    August 2015, the owner submitted an
                                                                                            application (SDP 15-18, Pacific Wind)        Requests for
                             Acquire and rehabilitate rental housing that is                for city review of a proposal to demolish    acquisition/rehabilit
            Acquisition/                                                                    22 duplexes, consolidate the lots and
                             substandard, deteriorating or in danger of                                                                  ation of rental
            Rehabilitation                                                                  construct a 93-unit apartment project
      1.3                    being demolished. Set-aside at least 20           O   HNS, B                                                properties will
            of Rental                                                                       that would be 100% affordable.
                             percent of the rehabilitated units for                                                                      continue to be
            Housing                                                                         Relocation assistance will be provided
                             extremely- and/or very low income                                                                           considered on a
                             households.                                                    to existing tenants of the duplexes.         case by case basis.
                             Provide deferral or subsidy of planning and                    In 2014, the city awarded CDBG funds
                             building fees, and priority processing.                        ($452,000) and Housing Trust Funds
                             Objective of assisting 44 rental housing units.                ($2,438,000) to Solutions For Change
                                                                                            to acquire an existing 16-unit apartment
                                                                                            complex in the Barrio and convert it to
                                                                                            affordable housing for graduates of their
                                                                                            academy that helps homeless families
                                                                                            find permanent housing. Over 2015,
                                                                                            the property was acquired and families
                                                                                            began moving into the property.
                                                                                            In 2015, the city adopted an ordinance
                                                                                            permitting the deferral of specified
                                                                                            development impact fees for residential
                                                                                            projects of five or more units.
                                                                                                                                                                 APPENDIX A
A-3

A-4
                                                                                                                                                                               CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
      Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                             Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
            Program                            Description                       Status                                                                 Appropriateness
                                                                                          Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                              Provide assistance to homeowners to                                       The city has implemented a home
                              rehabilitate deteriorating housing. Assistance                            repair program for owner occupied
                                                                                                                                                       The city will
             Rehabilitation   will include financial incentives in the form of                          properties that provides loans which are
                                                                                                                                                       continue offer this
             of Owner-        low interest and deferred payment loans, and                              forgiven after five years. For the
      1.4                                                                          O         HNS                                                       program to qualified
             Occupied         rebates. Households targeted for assistance                               Housing Element planning period, the
                                                                                                                                                       low income
             Housing          include lower-income and special needs                                    city aided six low income households
                                                                                                                                                       homeowners.
                              (disabled, large, and senior) households.                                 with home repair loans up to $5,000
                              Objective of assisting 10 households/units.                               each.
                                                                                                                                                       Given that the Santa
                                                                                                                                                       Fe Ranch
                                                                                                        Notices to tenants at Santa Fe Ranch           Apartments was the
                                                                                                        were monitored and city staff worked           only identified “at
                                                                                                        with the apartment owners in an attempt        risk” housing, that
                                                                                                        to extend the affordability restrictions for   the owners
                              Monitor the status of projects such as Santa                              the 64 units. Property owners declined,        exercised their
                              Fe Ranch Apartments, ensure tenants                                       and in 2016 paid off the bonds, thus           options to remove
                              receive proper notification of any changes                                removing the affordability provisions.         the affordability
             Preservation     and are aware of available special Section 8                                                                             provisions in the
      1.5    of At-Risk       vouchers, and contact nonprofit housing              C         HNS        The city’s Housing and Neighborhood            project, and that the
             Housing          developers to solicit interest in acquiring and                           Services staff successfully assisted in        city has successfully
                              managing the property in the event this or                                negotiating rents of 26 low income             assisted a number
                              any similar project becomes at risk of                                    tenants at Santa Fe Ranch so that they         of affected tenants
                              converting to market rate.                                                could remain in place after the project’s      during the
                                                                                                        conversion to market rate. The city also       conversion process,
                                                                                                        provides Section 8 rental assistance to        this program is
                                                                                                        maintain housing affordability for these       considered to be
                                                                                                        residents.                                     completed, and will
                                                                                                                                                       be removed from the
                                                                                                                                                       Housing Element.

      Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                        Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
            Program                         Description                     Status                                                                 Appropriateness
                                                                                     Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                                                                                                   The city reviews residential
                                                                                                   development applications for
                                                                                                   compliance with meeting the minimum
                                                                                                   densities on which the city relies to
                                                                                                   meet its share of regional housing
                                                                                                   needs. Consistent with state law and
                           Continue to monitor the absorption of                                   the city’s land use policies, the city shall
                           residential acreage in all densities and, if                            not approve applications below the
                           needed, recommend the creation of                                       minimum densities established in the
                           additional residential acreage at densities                             Housing Element unless it makes the
                           sufficient to meet the city’s housing need for                          following findings:
                                                                                                                                                  This is an ongoing
                           current and future residents. Any such                                       a. The reduction is consistent            activity. The city will
                           actions shall be undertaken only where                                  with the adopted general plan, including       continue to monitor
                           consistent with the Growth Management                                   the housing element.                           the absorption of
             Adequate      Plan.                                                                        b. The remaining sites identified         residential acreage
             Sites to                                                                              in the housing element are adequate to         in all densities and,
      2.1                                                                     O        P, HNS
             Accommodate   Encourage the consolidation of small parcels                            accommodate the City’s share of the            if needed,
             the RHNA      in order to facilitate larger-scale                                     regional housing need pursuant to              recommend the
                           developments that are compatible with                                   Government Code Section 65584.                 creation of
                           existing neighborhoods. Make available an                                                                              additional
                           inventory of vacant and underutilized                                                                                  residential acreage
                                                                                                   The city continues to make available an        at densities
                           properties to interested developers, market                             inventory of vacant and underutilized
                           infill and redevelopment opportunities                                  properties and works with interested
                           throughout the city, including the Village and                          developers on infill and redevelopment
                           Barrio, and meet with developers to identify                            opportunities. In August 2015, the
                           and discuss potential project sites.                                    owner of the Carol Harding duplexes
                                                                                                   (see program 1.3) submitted an
                                                                                                   application (SDP 15-18, Pacific Wind)
                                                                                                   for city review of a proposal to demolish
                                                                                                   22 duplexes, consolidate the lots and
                                                                                                   construct a 93-unit apartment project
                                                                                                   that would be 100% affordable.
                                                                                                                                                                            APPENDIX A
A-5

A-6
                                                                                                                                                              CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
                                                                                        The city considers density increases,
                                                                                        waivers and modifications to
                                                                                        development standards to assist in the
                                                                                        development of affordable housing on a
                                                                                        case by case basis.
                                                                                        Since 2013, the city approved
                                                                                        standards modifications to facilitate
                                                                                        development of affordable housing in at
                                                                                        least four projects:
                                                                                                 The Encinas Creek Apartment
                                                                                                  Homes (SDP 01-10(A)), which
                                                                                                  received Planning Commission
                                                                                                  approval in April 2013, was
                             Consider waiving or modifying certain                                granted         a      standards
                             development standards, or propose changes                            modification for a height limit
                             to the Municipal Code to encourage the                               increase and garage width          The city will continue
                             development of low and moderate income                               reduction in return for 50% of     to consider
                             housing. The city offers offsets to assist in                        the units (63) being dedicated     standards
            Flexibility in   the development of affordable housing                                as affordable housing.             modifications and
      2.2   Development      citywide. Offsets include concessions or           O   P            In April 2014, the La Costa        waivers to assist in
            Standards        assistance including, but not limited to, direct                     Town Center mixed-use project      the development of
                             financial assistance, density increases,                             (SDP       78-03(D))    received   affordable housing
                             standards modifications, or any other                                Planning Commission approval       on a case by case
                             financial, land use, or regulatory concession                        for a standards modification to    basis.
                             that would result in an identifiable cost                            exceed the 35’ height limitation
                             reduction.                                                           in return for designating 20% of
                                                                                                  the units (12) as affordable
                                                                                                  housing.
                                                                                                 The Seagrove (State Street
                                                                                                  Townhomes) project (CT13-05)
                                                                                                  was approved in June 2014,
                                                                                                  and was granted a standards
                                                                                                  modification for a reduction in
                                                                                                  the garage dimensions for the
                                                                                                  affordable housing component
                                                                                                  of the project.

      Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                          Dept.         Progress and Effectiveness in
            Program                  Description              Status                                                           Appropriateness
                                                                       Responsible           Meeting Objectives
                                                                                            The approval of Robertson
                                                                                             Ranch West Planning Areas 7
                                                                                             and 8 (SDP 14-08) in May
                                                                                             2015, included the grant of
                                                                                             standards modifications for
                                                                                             reduction in top of slope
                                                                                             setback, garage width, and
             Flexibility in                                                                  senior parking standards to
             Development                                                                     support an apartment complex
      2.2                                                                                    with 101 senior affordable
             Standards
             (continued)                                                                     units and 56 moderate income
                                                                                             units.
                                                                                     In 2015, the city adopted an ordinance
                                                                                     permitting the deferral of specified
                                                                                     development impact fees for residential
                                                                                     projects of five or more units.
                                                                                                                                                 APPENDIX A
A-7

A-8
                                                                                                                                                            CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
      Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                              Dept.         Progress and Effectiveness in
            Program                     Description               Status                                                            Appropriateness
                                                                           Responsible           Meeting Objectives
                                                                                         The city considers mixed use
                                                                                         developments on a case by case basis.
                                                                                         The following projects were reviewed or
                                                                                         approved in the Village area through
                                                                                         2015:
                                                                                           Seagrove (CT 13-05, State Street
                                                                                             Townhomes) was approved in June
                                                                                             2014, and includes 41 live/work
                                                                                             townhomes and six affordable
                                                                                             residential condos. The project
                                                                                             began issuing building permits in
                                                                                             March 2015.
                                                                                           State Street Mixed Use 30 (CT 14-
                                                                                             01), was approved by City Council
                                                                                             in January 2015, and proposes 14
                         Encourage mixed-use developments that                               multi-family residential units, 13    The city will continue
                         include a residential component. Major                              timeshare units and 4,529 s.f. of     to consider mixed-
      2.3    Mixed Use   commercial centers should incorporate,     O          P             commercial space.                     use projects on a
                         where appropriate, mixed
                         commercial/residential uses.                                      The Wave (CT 15-06), a mixed use       case-by-case basis.
                                                                                             project that proposes 8 residential
                                                                                             units, 13 timeshare units and one
                                                                                             retail space was reviewed in 2015.
                                                                                           Grand Madison (CT 15-04), was
                                                                                            approved by City Council in
                                                                                            November 2015 and includes four
                                                                                            residential units above office and
                                                                                            retail uses.
                                                                                           In 2015, the city conducted a
                                                                                            preliminary review for a mixed use
                                                                                            commercial and residential project
                                                                                            at 1044 Carlsbad Village Drive that
                                                                                            proposed a density increase.

      Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                           Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
            Program                          Description                       Status                                                               Appropriateness
                                                                                        Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                                                                                                      Outside of the Village area, the following
                                                                                                      mixed use projects were considered:
                                                                                                         La Costa Towne Center (SDP 78-
                                                                                                          03(D)), was approved in April 2014
                                                                                                          to build two mixed use buildings
                                                                                                          with 60 apartments and 49,000
             Mixed Use
      2.3                                                                                                 square feet of retail space.
             (continued)
                                                                                                         Uptown Bressi (EIR 15-01), was
                                                                                                          filed in 2015; it proposes a mixed
                                                                                                          use development with 125
                                                                                                          townhomes and approximately
                                                                                                          90,000 s.f. of commercial space.
                                                                                                      The city’s comprehensive General Plan
                                                                                                      Update project includes a Climate
                            The city has established requirements,                                    Action Plan. The General Plan and
                            programs, and actions to improve household                                Climate Action Plan were approved by
                            energy efficiency, promote sustainability,                                the City Council in Sept. 2015.
                            and lower utility costs. The city shall enforce
                            state requirements for energy conservation,
                            including the latest green building                                       There were 2,055 residential
                            standards, and promote and participate in                                 photovoltaic energy systems totaling         The city will continue
             Energy                                                                                   approximately 10.76 megawatts (AC) of
      2.4                   regional water conservation and recycling            O         P, B                                                    to implement this
             Conservation                                                                             solar power installed in the city between
                            programs.                                                                                                              program.
                                                                                                      2013 and 2015.
                                Create a coordinated energy
                                 conservation strategy, including
                                 strategies for residential uses, as part of                          Through 2015, the city continued to
                                 a citywide Climate Action Plan.                                      implement the 2013 Building Energy
                                                                                                      Efficiency Standards as established by
                                                                                                      the CEC.
                                                                                                                                                                            APPENDIX A
A-9

A-10
                                                                                                                                                                  CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                          Dept.         Progress and Effectiveness in
             Program                         Description                      Status                                                            Appropriateness
                                                                                       Responsible           Meeting Objectives
                                In the Village, encourage energy
                                 conservation and higher density
                                 development by the modification of
                                 development standards (e.g. parking
                                 standards, building setbacks, height,
                                 and increased density) as necessary to:
                                  -   Enable developments to qualify for
                                      silver level or higher LEED
                                      (Leadership in Energy and
                                      Environmental Design)
                                      Certification, or a comparable
                                      green building rating, and to
                                      maintain the financial feasibility of
                                      the development with such                                      In 2015, the city continued working on
                                      certification.                                                 an update to its Village Master Plan and
                                  -   Achieve densities at or above the                              Design Manual that incorporates the
              Energy                  minimum required if the applicant                              area of the Barrio into the plan. Under
       2.4    Conservation            can provide acceptable evidence           O         P, B       consideration are policies and
              (continued)             that application of the development                            standards revisions that would
                                      standards precludes development                                incentivize infill development and
                                      at such densities.                                             enhance pedestrian connections
                                Facilitate resource conservation for all                            through land uses and building and
                                 households by making available,                                     street design to help realize the smart
                                 through a competitive process, CDBG                                 growth potential of the areas.
                                 funds to non-profit organizations that
                                 could use such funds to replace
                                 windows, plumbing fixtures, and other
                                 physical improvements in lower-income
                                 neighborhoods, shelters, and
                                 transitional housing.
                                Encourage infill development in
                                 urbanized areas, particularly in the
                                 Village and Barrio, through
                                 implementation of the Village Master
                                 Plan and Design Manual and the
                                 allowed density ranges in the Barrio.

       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                              Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
             Program                           Description                        Status                                                              Appropriateness
                                                                                           Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                             Continue to implement the Inclusionary
                             Housing Ordinance, which requires a
                             minimum of 15 percent of all ownership and
                             qualifying rental residential projects of seven
                             or more units be restricted and affordable to
                             lower income households. This program                                       The city continues to explore potential
                             requires an agreement between all                                           adoption of a housing impact fee for
                             residential developers subject to this                                      development of rental units if affordable
                             inclusionary requirement and the city which                                 units are not included in a development.
                             stipulates:                                                                 The city worked with a consultant to
                                The number of required lower income                                     prepare a nexus study, drafted
                                 inclusionary units;                                                     implementing ordinances, and met with
                                                                                                         the Building Industry Association of San
                                The designated sites for the location of                                Diego County.
                                 the units;
                                A phasing schedule for production of the                                                                            Inclusionary
                                                                                                         The city continues to implement its         housing program is
                                 units; and
                                                                                                         Inclusionary Housing Ordinance.             one of the City’s
              Inclusionary      The term of affordability for the units.                                Between 2013 and 2015, building             most effective
       3.1    Housing                                                               O        P, HNS      permits were issued for 15 dwelling         programs to build
              Ordinance                                                                                  units required to be affordable through
                             For all ownership and qualifying rental                                                                                 affordable housing
                             projects of fewer than seven units, payment                                 Inclusionary requirements for the           and will be
                             of a fee in lieu of inclusionary units is                                   following projects:                         continued.
                             permitted. The fee is based on a detailed                                      Fair Oaks Valley/Shelley Property
                             study that calculated the difference in cost to                                  (CT 02-17)
                             produce a market rate rental unit versus a                                     Valley 17 (CT 12-07)
                             lower-income affordable unit. As of 2013, the
                             in-lieu fee per market- rate dwelling unit was                                 Tabata 10 (CT 06-13)
                             $4,515. The fee amount may be modified by                                      Buena Vista 11 (CT 13-01)
                             the City Council from time-to-time and is
                             collected at the time of building permit
                             issuance for the market rate units. The city
                             will continue to utilize inclusionary in-lieu fees
                             collected to assist in the development of
                             affordable units.
                                                                                                                                                                          APPENDIX A
A-11

A-12
                                                                                                                                                                            CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                            Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
             Program                           Description                      Status                                                              Appropriateness
                                                                                         Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                                                                                                       In addition, the following projects
                                                                                                       receiving building permits during this
                                                                                                       reporting period purchased a total of 55
                                                                                                       Inclusionary Housing credits at existing
                                                                                                       affordable apartments:
                                                                                                          La Costa Residential (CT 12-05)
                              The city will apply Inclusionary Housing
                              Ordinance requirements to rental projects if                                Tabata/Blackrail 16 (CT 03-06)
                              the project developer agrees by contract to                                 Coastal Living 10 (CT 13-02)
                              limit rent as consideration for a “direct                                   La Costa Villas (CT 13-06)
              Inclusionary    financial contribution” or other form of
              Housing                                                                                     Walnut Townhomes (CT 12-03)
       3.1                    assistance specified in density bonus law; or
              Ordinance       if the project is at a density that exceeds the                             La Costa Town Square
              (continued)     applicable GMCP density, thus requiring the                                  Residential/Artero (CT 08-03)
                              use of “excess dwelling units,” as described                                Poinsettia Place (CT 04-10A)
                              in Section 10.3 (Resources Available).                                      Ocean St. Condos (CT 05-12)
                                                                                                          La Costa Vista (CT 11-02)
                                                                                                          Carlsbad La Costa Collection (CT
                                                                                                           04-08)
                                                                                                       In 2015 the in-lieu fee per market rate
                                                                                                       dwelling unit remained at $4,515.
                              Pursuant to City Council Policy Statement
                              43, the city will continue to utilize “excess
                              dwelling units,” described in Section 10.3                               Through its continued implementation of
                              (Resources Available), for the purpose of                                the Growth Management Plan, the city
                              enabling density transfers, density                                      tracks development and the Excess           The city will continue
                              increases/bonuses and General Plan                                       Dwelling Unit Bank in its monthly           to maintain, monitor
              Excess          amendments to increase allowed density.                                  Development Monitoring Report. As of        and make “excess
       3.2    Dwelling Unit                                                       O          P         December 2015, the excess unit balance      units” available for
              Bank                                                                                     was 764 dwelling units inside the Village   qualifying projects,
                              Based on analysis conducted in Section 10.4                              and 322 units outside of the Village.       including affordable
                              (Constraints and Mitigating Opportunities),                              These units are available for qualifying    housing projects.
                              the city can accommodate its 2010-2020                                   projects, which include affordable
                              RHNA without the need to utilize excess                                  housing and density bonuses.
                              dwelling units to accommodate the RHNA at
                              each household income level.

                       Consistent with state law (Government
                       Code sections 65913.4 and 65915), the city
                       continues to offer residential density
                       bonuses as a means of encouraging
                       affordable housing development. In
                       exchange for setting aside a portion of the
                       development as units affordable to lower
                       and moderate income households, the city
                       will grant a density bonus over the                             The city continues to make available
                       otherwise allowed maximum density, and                          density bonuses in compliance with state
                       up to three financial incentives or regulatory                  density bonus law (SDBL). Between
                       concessions. These units must remain                            2013 and 2015, there were no SDBL
                       affordable for a period of no less than 55                      applications filed with the city; however,
                       years and each project must enter into an                       the city also offers density increases
                       agreement with the city to be monitored by                      through its inclusionary housing program
                       the Housing and Neighborhood Services                           as provided for in Municipal Code
                       Division for compliance.                                        Chapter 21.85.                               The city will continue
                                                                                                                                    to implement state
                                                                                       The city's density bonus regulations         density bonus law,
                       The density bonus increases with the
             Density                                                                   (Municipal Code Chapter 21.86)               and will update its
       3.3             proportion of affordable units set aside and     O/I   P, HNS
             Bonus                                                                     incorporate all recent changes to state      local regulations to
                       the depth of affordability (e.g. very low
                                                                                       density bonus law up to and including AB     be consistent with
                       income versus low income, or moderate
                                                                                       2222 changes, effective 1/1/15.              recent changes in
                       income). The maximum density bonus a
                                                                                                                                    the law.
                       developer can receive is 35 percent when a
                       project provides 11 percent of the units for                    Additional changes to the density bonus
                       very low income households, 20 percent for                      law were made by the state at the end of
                       low income households, or 40 percent for                        2015 (AB 744); consequently, the city’s
                       moderate income households.                                     density bonus regulations will be
                                                                                       updated in 2016.
                       Financial incentives and regulatory
                       concessions may include but are not limited
                       to: fee waivers, reduction or waiver of
                       development standards, in-kind
                       infrastructure improvements, an additional
                       density bonus above the requirement,
                       mixed use development, or other financial
                       contributions.
                                                                                                                                                             APPENDIX A
A-13

A-14
                                                                                                                                                                         CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                         Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
             Program                           Description                   Status                                                              Appropriateness
                                                                                      Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                               The city is currently amending its density
              Density
                               bonus regulations (Municipal Code Chapter
       3.3    Bonus
                               21.86) to ensure consistency with recent
              (continued)
                               changes to state density bonus law.
                                                                                                    The city continues to provide
                                                                                                    information and work with developers to
                                                                                                    assist them in creating additional
                                                                                                    housing opportunities for lower income
                                                                                                    households.
                                                                                                    On November 6, 2012 the City Council
                                                                                                    approved a $7.4 million residual
                                                                                                    receipts loan from the Housing Trust
                                                                                                    Fund to assist with the acquisition of
                                                                                                    and rehabilitation of 42 1950’s era
                                                                                                    duplex units in the Barrio (known as the    The city will continue
                                                                                                    Carol/Harding project) and in 2013,         to provide
                               The city, through the Housing and                                    acquisition of the property was             information and
                               Neighborhood Services Department, will                               completed. The rehabilitated units were     work with
              City-Initiated   continue to work with private developers                             rent-restricted for 55 years to low         developers to assist
       3.4                                                                     O        P, HNS      income households (50-60% AMI).
              Development      (both for-profit and non-profit) to create                                                                       them in creating
                               housing opportunities for low, very low and                                                                      additional housing
                               extremely low income households.                                     In Aug. 2015, the owner submitted an        opportunities for
                                                                                                    application (SDP 15-18, Pacific Wind)       lower income
                                                                                                    for city review of a proposal to demolish   households.
                                                                                                    22 duplexes, consolidate the lots and
                                                                                                    construct a 93-unit apartment project
                                                                                                    that would be 100% affordable.
                                                                                                    Relocation assistance will be provided
                                                                                                    to existing tenants of the duplexes.
                                                                                                    The city also provided assistance to the
                                                                                                    privately developed 50 unit Tavarua
                                                                                                    Senior Apartments affordable housing
                                                                                                    project, which opened in 2013.

       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                        Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
             Program                        Description                     Status                                                              Appropriateness
                                                                                     Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                           Use Housing Trust Funds on a case-by-case
                           basis to offer a number of incentives to
                           facilitate affordable housing development.
                           Incentives may include:
                              Payment of public facility fees;
                              In-kind infrastructure improvements,
                               including but not limited to street
                               improvements, sewer improvements,                                   The city continues to offer incentives to
              Affordable       other infrastructure improvements as                                facilitate affordable housing, including    The city will continue
       3.5    Housing          needed;                                        O       P, HNS, F    those listed in Program 2.2 above and       to implement this
              Incentives      Priority processing, including accelerated                          Program 3.4.                                program.
                               plan-check process, for projects that do
                               not require extensive engineering or
                               environmental review; and
                              Discretionary consideration of density
                               increases above the maximum permitted
                               by the General Plan through review and
                               approval of a site development plan
                               (SDP).
                                                                                                                                                                        APPENDIX A
A-15

A-16
                                                                                                                                                                   CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                          Dept.         Progress and Effectiveness in
             Program                         Description                      Status                                                           Appropriateness
                                                                                       Responsible           Meeting Objectives
                             Continue to implement a land banking
                             program to acquire land suitable for
                             development of housing affordable to lower
                             and moderate income households. The land
                             bank may accept contributions of land in-lieu
                             of housing production required under an
                             inclusionary requirement, surplus land from                                                                      The city will
                             the city or other public entities, and land                                                                      continue to
                             otherwise acquired by the city for its housing                          The city continues to implement a land   implement a land
                             programs. This land would be used to reduce                             banking program to acquire land          banking program to
                             the land costs of producing lower and                                   suitable for development of housing      acquire land
       3.6    Land Banking   moderate income housing by the city or other       O         HNS        affordable to lower and moderate         suitable for
                             parties.                                                                income households. Between 2013 and      development of
                                                                                                     2015, there were no offers to donate     housing affordable
                                                                                                     land for affordable housing.             to lower and
                             The city has identified a list of nonprofit                                                                      moderate income
                             developers active in the region. When a city-                                                                    households.
                             owned or acquired property is available, the
                             city will solicit the participation of these
                             nonprofits to develop affordable housing.
                             Affordable housing funds will be made
                             available to facilitate development and the
                             city will assist in the entitlement process.
       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                             Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
             Program                            Description                      Status                                                              Appropriateness
                                                                                          Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                                                                                                        The city continues to maintain the
                                                                                                        Housing Trust Fund, which had an
                                                                                                        available balance of approximately $14
                                                                                                        million as of December 31, 2015.
                                                                                                        In 2014, the city awarded CDBG funds
                                                                                                        ($452,000) and Housing Trust Funds
                              Continue to maintain the Housing Trust Fund                               ($2.4 million) to Solutions For Change to
                              for the fiduciary administration of monies                                acquire an existing 16-unit apartment
                              dedicated to the development, preservation                                complex in the Barrio and convert it to
                              and rehabilitation of affordable housing in                               affordable housing for graduates of their
                              Carlsbad. The Housing Trust Fund will be the                              academy that helps homeless families
                              repository of all collected in-lieu fees, impact                                                                      The city will continue
                                                                                                        find permanent housing.                     to collect and
                              fees, housing credits, loan repayments, and
                              related revenues targeted for proposed                                                                                distribute funds from
              Housing Trust   housing as well as other local, state and                                 In 2013, acquisition of the Carol/Harding   the Housing Trust
       3.7                                                                         O        HNS, F
              Fund            federal funds.                                                            project was completed with receipt of a     Fund to support the
                                                                                                        $7.4 million residual receipts loan from    development and
                                                                                                        the Housing Trust Fund (see Program         maintenance of
                              The city will explore additional revenue                                  1.3).                                       affordable housing.
                              opportunities to contribute to the Housing
                              Trust Fund, particularly, the feasibility of a
                              housing impact fee to generate affordable                                 In 2015, the city continued to explore
                              rental units when affordable units are not                                potential adoption of a housing impact
                              included in a rental development.                                         fee for development of rental units if
                                                                                                        affordable units are not included in a
                                                                                                        development. The city worked with a
                                                                                                        consultant to prepare a nexus study,
                                                                                                        drafted implementing ordinances, and
                                                                                                        met with the Building Industry
                                                                                                        Association of San Diego County.
                                                                                                                                                                             APPENDIX A
A-17
A-18
                                                                                                                                                                        CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                         Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
             Program                         Description                     Status                                                             Appropriateness
                                                                                      Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                                                                                                    The Housing Authority continues to         The Carlsbad
                             Continue to operate the city's Section 8                               operate Section 8 Housing Choice           Housing Authority
              Section 8      Housing Choice Voucher program to provide                              Voucher Program.                           will continue to
              Housing        rental assistance to very low income                                                                              operate the Section
       3.8                                                                     O         HNS
              Choice         households.                                                                                                       8 Housing Choice
              Vouchers                                                                              Between 2013 and 2015, approximately       Voucher Program,
                                                                                                    545-600 households have been assisted      subject to continued
                                                                                                    through this program.                      federal funding.
                             Participate in the San Diego Regional
                             Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) Program.
                             By obtaining a MCC during escrow, a
                                                                                                                                               The city will continue
                             qualified homebuyer can qualify for an
              Mortgage                                                                              The city continues to participate in the   to participate in the
                             increased loan amount. The MCC entitles the
       3.9    Credit                                                           O         HNS        MCC Program, however, no certificates      San Diego Regional
                             homebuyer to take a federal income tax
              Certificates                                                                          issued between 2013 and 2015.              Mortgage Credit
                             credit of 20 percent of the annual interest
                                                                                                                                               Certificate Program.
                             paid on the mortgage. This credit reduces the
                             federal income taxes of the buyer, resulting
                             in an increase in the buyer's net earnings.
       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                      Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
              Program                     Description                     Status                                                              Appropriateness
                                                                                   Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                                                                                                 The city continues to encourage senior
                                                                                                 housing opportunities through financial
                                                                                                 assistance and regulatory incentives.
                                                                                                 The city provided a loan of $3.75 million
                                                                                                 to assist in the development of the 50
                                                                                                 unit Tavarua Senior Apartments. The
                          Continue to encourage a wide variety of
                                                                                                 apartments, which opened in 2013, are
                          senior housing opportunities, especially for
                                                                                                 affordable to seniors at 30%, 40%, 50%
                          lower-income seniors with special needs,
                                                                                                 and 60% of the Area Median Income.
                          through the provision of financial assistance
                          and regulatory incentives as specified in the
                          city’s Housing for Senior Citizens Ordinance                           The city has begun priority processing
                          (Municipal Code Chapter 21.84). Projects                               for the College Blvd. improvement plans     The city will continue
                          assisted with these incentives will be                                 and a mitigation site for future road       to encourage senior
                          subjected to the monitoring and reporting                              construction impacts. In July 2015, the     housing
               Senior     requirements to assure compliance with                                 mitigation site was approved by the City    opportunities
       3.10               approved project conditions.                      O        P, HNS      Council, and financing was secured for
               Housing                                                                                                                       through financial
                                                                                                 College Blvd. Completion of College         assistance and
                                                                                                 Blvd. will allow the construction of the    regulatory
                          In addition, the city has sought and been
                                                                                                 previously approved Dos Colinas senior      incentives.
                          granted California Constitution Article 34
                                                                                                 facility and the Encinas Creek
                          authority by its voters to produce up to 200
                                                                                                 Apartments project, and facilitate
                          senior-only, low-income restricted housing
                                                                                                 planning for a future potential apartment
                          units. The city would need to access its
                                                                                                 site known as Basin BJ.
                          Article 34 authority only when it provides
                          financial assistance and regulates more than
                          51 percent of the development.                                         In 2015, the city approved plans for a
                                                                                                 101 senior low income apartment project
                                                                                                 and processed and reviewed an
                                                                                                 application for a proposed 98-unit senior
                                                                                                 apartment complex featuring 20
                                                                                                 apartments rent restricted to low income
                                                                                                 households. Both projects are in
                                                                                                 Robertson Ranch.
                                                                                                                                                                      APPENDIX A
A-19

A-20
                                                                                                                                                                              CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                             Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
              Program                          Description                       Status                                                               Appropriateness
                                                                                          Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                                                                                                        The       Reasonable      Accommodation
                                                                                                        ordinance became effective in March
                              The city has an adopted ordinance to provide                              2013. Consistent with the ordinance, the
                              individuals with disabilities “reasonable                                 city will consider requests for reasonable
                              accommodation” in land use, zoning and                                    accommodation in land use, zoning and
                                                                                                        building regulations on a case by case
                              building regulations. This ordinance seeks to
                                                                                                        basis.
                              provide equal opportunity in the development
                              and use of housing for people with disabilities
                                                                                                        No reasonable accommodation requests
                              through flexibility in regulations and the                                were received between 2013 and 2015.
                              waiver of certain requirements in order to
                              eliminate barriers to fulfilling this objective.
               Housing for                                                                              In January 2013, provided $1,065,000 in      The city will continue
       3.11    Persons with                                                        O          P         CDBG funds to assist in the acquisition of   to implement this
               Disabilities   The city will continue to evaluate the success                            property for a hospice home in Carlsbad      program.
                              of this measure and adjust the ordinance as                               for primarily low income households.
                              needed to ensure that it is effective.
                              Moreover, the city will seek to increase the                              The city regularly awards CDBG funds to
                              availability of housing and supportive                                    provide supportive services such as
                              services to the most vulnerable population                                meals for seniors and emergency and
                              groups, including people with disabilities                                temporary housing for victims of abuse.
                              through state and federal funding sources,
                              such as HUD’s Section 811 program and
                              CDBG funding.

       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                         Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
              Program                        Description                     Status                                                              Appropriateness
                                                                                      Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                                                                                                    The city continues to implement this
                                                                                                    program as part of its inclusionary
                                                                                                    housing ordinance.
                                                                                                    The 127 unit Encinas Creek Apartment
                                                                                                    Homes, approved in 2013, will provide
                                                                                                    63 affordable housing units. Seven
                                                                                                    (10%) of these units are three bedroom.
                             In those developments that are required to
                             include 10 or more units affordable to lower-                                                                      The city will continue
               Housing for   income households, at least 10 percent of                              An application for the La Costa Town        to support the
       3.12    Large         the lower income units should have three or       O          P         Center mixed-use project (60 residential    development of
               Families      more bedrooms. This requirement does not                               units) was submitted in 2013 and            housing for large
                             pertain to lower-income senior housing                                 approved by the Planning Commission         families.
                             projects.                                                              in April 2014. Four of the 12
                                                                                                    inclusionary units (33%) are three
                                                                                                    bedroom.
                                                                                                    In 2015, the city reviewed a proposed
                                                                                                    64-unit affordable apartment project
                                                                                                    (Quarry Creek PA R-1, SDP 15-17) with
                                                                                                    20 three bedroom units, or nearly a third
                                                                                                    of the project.
                                                                                                                                                                         APPENDIX A
A-21
A-22
                                                                                                                                                                                  CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                            Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
              Program                          Description                      Status                                                                    Appropriateness
                                                                                         Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                                                                                                       The City Council approved a grant of
                                                                                                       federal Community Development Block
                                                                                                       Grant program funds in the amount of
                                                                                                       $454,000 and a loan from the city’s
                              Carlsbad will continue to facilitate and assist                          Housing Trust Fund in the amount of
                              with the acquisition, for lease or sale, and                             $2,436,000 to acquire an existing 16-unit
                              development of suitable sites for emergency                              apartment complex at 945 Chestnut
                              shelters and transitional housing for the                                Avenue. This purchase of property is in
                              homeless population. This facilitation and                               partnership with Solutions for Change.
                              assistance will include:                                                 After the full rehabilitation of all the units,
                                                                                                       the apartment complex will provide
                                                                                                       permanent affordable housing
                                Participating in a regional or sub-regional                           opportunities for 16 homeless families
                                 summit(s) including decision-makers from                              who have graduated from the Solutions
                                 north San Diego County jurisdictions and                              University. In 2015, the property was             The city will continue
               Housing for       SANDAG for the purposes of coordinating                               acquired and families began moving
       3.13                                                                       O         HNS                                                          to implement this
               the Homeless      efforts and resources to address                                      into the property.                                program.
                                 homelessness;
                                Assisting local non-profits and charitable
                                                                                                       In 2012, the city approved building
                                 organizations in securing state and
                                                                                                       permits to expand the existing La
                                 federal funding for the acquisition,
                                                                                                       Posada de Guadalupe farmworker
                                 construction and management of
                                                                                                       housing and homeless shelter from a
                                 shelters; and
                                                                                                       temporary 50 bed facility to a permanent
                                Continuing to provide funding for local                               100-120 bed facility. In addition, the city
                                 and sub-regional homeless service                                     committed $2 million in financial support
                                 providers that operate temporary and                                  for the La Posada de Guadalupe
                                 emergency shelters.                                                   expansion from money collected through
                                                                                                       its Agricultural Conversion Mitigation Fee
                                                                                                       program. The project completed in 2013
                                                                                                       and the entire $2 million has been
                                                                                                       disbursed for the project.

       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                           Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
              Program                         Description                      Status                                                              Appropriateness
                                                                                        Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                              Continue to provide CDBG funds to
                              community, social welfare, non-profit and
                              other charitable groups that provide services                                                                       The city will continue
               Supportive     for those with special needs in the North                               Between 2013 and 2015, the city             to support the
               Services for   County area.                                                            allocated approximately $1.8 million in     development of
               Homeless                                                                               funding assistance to various social        housing and
       3.14                                                                      O         HNS
               and Special                                                                            service providers in North County and       supportive services
               Needs          Furthermore, the city will work with agencies                           serves as a referral agency for homeless    for homeless and
               Groups         and organizations that receive CDBG funds                               shelters and support services.              other special needs
                              to offer a City Referral Service for homeless                                                                       groups.
                              shelter and other supportive services.
                                                                                                                                                  The city will
                                                                                                                                                  continue to facilitate
                                                                                                                                                  development of
                                                                                                      The city continues to implement the         second dwelling
                              Continue to implement its Second Dwelling                               Second Dwelling Unit Ordinance and          units, and will
                              Unit Ordinance (Section 21.10.015 of the                                consider alternative types of housing.
               Alternative                                                                                                                        continue to monitor
                              Carlsbad Municipal Code) and will continue                              Fifty-three second units were permitted     underutilized sites
       3.15    Housing        to support alternative types of housing, such      O        P, HNS      between 2013 and 2015.                      for potential for
                              as hotels and managed living units to
                                                                                                                                                  alternative housing,
                              accommodate extremely-low income
                                                                                                      No proposals for managed living units       and make
                              households
                                                                                                      have been received to date.                 information
                                                                                                                                                  available to
                                                                                                                                                  interested
                                                                                                                                                  developers.
                              Assure that information on the availability of                                                                      The city will continue
                              assisted or below-market housing is provided                            The city provides information on assisted   to reach out to
                              to all lower-income and special needs                                   and below market housing to individuals     students and
               Military and
                              groups. The Housing and Neighborhood                                    and groups needing that information         members of the
       3.16    Student                                                           O         HNS
                              Services Division will provide information to                           through pamphlets, the city’s website,      military to provide
               Referrals
                              local military and student housing offices of                           and distribution of info at community       housing
                              the availability of low-income housing in                               events and workshops.                       opportunities in the
                              Carlsbad.                                                                                                           city.
                                                                                                                                                                           APPENDIX A
A-23

A-24
                                                                                                                                                                 CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                        Dept.      Progress and Effectiveness in
              Program                      Description                      Status                                                          Appropriateness
                                                                                     Responsible        Meeting Objectives
                            Monitor and record Coastal Zone housing
                            data including, but not limited to, the
                            following:
                             1. The number of housing units approved                               1)   Between 2013 and 2015,
                                for construction, conversion or                                         building permits were issued
                                demolition within the coastal zone after                                for 200 dwelling units in the
                                January 1, 1982.                                                        Coastal Zone (107 single
                                                                                                        family dwellings, 47, 2-4 unit
                             2. The number of housing units for
                                                                                                        structures, 21, 5+ unit
                                persons and families of low or moderate
                                                                                                        structures, and 25 second
                                income, as defined in Section 50093 of
                                                                                                        dwelling units).
                                the Health and Safety Code, required to
                                be provided in new housing
                                developments within the coastal zone.                              2)   Between 2013 and 2015,
                             3. The number of existing residential                                      building permits were issued
                                dwelling units occupied by persons and                                  for five second dwelling units     Continue to monitor
               Coastal                                                                                  required to be affordable
                                families of low or moderate income that                                                                    and report as
       3.17    Housing                                                      O            P              (through Inclusionary or
                                are authorized to be demolished or                                                                         required per state
               Monitoring                                                                               Density Bonus requirements)
                                converted in the coastal zone pursuant                                                                     law.
                                to Section 65590 of the Government                                      in the Coastal Zone. Other
                                Code.                                                                   Coastal Zone projects
                                                                                                        purchased a total of 35
                             4. The number of residential dwelling units                                housing credits to satisfy their
                                occupied by persons and families of low                                 affordable housing
                                or moderate income, as defined in                                       requirements.
                                Section 50093 of the Health and Safety
                                Code that are required for replacement
                                                                                                   3)   0 demolitions
                                or authorized to be converted or
                                demolished as identified above. The
                                location of the replacement units, either                          4)   0 replacements required
                                onsite, elsewhere within the city’s
                                coastal zone, or within three miles of
                                the coastal zone in the city, shall be
                                designated in the review.

       Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                              Dept.         Progress and Effectiveness in
              Program                          Description                        Status                                                           Appropriateness
                                                                                           Responsible           Meeting Objectives
                              First, to retain the Housing Element as a
                              viable policy document, the Planning Division
                              will review the Housing Element annually and
                              schedule an amendment if necessary. As
                              required by state law, city staff will prepare
                              and submit annual progress reports to the
                              City Council, SANDAG, and California
                              Department of Housing and Community
                              Development (HCD).
                 Housing
                 Element                                                                                                                          The city will
                  Annual      Second, Senate Bill 575 requires that a                                                                             continue to provide
                 Progress     jurisdiction revise its housing element every                              The city prepared and submitted annual   annual reports as
                Report and    four years, unless it meets both of the                                    reports each year between 2013 and       required, and will
       3.18                   following criteria: (1) the jurisdiction adopted      O          P
               Mid-Planning                                                                              2015, and initiated the mid-planning     complete the mid-
                  Period      the fourth revision of the element no later                                period update in 2016.                   planning period
                 Housing      than March 31, 2010; and (2) the jurisdiction                                                                       update by April 30,
                 Element      completed any rezoning contained in the                                                                             2017.
                  Update      element by June 30, 2010. While
                              implementation of the city’s 2005-2010
                              Housing Element satisfied the first criterion, it
                              did not meet the second. Although rezoning
                              was completed before the end of the
                              extended Housing Element period (April 30,
                              2013) to satisfy the adequate sites program,
                              it was not completed in time to meet the SB
                              575 requirement.
                                                                                                                                                                        APPENDIX A
A-25

A-26
                                                                                                                                                                                   CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
           Table A-1: Housing Programs Review and Accomplishments (2013-2015)
                                                                                                 Dept.          Progress and Effectiveness in
                  Program                          Description                       Status                                                              Appropriateness
                                                                                              Responsible            Meeting Objectives
                                  The city will build on the annual review
                                  process to develop a mid-planning period
                                  (four-year) Housing Element update that
                                  includes the following:
                     Housing
                     Element         Review program implementation and
                      Annual          revision of programs and policies, as
                     Progress         needed;
                    Report and       Analysis of progress in meeting the
           3.18    Mid-Planning       RHNA and updates to the sites inventory
                      Period          as needed;
                     Housing
                                     Outcomes from a study session that will
                     Element
                      Update          be held with the Planning Commission to
                   (continued)        discuss mid-period accomplishments and
                                      take public comment on the progress of
                                      implementation. The city will invite service
                                      providers and housing developers to
                                      participate.
                                  With assistance from outside fair housing
                                  agencies, continue to offer fair housing
                                  services to its residents and property owners.
                                  Services include:
                                     Distributing educational materials to
                                      property owners, apartment managers,                                                                              The city will continue
                                      and tenants;                                                                                                      to    support       fair
                                     Making public announcements via                                       The city contracts with CSA San Diego       housing       services
                                      different media (e.g. newspaper ads and                               County, a fair housing agency, to provide   through information
                   Fair Housing       public service announcements at local
           4.1                                                                         O         HNS        their services to Carlsbad residents and    dissemination,
                   Services           radio and television channels);                                       property owners. Services include those     monitoring,        and
                                     Conducting public presentations with                                  listed in the column to the left.           partnerships       with
                                      different community groups;                                                                                       fair housing service
                                     Monitoring and responding to complaints                                                                           providers.
                                      of discrimination (i.e. intaking,
                                      investigation of complaints, and
                                      resolution); and
                                     Referring services to appropriate
                                      agencies.
       	

 Appendix B: Sites Inventory
   Supporting Documentation
This appendix documents the parcel by parcel sites inventory for the 2013-2021 Housing Element.
The inventory is summarized into the following four tables:
        Table B-1: Vacant Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing
        Table B-2: Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 1
         (Parking Lot and Agricultural Sites). Photos of the two largest sites identified in the table
         are included.
        Table B-3: Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 2
         (Other Underutilized Uses)
        Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Housing
Table B-5 identifies commercial sites that could potentially accommodate moderate income
housing in a mixed use format. However, since no residential capacity is assigned to these sites
(i.e., a discretionary excess dwelling unit allocation would be required, and subject to Growth
Management quadrant limits), they are not counted toward meeting RHNA. They are identified
here only as additional possible residential sites.
All parcels listed in Tables B-1 through B-4 are mapped on Figure 10-1 in Housing Element Section
10.3.
Vacant Sites
  Table B-1: Vacant Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing
                                                                      Unit Capacity, by Household
                                                                                 Income
                                                               Site
                            General Plan        Zoning         Size      Very
  APN                       Designation1        District    (Acres)      Low       Low     Moderate
  1680503600 (Basin BJ)     R30                 RD-M           4.30         99          -           -
  1683601600
  (Robertson Ranch PA
  22) 2                     R23 (20 du/ac)      PC             4.88          -        98            -
  2031730200                V (D1-4)            V-R            0.29          4          -           -
  2032930600                V (D1-4)            V-R            0.17          2          -           -
  2033051000                V (D1-4)            V-R            0.20          3          -           -
  2041600200                R30                 RD-M           0.20          4          -           -

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
 Table B-1: Vacant Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing
                                                                              Unit Capacity, by Household
                                                                      Site              Income
                               General Plan        Zoning            Size       Very
 APN                           Designation1        District       (Acres)        Low       Low    Moderate
 2090901100 (Sunny
 Creek)                        R15 (12 du/ac)      RD-M                9.6           -         -        115
 2161404300 (Ponto)            R23                 P-C                 6.5           -         -         98
                               GC (Mixed  Use) 3   P-C                   3           -         -         11
 2161701400                    R23                 RD-M              0.44            -         -            7
 2161701500                    R23                 RD-M              0.42            -         -            6
 2163000400                    R23                 RD-M              0.39            -         -            6
 2163000500                    R23                 RD-M              0.41            -         -            6
 2163000600                    R23                 RD-M              0.40            -         -            6
 2163001200                    R23                 RD-M              0.41            -         -            6
 2163001300                    R23                 RD-M              0.30            -         -            5
 2230507300 (La Costa
 Town Square)                  R23                 RD-M              6.32                                95
 1670404600 (Quarry
 Creek PA R-4)4                R15 (13.7 du/ac)    P-C               15.6            -         -        214
 1670404400
                               R23 (21.3 du/ac)    P-C                 9.4           -      278             -
 (Quarry Creek PA R-2)4
 Grand Total                                                                      112       376         575
 Notes:
 1. Sites with a General Plan designation “V” are located in the Village area. The “V” land use
     designation permits mixed-use development; however, development of stand-alone high-density
     residential projects is also permitted and would yield even more units. To account for non-residential
     uses, a conservative 50 percent of the potential capacity of units is assumed, while the other 50
     percent of developable area could be used for non-residential uses.
 2. A master plan for Robertson Ranch was approved in 2006 to provide for a residential community with
     over 1,300 housing units, open space, and a commercial center. Approval of land subdivision and
     architecture needs to be obtained before construction. The property is currently vacant and
     considered appropriate for development.
 3. Residential capacity is calculated based on 25 percent of the site developable acreage at a density of
     15 du/ac.
 4. A master plan for Quarry Creek was approved in March 2013 to provide for a residential community
     with 636 housing units, open space and community facilities. Approval of land subdivision and
     architecture needs to be obtained before construction. The property is currently vacant and
     considered appropriate for development.
 Source: City of Carlsbad, 2016.
B-2

                                                                                               APPENDIX B
Underutilized Sites
 Table B-2: Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 1
 (Parking Lot and Agricultural Sites)
                                                                              Unit Capacity, by
                                                                  Site       Household Income
                    Existing        General Plan Zoning           Size     Very                       Site
 APN                Use             Designation1 District      (Acres)     Low     Low   Moderate Photo
 20310136002        Parking Lot     V (D5-9)      V-R             0.21         -      -           2         -
 20317305002        Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.25        4       -           -         -
 20317308002        Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.33        5       -           -         -
 2031811600         Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.22        3       -           -         -
 20323213002        Parking Lot     V (D5-9)      V-R             0.35         -      -           3         -
 2032960600         Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.37        5       -           -         -
 20330201002        Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.14        2       -           -         -
 2033040200         Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.16        2       -           -         -
 2033040500         Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.17        2       -           -         -
 2033040900         Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.25        4       -           -         -
 20330417002        Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.16        2       -           -         -
 20330418002        Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.16        2       -           -         -
 2033042000         Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.16        2       -           -         -
 20330431002        Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.18        3       -           -         -
 20330514002        Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.24        3       -           -         -
 20330516002        Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.57        8       -           -         -
 20330612002        Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.24        3       -           -         -
 2033521200         Parking Lot     V (D1-4)      V-R             0.29        4       -           -         -
 2040310900         Parking Lot     R30           RD-M            0.20        4       -           -         -
 2041112000         Parking Lot     R30           RD-M            0.80       18       -           -         -
 2041502100         Parking Lot     R23           R-3             0.46         -      -           7         -
  2071013500        Agriculture     R15 (12       RDM             11.3         -      -         137        #1
 (Marja)                            du/ac)
 2120405600
 (Aviara Farms)     Agriculture     R30           RD-M            8.96      206       -           -        #2
 Grand Total                                                                282      0          149
 Notes:
 1. Sites with a General Plan designation “V” are located in the Village area. The “V” land use
     designation permits mixed-use development; however, development of stand-alone high-density
     residential projects is also permitted and would yield even more units. To account for non-residential
     uses, a conservative 50 percent of the potential capacity of units is assumed, while the other 50
     percent of developable area could be used for non-residential uses.
 2. Sites are adjacent to and serve uses on other sites identified by footnote 2 in Table B-3 -
     Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 2 (Other Underutilized
     Sites).
                                                                                                         B-3

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
  Table B-2: Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 1
  (Parking Lot and Agricultural Sites)
                                                                        Unit Capacity, by
                                                                       Household Income
                                                              Site
                     Existing        General Plan Zoning      Size   Very                   Site
  APN                Use             Designation1 District (Acres)    Low    Low   Moderate Photo
  Source: City of Carlsbad, 2016.
The largest sites in the Table B-2 underutilized inventory are also depicted in these photos to
demonstrate that the sites are underutilized and appropriate for residential development.
                Site Photo #1: Marja
                Site Photo # 2: Aviara Farms
B-4

                                                                              APPENDIX B
Table B-3: Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 2
(Other Underutilized Uses)
                                                              Unit Capacity, by Household
                                                                        Income
                              General Plan Zoning   Site Size      Very
APN           Existing Use    Designation1 District  (Acres)       Low    Low    Moderate
1551702400    Residential     R23          R-3           0.34         -       -         4
1551702500    Residential     R23          R-3           0.26         -       -         2
1552000400    Office          V            V-R           0.89        12       -          -
1552001000    Office          V            V-R           0.52         7       -          -
1552211100    Office          V            V-R           0.33         5       -          -
1552211200    Office          V            V-R           0.56         8       -          -
2030410200    Private School  V            V-R           7.23         -       -        65
 2030543200   Commercial      V            V-R           0.54         -       -         5
2030540100    Commercial      V            V-R           0.24         3       -          -
2030540300    Industrial      V            V-R           0.24         3       -          -
2030541400    Commercial      V            V-R           0.13         2       -          -
2030541800    Industrial      V            V-R           0.22         3
2030542400    Commercial      V            V-R           0.23         3       -          -
2030542500    Industrial      V            V-R           0.23         3       -          -
2030542600    Commercial      V            V-R           0.25         4       -          -
2030542700    Industrial      V            V-R           0.36         5       -          -
2031010100    Industrial      V            V-R           0.31         4       -          -
2031010300    Commercial      V            V-R           0.15         2       -          -
2031010400    Industrial      V            V-R           0.24         3       -          -
2031011100    Industrial      V            V-R           0.24         3       -          -
2031011200    Commercial      V            V-R           0.21         3       -          -
2031011400    Office          V            V-R           0.23         -       -         2
2031011500    Industrial      V            V-R           0.21         3       -          -
2031011600    Commercial      V            V-R           0.23         3       -          -
2031011800    Residential     V            V-R           0.31         -       -         2
2031011900    Industrial      V            V-R           0.18         3       -          -
2031012000    Residential     V            V-R           0.24         2       -
2031012100    Office          V            V-R            0.2         -       -         2
2031012200    RV Camp Site    V            V-R           0.93         -       -        12
2031012300    Office          V            V-R           0.44         -       -         4
2031012400    Commercial      V            V-R           0.47         7       -          -
20310125002   Industrial      V            V-R           0.23         3       -          -
2031012800    Residential     V            V-R           0.24         2       -          -
2031012900    Commercial      V            V-R           0.87        12       -          -
                                                                                      B-5

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
  Table B-3: Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 2
  (Other Underutilized Uses)
                                                                Unit Capacity, by Household
                                                                          Income
                                General Plan Zoning   Site Size      Very
  APN           Existing Use    Designation1 District  (Acres)       Low    Low    Moderate
  2031013400    Office          V            V-R           0.19         3       -          -
  2031020500    Office          V            V-R           0.43         -                 4
  2031021400    Residential     V            V-R           0.42         -       -         3
  2031021500    Office          V            V-R           0.43         -       -         4
  2031023400    Office          V            V-R           0.45         -       -         4
  2031023500    Office          V            V-R           0.29         -       -         3
  2031100900    Office          V            V-R           0.53         -       -         5
  2031103800    Office          V            V-R           0.17         -       -         2
  2031103900    Office          V            V-R           0.17         -       -         2
  2031420600    Private School  V            V-R            0.5         -       -         5
  2031430100    Office          V            V-R           0.35         -       -         3
  2031430200    Office          V            V-R           0.18         -       -         2
  2031430700    Church          V            V-R           2.16         -       -        19
  20317304002   Commercial      V            V-R           0.19         3       -          -
  2031730900    Commercial      V            V-R           0.35         5       -          -
  20317406002   Commercial      V            V-R           1.78        25       -          -
  20317407002   Commercial      V            V-R           1.79        25       -          -
  2031750100    Commercial      V            V-R           0.28         4       -          -
  2031750200    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2031750300    Commercial      V            V-R           0.45         6       -          -
  2031750400    Office          V            V-R           0.23         3       -          -
  2031750500    Residential     V            V-R           0.23         2       -          -
  2031750600    Commercial      V            V-R           0.23         3       -          -
  2031750700    Residential     V            V-R           0.25         3       -          -
  2031750800    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2031810400    Commercial      V            V-R           0.31         4       -          -
  2031810500    Commercial      V            V-R           0.15         2       -          -
  2031810700    Commercial      V            V-R           0.23         3       -          -
  2031810800    Office          V            V-R           0.22         3       -          -
  2031810900    Commercial      V            V-R           0.22         3       -          -
  2031811200    Commercial      V            V-R           0.59         8       -          -
  2031811300    Commercial      V            V-R           0.35         5       -          -
  2031811900    Commercial      V            V-R           0.71        10       -          -
  2031820400    Commercial      V            V-R           2.36        33       -          -
B-6

                                                                              APPENDIX B
Table B-3: Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 2
(Other Underutilized Uses)
                                                              Unit Capacity, by Household
                                                                        Income
                              General Plan Zoning   Site Size      Very
APN           Existing Use    Designation1 District  (Acres)       Low    Low    Moderate
2031820800    Post Office     V            V-R           1.43         -       -        20
2032020700    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
2032021300    Office          V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
2032021800    Commercial      V            V-R           0.95        13       -          -
20323204002   Commercial      V            V-R           0.52         -       -         5
2032320800    Commercial      V            V-R           0.18         -       -         2
2032321600    Commercial      V            V-R           0.46         -       -         4
2032500600    Commercial      V            V-R           0.37         -       -         3
2032600500    Residential     R23          R-3           0.39         -       -         2
2032610300    Residential     V            V-R           0.34         4       -          -
2032610700    Office          V            V-R           0.66         9       -          -
2032910100    Commercial      V            V-R           0.21         3       -          -
2032910300    Commercial      V            V-R           0.31         4       -          -
2032920100    Commercial      V            V-R           0.24         4       -          -
2032920500    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
2032920700    Commercial      V            V-R           0.24         3       -          -
2032920800    Commercial      V            V-R           0.17         2       -          -
2032920900    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
2032921000    Office          V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
2032921100    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
2032921800    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
2032922100    Commercial      V            V-R           0.41         6       -          -
2032930400    Commercial      V            V-R           0.17         2       -          -
2032930500    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
2032930800    Commercial      V            V-R           0.17         2       -          -
2032950100    Commercial      V            V-R           0.23         3       -          -
2032960700    Commercial      V            V-R           0.15         2       -          -
2032960800    Commercial      V            V-R           0.26         4       -          -
2032970200    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
2032970300    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
2032970500    Commercial      V            V-R           0.14         2       -          -
20330105002   Commercial      V            V-R           0.73        10       -          -
2033020200    Commercial      V            V-R           0.22         3       -          -
2033020400    Residential     V            V-R           0.21         2       -          -
                                                                                      B-7

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
  Table B-3: Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 2
  (Other Underutilized Uses)
                                                                Unit Capacity, by Household
                                                                          Income
                                General Plan Zoning   Site Size      Very
  APN           Existing Use    Designation1 District  (Acres)       Low    Low    Moderate
  2033032400    Commercial      V            V-R           0.48         7       -          -
  2033032600    Office          V            V-R           0.48         7       -          -
  2033032700    Office          V            V-R           0.32         4       -          -
  2033032800    Office          V            V-R           0.49         7       -          -
  20330419002   Office          V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  20330426002   Commercial      V            V-R            0.2         3       -          -
  2033042700    Commercial      V            V-R           0.24         3       -          -
  2033043000    Office          V            V-R           0.17         2       -          -
  2033051100    Office          V            V-R           0.24         3       -          -
  20330513002   Office          V            V-R            0.4         6       -          -
  20330515002   Office          V            V-R           0.56         8       -          -
  20330602002   Commercial      V            V-R           0.14         2       -          -
  2033060900    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2033510300    Office          V            V-R           0.17         2       -          -
  2033510700    Office          V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2033511100    Office          V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2033511200    Office          V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2033511300    Office          V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2033511600    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2033511800    Commercial      V            V-R           0.48         7       -          -
  2033512000    Office          V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2033521300    Commercial      V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2033521800    Church          V            V-R           0.64         -       -         9
  2033530400    Office          V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2033530900    Commercial      V            V-R           0.48         7       -          -
  2033540100    Office          V            V-R           0.16         2       -          -
  2033540500    Office          V            V-R           0.17         2       -          -
  2033540700    Office          V            V-R           0.22         3       -          -
  2033541300    Office          V            V-R           0.24         3       -          -
  2033541500    Office          V            V-R           0.73        10       -          -
  2033541900    Office          V            V-R           0.57         8       -          -
  2033550400    Commercial      V            V-R           0.32         4       -          -
  2033550500    Commercial      V            V-R           0.32         4       -
  2040310400    Residential     R30          RDM           0.17         3       -          -
B-8

                                                                              APPENDIX B
Table B-3: Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 2
(Other Underutilized Uses)
                                                              Unit Capacity, by Household
                                                                        Income
                              General Plan Zoning   Site Size      Very
APN           Existing Use    Designation1 District  (Acres)       Low    Low    Moderate
2040700900    Residential     R30          RDM            0.5         9       -          -
2040701000    Residential     R30          RDM           0.17         3       -          -
2040840600    Residential     R30          RDM           0.16         2       -          -
2040840800    Residential     R30          RDM           0.24         5       -          -
2041100100    Residential     R30          RDM           0.28         4       -          -
2041110200    Residential     R30          RDM           0.43         8       -          -
2041110600    Residential     R30          RDM           0.39         7       -          -
2041111300    Residential     R30          RDM           0.18         2       -          -
2041111400    Residential     R30          RDM           0.42         6       -          -
2041111500    Residential     R30          RDM            0.2         4       -          -
2041111700    Residential     R30          RDM            0.4         7       -          -
2041310300    Residential     R23          R-3            0.5         -       -         6
2041311200    Residential     R23          R-3           0.27         -       -         3
2041320500    Residential     R23          R-3           0.26         -       -         3
2041320600    Residential     R23          R-3           0.27         -       -         3
2041321700    Residential     R23          R-3           0.57         -       -         6
2041501700    Residential     R23          R-3           0.31         -       -         3
2041600300    Residential     R30          RDM           0.17         3       -          -
2041600900    Residential     R30          RDM           0.69         2       -          -
2041910500    Residential     R30          RDM           0.41         7       -          -
2041920500    Residential     R30          RDM           0.27         4       -          -
2041920600    Residential     R30          RDM           0.27         5       -          -
2041920700    Residential     R30          RDM           0.26         5       -          -
2041920900    Residential     R30          RDM           0.23         4       -          -
2042340100    Residential     R23          R-3           0.24         -       -         3
2042340200    Residential     R23          R-3           0.25         -       -         3
2042341200    Residential     R23          R-3           0.27         -       -         3
2042401300    Residential     R23          R-3           0.29         -       -         3
2042401400    Residential     R23          R-3           0.31         -       -         3
2042402200    Residential     R23          R-3           0.88         -       -        12
2042800100    Residential     R30          RDM           9.66       124       -          -
2042800200    Residential     R30          RDM            1.9        26       -          -
2042800500    Residential     R30          RDM           0.44         8       -          -
2042802600    Residential     R30          RDM           0.24         5       -          -
                                                                                      B-9

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
  Table B-3: Underutilized Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 2
  (Other Underutilized Uses)
                                                                                        Unit Capacity, by Household
                                                                                                     Income
                                          General Plan      Zoning       Site Size            Very
  APN                Existing Use         Designation1      District       (Acres)            Low       Low     Moderate
  2042910100         Residential          R30               RDM                 0.16              2         -              -
  20429116003        Residential          R30               RDM                 0.13                       1
  20429117003        Residential          R30               RDM                 0.15                       1
  20429201003        Residential          R30               RDM                 0.14                       1
  Various4           Residential          R30               RDM          .13 to .37                -      93               -
  Grand Total                                                                                  742        96            250
  Notes:
  1.  Sites with a General Plan designation “V” are located in the Village area. The “V” land use designation permits
      mixed-use development; however, development of stand-alone high-density residential projects is also permitted
      and would yield even more units. To account for non-residential uses, a conservative 50 percent of the potential
      capacity of units is assumed, while the other 50 percent of developable area could be used for non-residential
      uses.
  2.  Sites are adjacent to and served by parking lots on other sites identified by footnote 2 in Table B-2 - Underutilized
      Sites for Lower and Moderate Income Housing – Category 1 (Parking lot and agricultural sites).
  3.  Though smaller than 0.16 acre, these Harding Street Neighborhood, LP parcels have duplexes rent restricted to
      low income households; they may be part of a future phase of the proposed Pacific Wind project.
  4.  Harding Street Neighborhood, LP parcels that constitute the proposed “Pacific Wind” project site (APNs:
      2042911400, 2042911900 to 2700, 2042920200, 2042921000 to 1400, and 2042921600 to 2200).
  Source: City of Carlsbad, 2016.
B-10

                                                                            APPENDIX B
Vacant and Underutilized Sites
 Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                 General                                  Capacity (Above
                                 Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
 APN           Existing Use      Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
               Residential/
 2060922000    Vacant            R15           R-2                   0.57                3
 2061200100    Vacant            R15           RD-M-Q                0.48                4
 2061200200    Vacant            R15           RD-M-Q                0.50                4
 2090604800,
 20906054,     Residential/
 20906072      Stables           R4/OS         R-1                   16.4               52
 2231704500    Vacant            R15           RD-M-Q                0.40                3
 1551016800    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-30000             0.29                1
 1551702000    Residential       R23           R-3                   0.22                2
 1551702100    Residential       R23           R-3                   0.17                2
 1551702900    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.32                2
 1551802300    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.52                3
 1551901500    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-30000             1.09                1
 1551901600    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-30000             0.39                1
 1552210500    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.55                2
 1552231800    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.73                5
 1552511800    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.26                1
 1552511900    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.28                1
 1552512000    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.23                2
 1552512100    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.23                1
 1552512200    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.22                1
 1552711500    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.20                1
 1552711700    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.31                1
 1552711900    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.28                1
 1552712000    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.28                1
 1552712100    Vacant            R15           R-3                   0.16                1
 1552712800    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.24                1
 1560511800    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1                   1.04                3
 1560511900    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1                   1.90                6
 1560512200    Residential       R4            R-1                   1.14                2
 1560512300    Vacant            R4            R-1                   2.03                6
 1560521200    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.17                1
 1560904100    Vacant            R8            RD-M                  2.69               11
 1561108300    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.24                1
                                                                                     B-11

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
  Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                  General                                  Capacity (Above
                                  Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
  APN           Existing Use      Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
  1561108400    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.27               1
  1561301800    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.48               1
  1561302600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.51               2
  1561303200    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.14               1
  1561420300    Residential      R4             R-1                   1.14               1
  1561420800    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.49               1
  1561424800    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.29               1
  1561425100    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.20               1
  1561425600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.65               2
  1561521000    Residential      R4             R-1-9500              0.48               1
  1561521200    Residential      R4             R-1-9500              0.47               1
  1561521300    Residential      R4             R-1-9500              0.71               1
  1561522900    Vacant            R4            R-1-9500              0.28               1
  1561523700    Vacant            R4            R-1-9500              0.17               1
  1561901100    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.51               2
  1561901800    Residential      R4             R-1-10000             0.71               1
  1561902400    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.15               1
  1561903200    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.68               1
  1561903400    Garage           R4             R-1-10000             0.28               1
  1562001300    Residential      R4             R-1-10000             0.54               1
  1562002900    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.20               1
  1562003100    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.22               1
  1562003200    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.21               1
  1562123300    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.19               1
  1562123400    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.17               1
  1562123500    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.17               1
  1562123700    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.17               1
  1562123800    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18               1
  1562124100    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18               1
  1562124000    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18               1
  1562124200    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18               1
  1562124300    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18               1
  1562125000    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.22               1
  1562124500    Vacant            R4            R-1                    0.2               1
  1562124600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.17               1
  1562124700    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.17               1
B-12

                                                                           APPENDIX B
Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                General                                  Capacity (Above
                                Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
APN           Existing Use      Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
1562124800    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.17                1
1562124900    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18                1
1562121100    Residential       R4            R-1-10000             1.58                4
1562122500    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18                1
1562200200    Residential       R4            R-1-9500              3.08                9
1562313600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.19                1
1562314100    Residential       R4            R-1                   0.49                1
1562314800    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.20                1
1562317000    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18                1
1562706200    Residential       R4            R-1                   0.56                1
1563500100    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1                   0.30                1
1563510100    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1                   0.90                3
1563511300    Residential       R4            R-1                   1.03                2
1563511900    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.37                1
1670307300    Driving Range     R8/OS         R-1-10000             6.00               24
1670520600    Residential       R4            R-A-10000             0.64                1
1670531900    Vacant            R4            R-A-10000             0.12                1
1670532000    Vacant            R4            R-A-10000             0.39                1
1670701200    Vacant            R4            R-A-10000             0.26                1
1670703100    Residential       R4            R-A-10000             0.69                1
1670803300    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.45                1
1670803400    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.47                1
1670803500    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.52                2
1670803600    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.54                2
1670804100    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             1.00                3
1670804200    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.44                1
1670804600    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.17                1
1671120500    Residential       R4            R-A-10000             1.08                2
1671241000    Vacant            R4            R-A-10000             0.28                1
1672302400    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.70                2
1672302500    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.85                3
1672500600    Vacant            R4/R15        R-A-10000             0.30                1
1675705100    Residential      R8             RD-M-Q                0.60                1
1675805100    Vacant            R4            R-A-10000             0.37                1
1680505700    Vacant            R4/OS         OS/R-1-0.5Q          13.50               43
2030210300    Residential       R15           R-3                   0.25                1
                                                                                    B-13

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
  Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                  General                                  Capacity (Above
                                  Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
  APN           Existing Use      Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
  2031302500    Residential       R15/O         R-3                   0.20               1
  2031302600    Residential       R15/O         R-3                   0.21               1
  2031440300    Hotel             R15           R-3                   0.62               5
  2032020300    Parking Lot       R15           R-3                   0.40               3
  2040310100    Vacant            R30           RDM                   0.10               2
  2040310200    Vacant            R30           RDM                   0.09               2
  2040321000    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.15               1
  2040701500    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.14               2
  2040840400    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.15               1
  2041101200    Vacant            R30           RDM                   0.14               3
  2041103200    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.13               2
  2041111000    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.14               2
  2041111100    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.14               2
  2041111200    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.14               2
  2041711000    Vacant            R15           RDM                   0.08               1
  2041712300    Residential      R15            RDM                   0.24               1
  2041720400    Vacant            R15           RDM                   0.08               1
  2041721400    Residential      R15            RDM                   0.33               2
  2041722700    Residential      R15            RDM                   0.20               1
  2041722800    Residential      R15            RDM                   0.21               1
  2041910800    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.14               1
  2041921000    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.09               1
  2042100300    Residential      R15            RDM                   0.45               3
  2042100400    Residential      R15            RDM                   0.19               1
  2042101100    Residential      R15            RDM                   0.22               1
  2042101200    Residential      R15            RDM                   0.19               1
  2042910300    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.14               1
  2042910400    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.15               1
  2042910500    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.15               1
  2042910700    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.15               1
  2042910800    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.15               1
  2042912800    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.14               2
  2042911500    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.14               1
  2042912900    Residential      R30            RDM                   0.15               1
  2050200300    Residential       R4/R8         R-1                   0.41               1
  2050200400    Residential       R4/R8         R-1                   0.43               1
B-14

                                                                           APPENDIX B
Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                General                                  Capacity (Above
                                Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
APN           Existing Use      Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
2050201800    Residential       R4            R-1                   0.53                1
2050202700    Residential       R8            R-1                   0.63                2
2050202900    Residential      R8             RD-M-Q                0.42                1
2050203200    Residential      R8             RD-M-Q                0.46                1
2050203300    Residential      R8             RD-M-Q                0.44                1
2050204300    Vacant            R4/R8         R-1                   0.24                2
2050520800    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.56                1
2050604200    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.26                1
2051122300    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.49                1
2051201800    Residential      R4             R-1                   1.02                2
2051302100    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.74                1
2051900600    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.47                1
2052102100    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.55                2
2052102200    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.47                1
2052103000    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.91                2
2052103100    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.45                1
2052107100    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.28                1
2052109600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.22                1
2052200700    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.50                1
2052201500    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.66                1
2052201600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.67                2
2052209300    Residential      R4             R-1-10000             1.32                2
2052207300    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.16                1
2052208600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.32                1
2052300400    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.39                1
2052301400    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.72                1
2052701300    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.98                2
2052803200    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.24                1
2052805600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.20                1
2052807400    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.27                1
2060422800    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.92                2
2060424700    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.15                1
2060801500    Residential       R15           RD-M                  0.39                2
2060801600    Residential       R15           RD-M                  0.29                1
2060801700    Residential       R15           RD-M                  0.24                1
2060910800    Residential       R15           R-2                   0.35                2
                                                                                    B-15

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
  Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                  General                                  Capacity (Above
                                  Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
  APN           Existing Use      Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
  2060920900    Residential       R15           R-2                   0.64               4
  2061200700    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.50               1
  2061201600    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             1.43               4
  2061201800    Vacant            R8            RD-M/R-T              0.34               1
  2061202100    Residential       R8/TR/OS      RD-M/R-T              0.43               1
  2061202300    Residential       R15           RD-M                  0.36               2
  2061202900    Boat Launch       TR/R8/OS      RD-M/R-T              0.30               1
  2061203600    Boat Launch       R8/TR/OS      RD-M/R-T              1.45               6
  2061203900    Residential      R15            RD-M-Q                0.36               1
  2061204000    Residential      R15            RD-M-Q                0.46               3
  2061501200    Residential       R4            R-1-15000             1.73               5
  2061502600    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.38               1
  2061600200    Residential       R4            R-1-15000             0.75               1
  2061600300    Residential       R4            R-1-15000             0.94               1
  2061601000    Residential       R4            R-1-15000             0.75               1
  2061601100    Residential       R4            R-1-15000             0.75               1
  2061601300    Residential       R4            R-1-15000             1.30               3
  2061710300    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.85               3
  2061710800    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.38               1
  2061710900    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.51               1
  2061720100    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.66               2
  2061720200    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.49               1
  2061720300    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.40               1
  2061720400    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.30               1
  2061720500    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             1.30               4
  2061720600    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             2.00               6
  2061720700    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             1.40               4
  2061803200    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             1.15               4
  2061804000    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.35               1
  2061804100    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.42               1
  2061805000    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.46               1
  2061805100    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.46               1
  2061920700    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.80               2
  2061921400    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.76               2
  2061923100    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.28               1
  2061923800    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.30               1
B-16

                                                                           APPENDIX B
Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                General                                  Capacity (Above
                                Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
APN           Existing Use      Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
2061924100    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.30                1
2061924800    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.63                1
2061924900    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.42                1
2062000100    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1-15000             0.30                1
2062000300    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.38                1
2062000400    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.41                1
2070210300    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.53                1
2070210400    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.47                1
2070215400    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.49                1
2070221100    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.26                1
2070226500    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.25                1
2070226700    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.26                1
2070615400    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.34                1
2070634800    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.34                1
2070730600    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.35                1
2070730900    Residential       R8            R-A-10000             0.55                1
2070901900    Residential      R4             R-1-10000             1.00                2
2070902000    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1-10000             0.77                2
2071004800    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1-8000/OS           2.66                9
2071010900    Vacant            R4            R-A-10000             1.45                5
2071204000    Residential      R4             R-1                   0.53                1
2071206800    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18                1
2071207000    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.26                1
2071207100    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.26                1
2071207300    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18                1
2071307500    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.17                1
2071307600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.17                1
2071307700    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.17                1
2071307800    Vacant            R4            R-1-10,000            0.55                1
2071500100    Vacant            R23           R-W                   0.13                2
2071500200    Vacant            R23           R-W                   0.10                2
2071500300    Vacant            R23           R-W                   0.11                2
2071501500    Vacant            R23           R-W                   0.11                2
2071505700    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.16                1
2071507300    Vacant            R23           R-W                   0.11                2
2071800800    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.40                1
                                                                                    B-17

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
  Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                  General                                  Capacity (Above
                                  Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
  APN           Existing Use      Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
  2071800900    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.53               2
  2071801000    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.18               1
  2071801200    Vacant            R4            R-1-15000             0.43               1
  2072607700    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.18               1
  2073852000    Vacant            R4            R-A-10000             0.18               1
  2080401200    Vacant            R4            R-A-10000             0.91               3
  2081840900    Vacant            R8            RD-M-Q                1.69               7
  2090402700    Vacant            R4            R-A-2.5               3.30               2
  2090602300    Residential       R4/OS         L-C                   3.20               9
  2090606100    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1-0.5-Q/OS         16.62              19
  2090606500    Vacant            R4/OS         L-C                   7.00              22
  2090606800    Vacant            R4/OS         L-C                   1.50               5
  2090700300    Vacant            R1.5          R-A-10000             3.84               4
  2090700700    Vacant            R1.5/OS       R-E                  83.00              83
  2090701300    Vacant            OS/R4/R15     R-1-0.5-Q/OS/L-C     32.75             105
  2090701600    Agriculture       R1.5/OS       L-C                  65.91              66
  2100201600    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1                   0.29               1
  2100330900    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.13               1
  2100620900    Vacant            R4            R-2                   0.14               1
  2101150800    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.16               1
  2101150900    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.16               1
  2101151900    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.16               1
  2101203100    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1                   0.30               1
  2120100300    Vacant            R1.5/OS       R-1-30000/OS          5.47               5
  2130501600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   1.50               5
  2132501200    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.68               2
  2140210400    Vacant            R8            R-1-10000             0.11               1
  2140211100    Vacant            R8            R-1-10000             0.11               1
  2140220100    Vacant            R8            R-1-10000             0.10               1
  2140220400    Vacant            R8            R-1-10000             0.11               1
  2140230400    Vacant            R8            R-1-10000             0.13               1
  2140231300    Vacant            R8            R-1-10000             0.12               1
  2144731600    Vacant            R8            RD-M-Q                0.17               1
  2146312300    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.23               1
  2146312400    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.25               1
  2146312500    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.39               1
B-18

                                                                           APPENDIX B
Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                General                                  Capacity (Above
                                Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
APN           Existing Use      Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
2146312600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.44                1
2146312700    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.25                1
2150200700    Vacant            R4            L-C                  16.00               51
2150400900    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1/OS                1.76                6
2150401100    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1/OS                1.13                4
2150501200    Vacant            R4/OS         L-C                   4.58               15
2150502100    Vacant            R4/OS         L-C                   6.60               21
2150502200    Vacant            R4/OS         L-C                   5.00               16
2150504400    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1                   2.50                8
2150504500    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1                   2.45                8
2150504600    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1                   2.00                6
2150504700    Vacant            R4/OS         R-1                   3.50               11
2150510400    Residential       R4/OS         P-C                  12.00               36
2150702300    Vacant            R4            L-C                   0.74                2
2150703800    Vacant            R4            L-C                   8.19               26
2150704300    Vacant            R4            L-C                   1.76                6
2150704400    Vacant            R4            L-C                   0.73                2
2150704500    Vacant            R4            L-C                   2.00                6
2150705100    Vacant            R4            R-1-Q                 0.19                1
2150705200    Vacant            R4            R-1-Q                 0.23                1
2152202400    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.53                2
2152205900    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.66                2
2152311200    Vacant            R4            R-1-10000             0.50                2
2152500900    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.95                3
2152700400    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.30                1
2153004000    Vacant            R8            R-2                   0.18                1
2153100500    Vacant            R8            R-2                   0.25                1
2153203600    Vacant            R8            R-2                   0.24                1
2153504200    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.28                1
2153504800    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.29                1
2153702800    Vacant            R4            R-1                   1.80                6
2153903500    Vacant            R4            R-1/P-C               0.33                1
2154001100    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-15000             0.56                1
2154001500    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-15000             0.63                1
2154400200    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-15000             0.62                1
2154401300    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-15000             0.86                1
                                                                                    B-19

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
  Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                  General                                  Capacity (Above
                                  Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
  APN           Existing Use      Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
  2154401900    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-15000             1.66               2
  2154600200    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-15000             0.63               1
  2154600500    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-15000             0.74               1
  2154600600    Vacant            R1.5          R-1-15000             0.73               1
  2154910900    Vacant            R1.5          P-C                   0.77               1
  2154911200    Vacant            R1.5          P-C                   0.78               1
  2154913600    Vacant            R1.5          P-C                   0.78               1
  2154913900    Residential       R1.5          P-C                   2.42               1
  2154915000    Vacant            R1.5          P-C                   1.06               1
  2154920200    Vacant            R1.5          P-C                   1.40               1
  2154931400    Vacant            R1.5          P-C                   1.94               2
  2154931500    Residential       R1.5          P-C                   1.95               1
  2154931800    Vacant            R1.5          P-C                   0.66               1
  2154942200    Vacant            R1.5          P-C                   0.49               1
  2156002500    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.18               1
  2156002700    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.32               1
  2156100600    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.22               1
  2156101100    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.23               1
  2156102000    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.36               1
  2156102800    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.25               1
  2156102900    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.24               1
  2156110500    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.25               1
  2156112500    Vacant            R4            P-C                   0.44               1
  2159504600    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.20               1
  2161212200    Vacant            R8/OS         P-C                  12.07              48
  2161600500    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.30               1
  2161601000    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.24               1
  2161601800    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.30               1
  2161602300    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.44               1
  2161900100    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.21               1
  2161902000    Vacant            R8            R-2                   0.30               1
  2161902100    Vacant            R8            R-2                   0.29               1
  2161902200    Vacant            R8            R-2                   0.26               1
  2161903900    Vacant            R8            R-2                   0.26               1
  2162306200    Vacant            R4            R-1                   0.27               1
  2162401800    Vacant            R8            R-2                   0.31               1
B-20

                                                                           APPENDIX B
Table B-4: Vacant and Underutilized Sites for Above Moderate Income Households 
                                General                                  Capacity (Above
                                Plan                           Site Size       Moderate
APN              Existing Use   Designation   Zoning District   (Acres)          Income)
2162506300       Vacant         R4            R-1                   0.35                1
2162801200       Vacant         R4            R-1                   0.24                1
2163600900       Vacant         R4            R-1                   0.30                1
2230522000       Vacant         R4            P-C                   0.29                1
2230614700       Vacant         R4            R-1-10,000            0.35                1
2230614800       Vacant         R4            R-1-10,000            0.40                1
2230615000       Vacant         R4            R-1-10,000            0.42                1
2230615100       Vacant         R4            R-1-10,000            0.67                1
2230615200       Vacant         R4            R-1-10,000            0.33                1
2230615300       Vacant         R4            R-1-10,000            0.33                1
2231200100       Vacant         R4            R-1                   0.24                1
2231200200       Vacant         R4            R-1                   0.25                1
2231200300       Vacant         R4            R-1                   0.25                1
2231305000       Vacant         R4            R-1                   0.23                1
2231701800       Residential    R15           RD-M-Q                0.77                8
2231704500       Vacant         R15           RD-M-Q                0.44                5
2232500700       Vacant         R4            P-C                   0.60                2
2232501200       Vacant         R4            P-C                   0.75                2
2232601100       Vacant         R4            P-C                   0.96                3
2237922000       Vacant         R1.5          P-C                   0.33                1
Grand Total                                                                         1,255
Source: City of Carlsbad, 2016.
                                                                                    B-21

CITY OF CARLSBAD GENERAL PLAN
  Table B-5: Vacant and Underutilized Commercial Mixed Use Sites for Moderate Income
  Households 
                                                                                    Capacity
                                                      General           Site Size  (Moderate
  APN                            Existing Use         Plan    Zoning     (Acres)     Income)
  1563010600, 1563011000,        Plaza Camino Real                             57
  1563011100, 1563021400,                                                (parking
  1563022400                                          R       C-2        lot only)       214
  1563011600                     North County Plaza   OS/R    C-2-Q/OS         12         45
  2060501600, 2060501700,        Von’s Center
  2060501800, 2060502000         (Tamarack)           L       C-L                5        19
  2071012400, 2071012500         Country Store        GC      C-2/C-2-Q          5        19
  2090901100                     Vacant (Sunny Creek) L       C-L                8        30
                                 The Beacon at La
                                 Costa (former Von’s
  2161241600, 2161241700         Center)              GC/OS   C-2/OS             8        30
  Grand Total                                                                            357
 Source: City of Carlsbad, 2016.
B-22

