Town of Portola Valley General Plan
   Land Use Element
     Last amended March 11, 2015
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
   General Objectives ...................................................................................................................... 1
   General Principles ....................................................................................................................... 2
Residential Areas ............................................................................................................................ 4
   Objectives ................................................................................................................................... 4
   Principles ..................................................................................................................................... 5
   Standards. ................................................................................................................................... 7
   Description .................................................................................................................................. 9
   Other Residential Areas ............................................................................................................ 14
Parks, Recreation Areas and Open Spaces ................................................................................... 15
   Objectives ................................................................................................................................. 15
   Description ................................................................................................................................ 15
Commercial and Research – Administrative................................................................................ 17
   Objectives ................................................................................................................................. 17
   Principles ................................................................................................................................... 17
   Standards .................................................................................................................................. 18
   Description ................................................................................................................................ 18
Institutions .................................................................................................................................... 20
   Objectives ................................................................................................................................. 20
   Principles ................................................................................................................................... 21
   Standards .................................................................................................................................. 21
   Description ................................................................................................................................ 22
Portola Road Corridor ...................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
   Objectives .................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
   Principles ...................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
   Description ................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
Public Facilities and Services......................................................................................................... 24
   Objectives ................................................................................................................................. 24
   Principles ................................................................................................................................... 25
   Description ................................................................................................................................ 26

                                         Land Use Element
Introduction
2100      The land use element sets forth guidelines for land occupancy and describes the
          location and distribution aspects of land uses. Land use interrelationships and land
          use circulation relationships are also defined.
2101      Land use proposals in the plan include those for residential areas, those for
          community facilities and services, and those for region-serving facilities. For the
          purposes of this plan, all land uses are discussed separately in the following
          sections: residential areas; parks, recreation areas and open spaces; commercial
          and research - administrative areas; institutions; and public facilities and services.
          In these sections, objectives, principles, and standards are given, followed by a
          description of the plan proposals.
General Objectives
2102      1.     To provide for residential uses and related facilities and services that will
                 preserve and enhance the quality of living enjoyed by local residents.
          2.     To maintain the natural character of the planning area and to provide for
                 limited park, recreation and open space uses in appropriate scenic areas
                 where the uses will be compatible with the maintenance of the residential
                 nature and quality of the planning area.
          3.     To minimize the need for non-local traffic to penetrate the planning area.
          4.     To minimize consumption of energy from non-renewable sources and to
                 encourage the use of renewable energy sources while preserving the scenic
                 and aesthetic qualities of the area.
                                           Land Use
                                               1
          5.    To encourage and, where appropriate, require the conservation of water in
                new and existing developments and buildings.
          6.    To ensure that development in areas subject to geologic, fire and flooding
                hazards is controlled so that people and structures are not exposed to
                unacceptable levels of risk.
General Principles
2103      1.    The planning area should have the low intensity of development which is
                appropriate to its location on the fringe of the urban area of the Peninsula
                and should provide a transition between urban densities of adjoining
                communities and non-intensive land uses west of the skyline.
          2.    Uses of land should include homes, open spaces, agricultural pursuits and
                such other private, office and commercial uses as are required to serve the
                frequent needs of local residents.
          3.    In addition to uses serving primarily local residents, public, private and
                limited commercial recreational facilities serving a broader area would be
                appropriate in locations on the periphery of the planning area but so located
                as not to encourage traffic through the town.
          4.    Those public and private facilities such as schools, parks, churches, public
                buildings, stores and offices which serve all or a major portion of the
                planning area should be grouped in readily accessible centers to the greatest
                extent permitted by site and location requirements of the individual
                facilities.
          5.    In any development within the planning area, full consideration should be
                given to the geologic conditions so that development on unstable land can
                be avoided or minimized.
          5.1.  In areas subject to flooding, including those identified in the safety element,
                development shall be precluded or designed to minimize risk.
          6.    In order to maintain the rural atmosphere of Portola Valley, all buildings
                should be subordinate to their natural surroundings in size, scale and siting.
                Monumental buildings should be avoided.
          7.    Non-residential buildings should generally be of small or moderate size and,
                where groups of buildings are used, connected by plazas, terraces, porches,
                arcades, canopies or roofs to provide a pleasant environment and safety and
                shelter to pedestrians.
                                          Land Use
                                               2
8.   In order to help minimize the adverse effects of higher intensity uses upon
     lower intensity uses, landscaping areas of primarily native plants appropriate
     to the site should be provided. Such buffers should be of a size and design
     that will provide an effective visual buffer.
9.   In all developments in the planning area, full consideration should be given
     to fire protection needs, including those identified in the safety element, and
     adequate measures should be taken to ensure that these needs are met.
9.1. Development should be limited in areas when fire risk cannot be reduced to
     an acceptable level and adequate emergency access cannot be provided.
     Also, recognizing fire protection measures could have adverse effects on
     native vegetation, development should be configured to minimize damage
     as well as fire hazard.
10.  The rate of development and location of projects should not exceed the
     capacity of the town, special districts and utility companies to provide all
     needed services and facilities in an orderly and economic manner.
11.  Conservation of energy from non-renewable sources should be considered in
     the design, improvement, reconstruction and remodeling of buildings.
12.  The use of passive and active solar energy should be encouraged in the
     siting, design and construction of buildings.
13.  Where feasible, development proposals should incorporate unified planning
     for the largest land area practically possible in order to preserve open space,
     conserve unique natural features of the area, allow logical extensions of the
     trail and paths system, maximize the opportunities for controlling the extent
     and impacts of development and otherwise help ensure the application of
     good land use planning principles.
14.  Grading shall normally be the minimum necessary to accommodate
     development; however, in those instances where increased grading can
     provide for greater compatibility of development with the natural setting
     and not cause significant adverse effects on the environment, such grading
     shall be preferred.
15.  For all new developments within the planning area, full consideration shall
     be given to the fiscal ability of the town and other affected local
     governmental agencies to provide essential services. When fiscal impact will
     exceed tax revenue to be generated, provisions may be made to require off-
     setting fiscal impact fees.
                                Land Use
                                     3
           16. In the planning, design, construction and operation of development within
               the planning area, water conservation should be a high priority.
           17. In all new developments, the undergrounding of utilities should be
               considered a high priority.
Residential Areas
Objectives
2104       1.  To assure that all building sites and residences are developed in a manner
               minimizing disturbance to natural terrain and vegetation and maximizing
               preservation of natural beauty and open space.
           2.  To organize residential areas in a manner providing maximum convenience
               in the daily use of local facilities such as parks, recreation area, commercial
               facilities and access to major roads, consistent with the attainment of other
               objectives stated within the general plan.
           3.  To provide for the grouping or clustering of residential buildings where this
               will maximize the opportunity to preserve natural beauty, habitat and open
               space without generally increasing the intensity of development otherwise
               possible.
           4.  To maintain the present character of established residential areas.
           5.  To control the occupancy of parcels so as to:
               a.     Prevent overcrowding of dwellings.
               b.     Insure that occupancy of land and dwellings will be in balance with
                      service facilities such as on-site parking, traffic capacity of access
                      streets and capacity of utilities such as water and sewage disposal.
               c.     Insure against adverse impact on neighboring residences.
               d.     Fix responsibility for use, occupancy and conduct on the premises in
                      relation to town standards and requirements. That is, on each parcel
                      and in each main dwelling, someone must be “in charge” as owners or
                      tenant of the owner.
                                            Land Use
                                                4

Principles
2105       1.   Lands indicated for residential use on the comprehensive plan diagram
                should be used primarily for residential living, a use of land characterized by
                a single household occupying a main detached dwelling as the principal use
                of a parcel, together with uses and structures customarily accessory to a
                main dwelling in a rural residential community.
           2.   In addition to other accessory uses and structures, accessory living quarters
                within the main dwelling or in a separate structure should be deemed an
                appropriate accessory use on parcels large enough and under conditions
                adequate to insure the objectives cited in Sec. 2104.5 are met. Specific
                limits on accessory living quarters should be included in the zoning
                ordinances.
           2.1. Agricultural uses are encouraged as interim or long-term uses in residentially
                designated areas provided they are compatible with nearby nonagricultural
                uses and do not result in the significant degradation of the natural
                environment.
           3.   Population densities within the planning area should be guided by
                considerations of topography, geology, vegetative cover, access to
                transportation and services, fire hazards, emergency access, impact on pre-
                existing residential development and other factors such as:
                a.    The highest densities should be located on relatively level land close to
                      local shopping and service areas, other local facilities and
                      transportation facilities. Densities should decrease as the distance
                      from these facilities increases.
                b.    Population density should decrease as steepness of terrain increases.
                c.    The lowest densities and largest lots should be located on the steepest
                      hillsides on which the town allows development and in mountainous
                      areas where it is necessary to limit storm runoff, prevent erosion,
                      preserve existing vegetation, protect watersheds, avoid potentially
                      unstable ground and maintain the scenic quality of the terrain.
           4.   Steep slopes, potentially unstable ground, canyons and ravines should be
                left undisturbed as residential open space preserves.
           4.1  When residences are grouped or clustered in areas where intensity
                standards require one acre or more per dwelling unit:
                                          Land Use
                                               5
   a.     Each residence should have substantial direct frontage on a common
          open space of sufficient size to convey a feeling or being on the edge of
          a large and significant open space.
   b.     Clusters should generally consist of a small number of detached
          residences, and each cluster should be well-separated from adjacent
          clusters rather than interconnected in a linear form.
5. On tree covered buildable slopes, development should be designed to
   preserve groves of trees as well as individual trees and native understory to
   the maximum extent possible.
6. (Not used.)
7. To the extent feasible, all structures (including residences) should
   complement and blend in with the natural setting of the planning area; and
   to this end, the following principles should be adhered to:
   a.     Structures may be located in existing tree covered areas to the extent
          possible and still be consistent with slope, geologic and related
          conditions and the need to preserve locally unique or especially
          beautiful wooded areas.
   b.     Largely bare slopes and sparsely wooded ridges visible from large
          portions of the town or planning area should be kept free of structures
          to the maximum extent possible.
   c.     If development does take place on highly visible barren slopes or
          ridges, it must be unobtrusive and of a scale and design to maintain the
          character of the natural setting, and with required planting of native
          trees and plants where appropriate.
8. In all residential areas of the town, or its spheres of influence, particular
   attention must be given to the effects of approaching the maximum amount
   of development permitted on individual parcels. The cumulative effect of
   buildout under appropriate ordinances and policies should be examined and
   steps taken to ensure that its effect will not be injurious to the unique and
   desirable characteristics of each area. Overall development levels as
   measured by floor area ratios and impervious surfaces should be limited so
   as to preserve the rural setting.
9. To the extent feasible, the design of subdivisions should retain a
   representative composition of habitats on the site and their
   interrelationships.
                               Land Use
                                   6
          10.   Residential development should not occur in areas subject to flooding as
                shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued under the National Flood
                Insurance Program by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
                Development.
Standards.
2106      Residential areas are shown in four land use intensity categories:
          1.    Low-medium—Existing developed areas where net residential land area per
                housing unit is less than 1 acre.
          2.    Low—Existing developed areas where net residential land area per housing
                unit averages from 1 to 2 acres. These areas are generally geologically
                stable, in only moderately steep terrain, and have good accessibility.
          3.    Conservation-Residential—Includes:
                a.     Existing developed areas where net residential land area per housing
                       unit averages from 2 to 4 acres.
                b.     Relatively accessible undeveloped lands with few to considerable
                       potential geologic instabilities. To be developed with a slope-intensity
                       standard whereby the net residential land area per housing unit
                       increases from 2 acres on level to 9 acres on slopes of 50 percent or
                       greater.
          4.    Open Residential—Relatively inaccessible sparsely developed and
                undeveloped areas generally with extreme geologic instabilities and steep
                slopes. Fire hazards are often high and erosion potential great. These areas
                are often also of ecologic, scenic or historic importance. To be developed
                with a slope-intensity standard whereby the net residential land area per
                housing unit increases from 3 acres on level land to 18 acres on slopes of 50
                percent or greater.
2106a     Portions of some of these residential areas are classified as “residential open space
          preserves.” These preserves possess one or more of the following characteristics:
          slopes, canyons and ravines generally in excess of 30% in slope, unstable lands,
          lands of significant scenic value to the town, historic resources, riparian
          environments, and lands inaccessible without traversing potentially unstable lands.
          To the maximum extent possible, these preserves should be kept free of structures
          and left in a natural condition with respect to terrain and vegetation. New
          residential subdivisions should provide for the clustering of residences outside of
          residential open space preserves so that these areas are left undisturbed for visual
          enjoyment and limited local use. However, on lands also shown as open
                                           Land Use
                                                7

      residential, residences might be appropriate, if clustering is not possible, if
      acceptable development standards for access, utilities and geologic stability can be
      met, and if scenic qualities and historic features are preserved. Low intensity
      recreation uses would be appropriate in residential open space preserves, and
      drainage and erosion control measures should be undertaken where necessary.
2106b The slope-intensity standards for the conservation residential and open residential
      categories recognize in part the overall problems of the development in areas with
      potential geologic instabilities. However, the intensity of development in individual
      developments should be further reduced as necessary to reflect specific geologic
      conditions encountered, to minimize significant visual impacts, to preserve scenic
      qualities and historic features, and to avoid high fire hazards and inadequate
      emergency access.
2106c Residential development and related improvements should be permitted only
      where geologic stability meets the standards of the town for the specific uses.
2106d Land use intensities may be increased beyond those specified in this section in
      accordance with provisions for the inclusionary lot program specified in Section
      2478 of the housing element.
2106e Population densities are a function of the number of housing units per acre and the
      number of persons per housing unit. Based on the 1990 U.S. Census, the average
      persons per household unit in the town was approximately 2.6. Applying this
      average to the land use intensity categories (typical land area per dwelling or
      housing unit) of the general plan, and assuming one household per housing unit,
      the following typical anticipated population densities are derived(Persons/Acre):
      Residential Category                      Acres/HU              Persons/Acre
      Low-medium                                less than 1               2.6 plus
      Low                                       1-2                       2.6 - 1.3
      Conservation-Residential                  2-4                       1.3 - 0.65
      Open Residential                          more than 4           less than 0.65
      Where geologic conditions limit development on properties, these densities will be
      less.
      Second units, where permitted, may increase densities; however, based on Section
      2487, it would appear the increase would not exceed 15% - 30%.
      Densities in multiple family affordable housing, as provided for in Section 2482,
      may be greater than the densities in the above table as a result of there being
                                        Land Use
                                           8
          more housing units. Such densities, however, shall not exceed 3 times the
          densities stipulated in the above table.
Description
2107      Residential areas of low intensities are the predominant land use proposed in this
          general plan. Four categories of residential land use intensities are indicated. The
          low-medium and low intensities are restricted to areas of existing development.
          The conservation residential intensity is assigned to less steep land close to
          community and circulation facilities and existing development. The open
          residential intensity is applied to most undeveloped lands which have generally
          rugged topography, scenic qualities or historic features, are further from
          community facilities and major circulation routes, and have extreme geologic
          instabilities. These several residential intensities are similar to and compatible with
          intensities existing and proposed for most areas adjacent to the planning area.
2107a     In addition to the four residential land use intensities described in Section 2107
          above, possible residential land uses are indicated in Section 6100, Nathhorst
          Triangle Area Plan, and Section 6300, Town Center Area Plan. These sections
          should be consulted to determine the recommended residential land use
          intensities and population densities for these areas.
2108      Land use intensity standards provide a guide for the intensity of residential
          development within which considerable flexibility remains as to design solutions.
          They indicate the maximum number of housing units to be permitted on a given
          piece of land but do not prescribe type of design in relation to a minimum lot
          standard. Specific conditions may require lower intensities.
2109      Superimposed upon the residential land use indicated on the comprehensive plan
          diagram is a tree symbol representing residential open space preserve. The
          residential open space preserve should be primarily a permanent open space, but
          should in addition accommodate a variety of recreational uses well suited to the
          natural terrain and which preserve the continuity of native vegetation. Such uses
          include riding and hiking trails, informal play areas, scenic walks, picnic areas, and
          residences subject to suitable conditions (see foregoing standards). These areas
          can be either privately controlled by the local property owners or held by a public
          agency.
2110      The delineation of the residential open space preserve usually is intended to be
          general in nature. As specific areas develop, it will be necessary to apply with care
          the objectives, principals and standards set forth in this plan in the preparation of
          detailed designs.
                                            Land Use
                                                9
2111 Based on an evaluation of the slope and geologic constraints for each residential
     area, estimated holding capacities have been prepared and are included in
     Appendix 1 of this land use element. The holding capacity figures represent the
     maximum number of housing units estimated to be feasible under the criteria
     included in this plan.
2112 Each residential area is generally described below and shown on the following
     residential areas map.
2113 Residential Area No. 1. This area comprises the Brookside Park and Brookside
     Orchard subdivisions. The low-medium intensity recognizes the long-established
     character of the area. The area is almost fully developed with homes. Attention
     should be continually given to conserving and enhancing this residential area.
2114 Residential Area No. 2. This area comprises the Woodside Highlands subdivision.
     The low-medium intensity recognizes the character of this old subdivision.
     Originally an area of summer homes, this area has been converted to year-around
     living, is served by narrow roads and individual sewage disposal systems, and
     includes some areas of unstable ground. Some few lots are without homes.
     Continuing attention should be given to improving the quality and amenities of this
     area while protecting its individual character.
2115 Residential Area No. 3. This area comprises the Portola Redwoods subdivision.
     The low-medium intensity is consistent with the long-established nature of this
     subdivision. Virtually all lots are developed with homes. The character of this
     small residential area should be preserved and continual attention should be given
     to maintaining appropriate land use relationships between this area and
     surrounding and nearby non-residential uses.
2116 Residential Area No. 4. This area, in the town’s sphere of influence, comprises the
     Ladera subdivision. The low-medium intensity recognizes the established character
     of this area. The area contains but a very few vacant lots. The existing character of
     Ladera should be maintained and attention should be continually given to assuring
     compatibility of uses on the Webb Ranch with the residential character of Ladera.
2117 Residential Area No. 5. This area, in the town’s sphere of influence, consists of the
     Los Trancos Woods subdivision. The low-medium intensity is consistent with the
     character of the long-established residential area. Originally an area of summer
     homes, it is now used for year-around living, is served by narrow roads and
     individual sewage disposal systems, and is affected by some areas of geologic
     instability. Some lots are still vacant. Efforts should be made to improve the
     quality and amenities of the area while preserving its character.
                                       Land Use
                                          10

2118  Residential Area No. 6. This area comprises the Willowbrook subdivision, with
      parcel sizes of 1 acre or more, and several larger parcels along the eastern side of
      the area. The area is shown in the low intensity category and is virtually entirely
      developed with homes. The character of this area should be preserved and efforts
      should be made to reduce through traffic.
2119  Residential Area No. 7. This area is composed primarily of the Arrowhead
      Meadows, Alpine Hills, Hillbrook, Stonegate, Stonegate Meadows, Corte Madera
      Acres, Palmer Estates, Portola Terrace, Portola Heights, and Pine Ridge
      subdivisions. All of these subdivisions have minimum parcel sizes of 1 acre or
      more. In addition, there are unsubdivided areas of larger parcels, namely in the
      vicinity of Georgia Lane. The entire area is shown in the low intensity category.
2120  As the unsubdivided areas are developed, attention should be given to ensuring
      careful integration into the largely already developed area so as to ensure
      compatibility. Particular attention will need to be given to land use relationships in
      the vicinity of the non-residential uses along Portola and Alpine Roads.
2121  Residential Area No. 8. This area is composed of the Westridge and Oak Hills
      subdivisions plus a steep undivided area between Westridge and Alpine Hills
      subdivision. The area is shown in the conservation residential intensity. Few lots
      are vacant in the subdivisions. The character and quality of the area should be
      conserved as the area plays an important part in maintaining the open space
      character of the town.
2122  Residential Area No. 9. The development pattern for a large portion of this area
      has been set by the Portola Valley Ranch subdivision where there are slightly in
      excess of two acres per housing unit. Most of the balance of the area is in large
      ownerships. The area is shown in the conservation residential intensity category.
2123  Most of the area has good access to local town roads, most utilities, schools, and
      shopping. Parts of the area are quite stable geologically, while other parts are
      highly unstable, and slopes range from moderate to steep. The plan diagram
      indicates large areas in the residential open space preserve category.
2123a In the area along Alpine Road, any development should be kept well back from the
      road so as not to encroach on the Alpine Road Corridor, Portola Road Corridor, and
      Nathhorst Triangle Area.
2124  Residential Area No. 10. This area, in the town’s sphere of influence, comprises
      the Vista Verde subdivision. The area is shown in the conservation residential
      intensity category. There are some vacant lots in the subdivision. Geologic
      instabilities in the area warrant careful continuing evaluation as additional homes
      are built.
                                       Land Use
                                           11

2125 Residential Area No. 11. This area consists of the lower portion of the western
     hillsides and is unsubdivided except for the old Coombsville subdivision, which
     occupies a small part of the area. The area is shown in the conservation residential
     intensity category. It is characterized by gentle to steep slopes, geologically stable
     to unstable lands and grass covered slopes to tree covered canyons. The major
     development potential on the western slopes is confined to this area, which is less
     steep, enjoys somewhat more stable lands than the upper portion of the western
     hillsides, and has greater accessibility to roads, utilities, schools, and shopping. A
     major portion of this area is owned by the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space
     District.
2126 Most of the undeveloped portion of this area is in a few large holdings. This
     provides an opportunity for imaginative designs making full use of the range of
                                      Land Use
                                          12
Land Use
   13
          natural features present. It should be possible and practical to preserve a large
          amount of the area in a natural state. In particular, it is desirable that the natural
          character of the open ridge leading up to the Windy Hill Open Space Preserve and
          the orchards and meadow adjacent to Portola Road and town center be retained.
2127      Residential Area No. 12. This area consists primarily of the upper portion of the
          western hillsides. It is similar in character to residential area No. 11; however, it is
          more removed from local town roads, utilities, schools and shopping, has steeper
          slopes, has a significantly colder, more foggy, and more windy climate and is
          somewhat less geologically stable. The most feasible access appears to be from
          Skyline Boulevard, and fire protection is minimal. Its reduced density is compatible
          with the adjoining agricultural, recreational, and forest resource region west of
          Skyline Boulevard. This area is shown in the open residential intensity category.
2128      It is envisioned that development in this area will be minimal. The foregoing
          factors make the area unsuitable for more than very sparse development. Large
          areas are shown in the residential open space preserve category. Any
          development in this area should have adequate access by roads which ensure
          prompt access to and from public facilities and commercial areas, and for fire,
          police and other emergency services.
2129      The barren ridge leading up to Windy Hill from the east is a visually dominant
          feature of Portola Valley and highly noticeable from much of the Midpeninsula
          area. It should remain in its natural state to the maximum extent possible.
          Development which might go on these lands should preferably be located
          elsewhere on the same parcel of land. If any development takes place in this area,
          extreme care should be taken to ensure absolute minimum disruption of existing
          visual characteristics. A major portion of this ridge is owned by the Midpeninsula
          Regional Open Space District.
2129a     A small portion of the area lies east of Alpine Road next to Los Trancos Woods and
          Vista Verde. This area is included because it is similar to the balance of the area in
          terms of remoteness and geologic instability, and also because it contains steep
          slopes, scenic qualities and the historic Coal Mine Ridge Trail.
Other Residential Areas
2130      In addition to the areas described above, there are several other residential areas
          included within the planning area. These areas, although in other jurisdictions, are
          of concern to the planning area because of common problems relating to drainage,
          circulation, public facilities and visual amenities.
2131      The portion of the Town of Woodside northeast of Portola Road and known as
          Hidden Valley Farm and Family Farm is shown on the plan diagram because of its
                                             Land Use
                                                14
           close physical relationships to Portola Valley. This area is shown as conservation
           residential and is consistent with the Town of Woodside’s General Plan. There is a
           need to maintain compatible land use relationships between Hidden Valley Farm
           and the non-residential uses fronting on Portola Road within the Town of Portola
           Valley.
2132       The portion of the Town of Woodside along the Portola Valley town boundary
           between Portola Road and Skyline Boulevard is included because of the need to
           maintain compatible land uses on either side of the town boundary. The area in
           Woodside is shown as conservation residential and is consistent with the Woodside
           General Plan.
2133       Two areas of low-medium intensity are shown on the comprehensive plan diagram
           in the northern portion of the planning area: the Stanford Hills subdivision and the
           Stanford Weekend Acres area. The inclusion of these areas at these intensities
           indicates concurrence with plans of Menlo Park and San Mateo County. Continued
           attention to traffic control measures along Alpine Road in the vicinity of Stanford
           Weekend Acres appears warranted in order to help assure traffic safety.
Parks, Recreation Areas and Open Spaces
Objectives
2134       1.     To retain areas of natural terrain and vegetation sufficient to preserve the
                  overall natural open character and quality of the area, and to buffer the
                  town from its neighbors and its constituent neighborhoods from each other
                  while permitting reasonable development of private lands.
           2.     To provide for appropriate park and recreation areas for community and
                  neighborhood use.
           3.     To encourage public parks, recreation areas and open spaces serving other
                  than primarily local residents only in locations where they will not be a
                  disruptive influence on local residents and where they will preserve unique
                  natural resources for use by residents of the larger region.
Description
2135       Extensive parks, recreation areas and open spaces are proposed in the plan. Each
           proposal is based upon the natural resources of the planning area and related to
           the needs of local residents, Midpeninsula residents, or other Bay Area residents.
           These proposals and the elements in which they are described are indicated in
           Table 1: Guide to Park, Recreation, and Open Space Proposals in the General Plan.
                                            Land Use
                                               15

2136  Each park or recreation area proposed is so located and served by circulation
      facilities that it can be reached and used by the intended users without interfering
      with the enjoyment of nearby areas. Thus, facilities serving other than primarily
      local residents should be located on the edges of the planning area accessible from
      major thoroughfares.
2136a The comprehensive plan diagram proposes certain parks, recreation areas and
      open space uses on privately owned land. It is anticipated that some of these
      proposals will be implemented through appropriate dedications pursuant to
      planning regulations when private development takes place. In some instances,
      rights in land may be purchased by the town or other appropriate agency. In other
      instances, the private use of the land for a recreation or open space use constitutes
      conformity with the plan. Nonetheless, there may be instances when a property
      owner wishes to put land to a use not shown on the comprehensive plan diagram
      and the town or some other public agency is not able to obtain public rights
      through regulation and does not negotiate a purchase with the owner. In such
      instances and only for lands designated on the comprehensive plan diagram as
      neighborhood preserve, community preserve, scenic corridor and greenway, or
      labeled “Other Community,” the general plan hereby permits:
      1.      private use of a character and intensity no greater than the public use
              indicated on the comprehensive plan diagram, or
      2.      private use at the lowest residential intensity suitable for the property and
              designed to maximize the open space character of the land.
      In implementing the foregoing policy with respect to any proposal by a property
      owner, the approving authority of the town shall exercise judgment in approving a
      use to ensure compatibility with surrounding and nearby uses, circulation facilities
      and the applicable objectives of this general plan. Any use permitted must, of
      course, conform to the zoning for the property.
                                        Land Use
                                           16

Table 1. Guide to Park, Recreation, and Open Space Proposals in the General Plan
     Park, Recreation or Open Space           Park and        Open         Trail &     Scenic Roads    Land Use
                                             Recreation       Space         Path      and Highways      Element
                                              Element       Element       Element        Element
Neighborhood Preserve                             X
Neighborhood Park                                 X
Community Preserve                                X
Community Park                                    X
Other Community Parks or Preserves                X
Regional Park or Private Regional Facility        X
Open Space Preserve                                              X
Scenic Corridor                                   X
Greenway                                          X
Open Space Limited Development                                   X
Agriculture                                                      X
 Secondarily Park, Recreation, or Open
                  Space*
Residential Open Space Preserves                                                                           X
Trails and Paths                                                              X
Scenic Roads and Highways                                                                    X
* These land use categories serve primarily for residential or circulation purposes, but have secondary uses as
parks, recreation areas, or open spaces.
Commercial and Research – Administrative
Objectives
2137           1.     To provide goods and services to satisfy the most frequently recurring needs
                      of local residents.
               2.     To limit other commercial development to the maximum extent possible
                      consistent with other objectives of the plan.
               3.     To group related facilities attractively for convenient use and to prevent
                      continuous commercial development along arterials which would detract
                      from the scenic character of the area.
               4.     To control commercial development in a manner that will minimize its
                      impact on neighboring residential areas.
Principles
2138           1.     Convenience goods and services and limited shopping goods should be
                      available in local shopping centers in sufficient quantity and variety to meet
                      the most frequently recurring needs of the residents of the Town of Portola
                      Valley and its spheres of influence.
                                                     Land Use
                                                         17

          2.    The development of new commercial and office floor area should be
                controlled to avoid premature availability and should only be permitted
                when it is demonstrated that the proposed additional space and uses are
                needed, within the objectives of this plan, to serve the existing population or
                the population anticipated over a reasonable time period.
          3.    Local shopping and service centers should be centrally located with respect
                to the population served, have direct access from major streets and have
                sufficient parking and service areas.
          4.    Individual sites should be landscaped attractively with native plants so as to
                integrate the entire development visually with its neighbors and the overall
                natural qualities of the planning area. Protecting residential areas from
                noise, unsightliness, odor and other nuisances should be accomplished
                through adequate landscape buffers that also enhance pedestrian access
                and through other appropriate design features.
          5.    Night lighting visible from the exterior of buildings should be strictly limited
                to that necessary for security, safety and identification. All night lighting,
                including signs, should be low intensity and shielded from view from
                residential areas.
          6.    All commercial uses should be compatible with adjacent development in
                terms of scale, general visual character and siting. (For principles relating to
                design objectives, building size and scale, conservation of natural beauty,
                and landscaping, see “General Principles” of the land use element and
                “Principles” of the open space element and “Principles” of the Nathhorst
                Triangle Area Plan.)
Standards
2139      1.    In local shopping and service areas, a small percentage of the total net site
                area (exclusive of street and road rights-of-way) should be occupied by
                buildings. A substantial percentage of the site area should be left as natural
                and/or developed as landscaped open space using native plants.
          2.    Within local shopping and service areas, the ratio of total floor area to net
                site area for commercial uses shall not exceed 0.18 and for office uses shall
                not exceed 0.13.
Description
2140      The major shopping, service and employment opportunities in nearby areas are
          recognized, and hence a duplication is not proposed within the planning area.
          Thus, while frequently needed local shopping and service facilities are proposed
                                           Land Use
                                              18

     within the area, activity centers outside the planning area such as the Stanford-
     Palo Alto shopping area are relied upon for more specialized goods and services.
2141 Four local shopping and service centers are indicated on the plan diagram. These
     centers are all existing at the present time and have sufficient area to meet the
     needs of local residents when the planning area is fully developed. The four
     centers are Ladera Country Shopper, Nathhorst Triangle Area, Town Center, and
     Sharon Heights Shopping Center.
2142 The two centers within the town, the Nathhorst Triangle Area and Town Center,
     should strictly adhere to the objective that these centers should provide only those
     goods and services necessary to satisfy the most frequently recurring needs of
     residents of the town and its spheres of influence. Thus, these centers are seen as
     including but not being limited to: hardware stores, food service stores, drug
     stores, beauty parlors and similar convenience goods, and very limited shopping
     goods. Limited office uses, such as doctors, banks and real estate offices serving
     the same population are also appropriate. Uses which would attract a majority of
     patronage from outside the service area should more appropriately be located in
     larger and more centrally located commercial and office centers elsewhere on the
     Midpeninsula or the Bay Area. These centers are related by the Portola Road
     corridor, which is described in the Corridor Plan starting with section 6400 of this
     General Plan.
2143 It is recognized that the Sharon Heights Shopping Center and the Ladera Country
     Shopper and adjoining professional center do not completely meet the criteria for
     commercial uses described above. These centers, outside the town and developed
     under other criteria, do however, provide largely convenience goods and services
     with limited shopping goods. The Ladera professional center also provides general
     office space not geared to serving local residents. Both of these centers are well-
     served by circulation and are accepted by this plan as appropriate for the locations
     involved. The undeveloped hillside behind the Ladera Country Shopper should be
     left as open space to balance the intensive development of the remainder of the
     site and provide a buffer between the shopping center and nearby residences.
2144 Existing research-administrative areas are recognized. The major use is the
     Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC). This facility will have a continuing major
     impact on the planning area. Employment and access traffic to SLAC should be
     confined to Sand Hill Road. Attention should be given to assuring maximum
     compatibility of this installation with the surrounding area. Those aspects of the
     development continuing to require special attention include: power transmission
     to the accelerator, control of noise and exterior lighting, traffic, landscaping and
     building design. It is likely that continuing attention to “temporary” installations
     will also be required. An existing research building complex on Arastradero Road is
     also recognized. The existing tree nursery, because of its largely impervious gravel
                                        Land Use
                                           19

           surface, contributes considerable runoff to the creek. This use and similar uses
           should provide a buffer along the creek to minimize runoff, erosion and
           disturbance of habitats. In addition, present controls over these areas should be
           maintained or strengthened.
2145       Additional areas are shown for research-administrative use north of the Junipero
           Serra Freeway as proposed on the Menlo Park General Plan. Uses in these areas
           should be of very low intensity in order to be compatible with uses in nearby
           residential areas. Sites used for research-administrative purposes should be
           primarily open, buildings should be low and perhaps in small clusters, and the site
           development and landscaping should be designed to blend the buildings into the
           natural landscape.
2145a      One area for research-administrative use is shown along Arastradero Road in Palo
           Alto. This use is inconsistent with Portola Valley’s position as to appropriate uses
           in this area, but is recognized because of the substantial investment involved and
           the limited extent of the uses. No additional development of this intensity is
           shown on the comprehensive plan diagram for this area because of the adverse
           impact such uses have on the surrounding area. In particular, the road system is
           not adequate to accommodate the heavy traffic characteristic of such uses, and in
           addition, such uses tend to attract additional high intensity uses which are not
           compatible with the low intensity residential character of Portola Valley.
2145b      Near the area for research-administrative use along Arastradero Road is a
           headquarters for a tree maintenance service which serves the Midpeninsula. This
           use is relatively low intensity and is not shown separately on the comprehensive
           plan diagram. The town recommends that this use be kept within limits which are
           compatible with the low intensity character of the surrounding area.
2145c      The “Lee” quarry on Los Trancos Road in Palo Alto is within the town planning area.
           The quarry scar is visible from Portola Valley, but efforts have been made and
           should continue to be made to reduce the negative impacts of the quarry,
           including long-range restoration of the quarry to a more natural appearance.
Institutions
Objectives
2146       1.      To provide for those institutions that are for the use of local residents and in
                   harmony with the residential character of the Valley.
           2.      To ensure that existing institutions will be properly served by trafficways and
                   are properly related to adjacent land uses.
                                             Land Use
                                                 20

           3. To provide an appropriate area for the grouping of major community-serving
              institutional facilities.
Principles
2147       1. All institutional uses should be served directly by major collector roads or
              roads with higher capacities.
           2. All institutional uses should be compatible with adjacent development in
              the planning area in terms of scale, general visual character and siting.
           3. Space should be provided for all local institutional uses that may be
              necessary such as elementary and intermediate schools, churches, libraries
              and local governmental buildings.
           4. Major community facilities should be located where convenient to the entire
              planning area.
           5. Schools should make recreation areas and facilities available for use during
              non-school hours.
           6. Schools should be located so as to minimize the time necessary to be spent
              in travel to and from school.
           7. Schools should be located to provide safe and convenient access giving
              particular attention to the requirements of young children.
           8. (For principles relating to building size and scale, and landscaping, see
              “General Principles” of the land use element.)
           9. If an institutional land use ceases to exist, the town shall consider an
              appropriate alternate institutional use or development for other appropriate
              uses giving due consideration to the relationship to adjacent and nearby
              land uses.
Standards
2148       1. Residential type institutional facilities should be limited to a density of
              population no greater than that proposed for adjoining residential areas in
              the general plan. Section 2106.e. provides guidance with respect to
              appropriate ranges for building intensities and population densities.
           2. Public Schools:
                                         Land Use
                                            21

                    Grades               Maximum Desirable Travel Time
                      K-5                           20 minutes
                      K-6                           20 minutes
                      6-8                           30 minutes
                  High School                       40 minutes
Description
2149      Institutions needed to serve all or parts of the planning area are proposed and are
          located so as to be convenient to their service areas. Institutional uses proposed
          include schools, churches and fire stations.
2150      Schools. With regard to public schools, the plan indicates one elementary school
          and one intermediate school in the planning area.
2151      The Portola Valley Elementary School District serves the Town of Portola Valley
          plus some areas beyond the town boundary. The Ormondale elementary school
          serves the entire Town of Portola Valley as does the Corte Madera intermediate
          school. Thus, most children in the town have to travel considerable distances to
          school. As the population of the town grows, there may be a need for additional
          school facilities. The changing age composition of the population, however, makes
          it very difficult to project the number of school age children accurately. It is
          recommended that population changes be watched closely and appropriate school
          facility decisions be made in advance of any deficiencies.
2152      The Las Lomitas Elementary School District serves Ladera and a considerable area
          to the north. The Ladera elementary school, well located to serve that local
          community, is integrated with the adjoining recreational facilities of the Ladera
          Recreational District. The school is currently leased to a private school. Should the
          use of the school change, any new use should be compatible with the surrounding
          residential uses.
2153      One private school is shown on the plan diagram, the existing Woodside Priory
          school with grades 6 though 12.
2154      Churches. Five churches are shown, three of which are in the town. All are well
          served by major thoroughfares. Additional churches may be needed in the
          planning area in the future. Those areas indicated as “institutional” on the plan
          diagram provide suitable locations for additional churches.
2155      Fire Stations. Fire protection to the town and most of the planning area is
          provided by the Woodside Fire Protection District. The district has a station on
          Portola Road near Alpine Road as shown on the comprehensive plan diagram. This
                                             Land Use
                                                22

      station will provide primary service to the town. The other district station is
      located to the north in the Town of Woodside. For further description of fire
      service and fire hazards, see the safety element.
2156  Other Institutional Uses. Other appropriate institutional uses that may be needed
      in the town would include but not necessarily be limited to local governmental
      buildings. Each institutional use should be judged separately and, if compatible
      with other uses in the area, could be located in one of the local shopping and
      service areas or in the vicinity thereof.
2156a The town center contains the historic schoolhouse, town hall (administration
      building), meeting rooms, indoor recreation facilities, outdoor recreation facilities
      and the library. The site is within the San Andreas Rift Zone and occupancy of
      buildings should be related to the risk due to earthquake hazards. The outdoor
      recreation facilities at the site should be used and augmented as appropriate as a
      part of the town center (see the recreation element for further description).
2157  An extensive area is shown as “low intensity academic reserve” for Stanford
      University. This area is presently being used for various radio telescopes, antennas,
      other experimental installations, stabling and training facilities for horses, and
      agriculture. Where it does not interfere with these primary uses, lands are also
      used for grazing. Much of this area is visible from the Portola Valley area. The
      retention of agricultural uses is encouraged. Any further developments in this
      area by Stanford University should be referred to the local governments in the
      nearby areas so that the effects on these areas can be properly evaluated and
      modifications recommended where necessary and desirable.
2158  Another area owned by Stanford University and shown as “low intensity academic
      reserve” is the area designated “Webb Ranch” on the comprehensive plan diagram,
      Part 5. A portion of this area designated for agricultural use is described in the
      open space element. A variety of uses would be appropriate on the balance of the
      Webb Ranch and therefore a detailed plan for this area is not appropriate at this
      time. Town guidelines for development are appropriate, however, and are as
      follows:
      1.     Lands within the area are appropriate for development of Stanford
             University’s academic program and closely related land uses provided the
             intensity of development and use conforms with standards and criteria set
             forth in this plan. Opportunities exist for outdoor education including study
             of plant and animal life, geology and paleontology.
      2.     The retention of agricultural uses is encouraged. These activities allow use
             of the land while retaining the essential natural open space qualities of the
             area. The combining of agricultural uses with educational programs may be
                                         Land Use
                                            23

              feasible. Agricultural uses would be appropriate on all lands shown as low
              intensity academic reserve, as an interim use on lands ultimately to be used
              for academic purposes, or as permanent open space. Proper attention
              should be given to prevent stream pollution from agricultural activities.
           3. Intensity of use should be compatible with present and planned uses of
              adjoining and nearby lands when measured by such factors as vehicular
              traffic, ratios of building coverage and floor space in buildings to land area,
              building height, daytime and nighttime population density, artificial light,
              glare, noise, emission of smoke, smog, dust, odor, vibration and radiation or
              other deleterious factors. The volume of site traffic generated (people and
              vehicle) should not exceed the capacity of off-site transportation facilities to
              handle such traffic with reasonable convenience. The limited traffic capacity
              of the system is a major factor in determining the appropriate intensity of
              development within this area. Expansion of transportation facilities should
              be controlled to preclude aesthetic or ecological damage. Because of
              physical limitations, road access within the area can be developed at only
              two points on Alpine Road. In addition, in the freeway design and
              construction, provision has been made for only one road under the freeway
              interconnecting the Stanford lands to the north and south. Consideration
              should also be given to potential failure of Searsville Dam and consequent
              downstream flooding.
           4. Development on the “low intensity academic reserve” areas should allow
              very substantial open space (all natural or replanted). Paved areas and
              building ground coverage shall not count as open space. Each developed
              area should emphasize uninterrupted open space. All development should
              be concealed from view, through location, from Freeway 280, Alpine Road
              and residential uses as much as possible. The low intensity academic reserve
              designation is intended to help meet the objectives of Section 2158,3. and
              the scenic roads and highways element.
2159 – 2162   Not used.
Public Facilities and Services
Objectives
2163       1. To ensure the development of public utilities in a manner that will cause
              minimum disruption of the natural beauty of the area.
           2. To provide utilities adequate to serve local needs in the planning area.
           3. To conserve natural resources and prevent pollution of water and air.
                                          Land Use
                                             24

Principles
2164       1.  All lines and facilities related to the transmission and distribution of power
               and telecommunications should be placed underground. If this is not
               practical and such lines or facilities are to be placed aboveground, the
               impact should be compensated by the undergrounding of lines or facilities in
               other locations within the planning area. The undergrounding of lines and
               facilities should be balanced against adverse effects on native vegetation.
           2.  A program should be developed for progressively placing existing overhead
               lines underground.
           3.  All utility installations should be sited, designed, developed and landscaped
               so as to blend with the natural scenery of the area.
           4.  All utility installations should be designed to minimize damage from
               identified geologic hazards.
           5.  Water, electric and gas supply lines should be loop systems where feasible.
           6.  Water supply systems must conform with established health and fire
               protection standards.
           7.  Waste water must not pollute ground water or streams or cause public or
               private nuisance.
           8.  Vegetative ground cover should be sustained to prevent storm water
               erosion. Unobstructed natural drainage channels should remain the
               principal storm drainage system, and riparian vegetation along their sides
               should be maintained in order to reduce erosion and bank failure and
               preserve habitat. Publicly owned drainage structures should be provided
               and maintained in accordance with the current Storm Drainage Plan of
               Portola Valley.
           9.  A solid waste and hazardous waste program which will assure adequate
               services, protect health, reduce waste generation and conserve energy and
               resources without adversely affecting the environment should be supported.
               Wastes resulting from animal keeping should also be controlled and
               disposed of in a sanitary manner.
           10. The planting of native vegetation in developments should be encouraged as
               a water conservation measure.
                                            Land Use
                                               25
          11.     Utilities should first serve adjoining areas and then be incrementally
                  extended to serve contiguous new development rather than be extended so
                  as to allow development to “leap-frog” over intervening lands.
          12.     Whenever there is a known limited supply of a public facility or service which
                  is beyond the control or ability of the town to overcome, such limited facility
                  or service shall be allocated approximately evenly over the time period of
                  the anticipated shortage.
Description
2165      It is recognized that this general plan shows areas for development which are not
          served by utilities or which have utilities inadequate to serve additional
          development. Such areas shall not be developed until all utilities are supplied.
2165a     In the planning area, where the preservation of the natural scenery and
          environment is the one most important consideration by most residents, it appears
          appropriate to require that all public facilities not detract from the natural
          environment but to the maximum extent possible blend into the natural setting. In
          order to ensure that this is done, adequate review procedures should be
          established.
                                              Land Use
                                                 26

Land Use Element Appendix 1:
Calculating Holding Capacity for the Land Use Element
The holding capacity of the general plan is an estimate of the total number of housing units
and persons that could be accommodated within the planning area under the plan proposals
when and if the land is fully developed. It is a maximum figure and may be approached in time,
but will probably never be achieved since some properties will never be developed to their
fullest potential. The holding capacity shows a reduction in the overall holding capacity
projected at the time the general plan for the Portola Valley area was originally prepared in
1964. This reduction is primarily a result of greater awareness by the town of development
constraints imposed by unstable lands and conscious policies to reduce unnecessary exposure
of persons and property to potential geologic hazards. The housing unit and population
holding capacities were derived in the following manner.
        1. Within existing subdivisions, the number of existing houses, vacant lots and
            potential lots that could be created through resubdivisions were counted. A
            small percentage of the vacant lots may never be built upon due to geologic
            hazards.
        2. In unsubdivided areas, the residential land use intensity standards and
            policies contained in Sections 2106, 2106a and 2106b of the land use
            element were applied to obtain an estimate of the potential number of lots
            (see the detailed explanation below).
        3. The number of lots from 1 and 2 above were added to obtain the housing
            unit holding capacity.
        4. The number of lots obtained in 3 above were multiplied by the estimated
            household size to yield a population holding capacity.
Estimating the number of lots in unsubdivided areas
The housing unit holding capacity for undeveloped lands was calculated by applying the
residential land use intensity standards for each parcel and considering analysis of slope,
unstable lands, and land that could be reasonably developed within the objectives and
principles of the land use element. In some cases, the other factors analyzed reduced the
holding capacity below the level that would be expected if only the basic land use intensity
standard were applied. This is true in particular for lands with severe geologic stability
problems whose holding capacity was calculated as follows:
        1. Areas of geologic instability (Pmw, Ms, Pd, Psc, Md, Pf) and areas of geologic
            stability (Sbr, Sun, Sex, Sls, Ps) were identified. These areas are shown on the map
            “Movement Potential of Undisturbed Ground” for Portola Valley as of 1/23/76, as
            amended through 1995.
                                         Land Use: Appendices
                                                   27

2. The land use intensity standards for the parcel were determined from the
   comprehensive plan diagram and section 2106 of the land use element. The
   methods of applying the standards are those in effect in the Portola Valley zoning
   ordinance.
3. The land use intensity standards were applied to geologically stable areas providing
   a housing unit yield for stable lands.
4. The land use intensity standards were applied to the geologically unstable lands to
   obtain a housing unit yield that would be expected if there were no severe geologic
   constraints present. Then, to account for geologic instability, the yield was reduced
   by 90%. This reduction stems from the provisions of Sec. 2106 b. of the general
   plan. It was assumed that the remaining housing unit yield of 10% could be
   transferred to stable portions of the same parcel.
5. The housing unit yield from 3 and 4 above were added to obtain total housing unit
   holding capacity for the parcel.
                              Land Use: Appendices
                                        28
                                             HOLDING CAPACITIES
   Residential Area                    Land Use              Estimated               Holding Capacity
                                       Intensity           Existing 1996          Housing         Population 2
                                                          Housing Units 1           Units
                   1                  Low-Medium                    205                207                  518
                   2                                                100                116                  290
                   3                                                 30                 37                   93
                  43                                                539                542                1,355
                  54                                                149                157                  393
                                                                  1,023              1,059                2,649
                   6                      Low                        56                 60                  150
                   7                                                553                582                1,455
                                                                    609                642                1,605
                   8                  Conservation                  268                322                  805
                                       Residential
                   9                                                224                290                  725
                 104                                                105                143                  358
                 11 5                                                46                116                  290
                                                                    643                871                2,178
                  12                Open Residential                 15                 44                  110
       Planning Area Total                                        2,290              2,616            6,542
             (all areas)                                                                          approx. 6,500
       Portola Valley Total                                       1,497              1,774            4,504
      (Areas 1-3, 6-9, 11, 12)                                                                    approx. 4,500
Totals may not add due to rounding
1 Estimated numbers of existing housing units are from available records for approximately March 1996.     The
records were least accurate for areas 5 and 10. Due to the small number of housing units in these areas, however,
minor inaccuracies would not significantly affect the planning area totals.
2 In the 1990 U.S. Census, there were 1,675 housing units and 4,143 persons in households (excluding those in
group quarters), for an average of approximately 2.5 persons per housing unit.
3 The existing number of housing units in 1996 is from the Los Trancos Woods Community Association.
4 The existing number of housing units in 1996 is from the San Mateo County Planning Department.
5 Although residential area 11 includes The Sequoias, the number of housing units and persons at The Sequoias are
not included in the area 11 figures. Since the population at The Sequoias is approximately 325, the total holding
capacity for the town is approximately 5,000 persons and for the planning area approximately 7,100 persons.
                                             Land Use: Appendices
                                                         29
Land Use Element Appendix 2:
Implementation of the Land Use Element
Actions to date:
1.    A wide range of recommendations are set forth in Appendix 5 of the Portola
      Valley General Plan adopted in 1965 pertaining to needed rezonings and other
      regulating ordinances. These recommendations were all subsequently enacted.
      These regulations guide implementation of the plan except where public
      purchase of property may be required. (See Open Space Appendix 2:
      Implementation of the Open Space Element for examples).
2.    The 1977 general plan amendments included provisions regarding a new “Open
      Residential” category, revised guidelines for clustering, allowed only partial
      density credit for unstable lands and added impervious surface limitations and
      new provisions for accessory living quarters, among other changes. These
      changes have been reflected in amendments to the zoning ordinance.
3.    The 1980 general plan amendments, among other matters, changed the land use
      intensity for the “Conservation-Residential” category from one to two net acres
      per housing unit. This change has been reflected in the zoning ordinance.
Future actions:
1.    The town should undertake the preparation of a plan for the Portola Road
      corridor.
                                  Land Use: Appendices
                                           30

Town of Portola Valley General Plan
  Open Space Element
     Last amended March 11, 2015
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
   Definitions ................................................................................................................................... 1
Objectives........................................................................................................................................ 6
Principles ......................................................................................................................................... 7
Standards ........................................................................................................................................ 9
Description ...................................................................................................................................... 9
Action Program ............................................................................................................................. 14
General Plan Diagram ................................................................................................................... 15
                                  Open Space Element
Introduction
2200      The open space element provides a framework for the preservation of open space
          within the planning area. Open space includes all open areas, large and small, public
          and private. The element, however, is most concerned with those open space lands
          that are of major significance for protection of natural resources, public health and
          safety, aesthetics and recreation and that require special actions to ensure their
          preservation. The open space land uses described herein are primarily the macro-
          and intermediate-scale open spaces but this does not imply that the micro-scale is
          not important.
2201      Open spaces intended primarily for intensive recreation, such as parks and
          playfields, are addressed in the recreation element.
2202       Scenic corridors and greenways are described in this element; however, their use by
          motorists, cyclists, those on foot and equestrians are addressed in the circulation
          and trails and paths elements.
Definitions
2203      The several types of open space included in this element are defined below;
          however, more complete descriptions can be found in section 2214.
          Neighborhood Open Space Preserves serve local neighborhoods and are generally
          two to ten acres in size.
          Community Open Space Preserves are scenic areas kept essentially in a natural
          state for the benefit of the residents of the town. Such preserves provide visual
          pleasure and accommodate very limited access and use, such as by trails and paths.
          They serve major parts of the town and generally are up to 50 acres in size.
                                           Open Space
                                                1
     Large Open Space Preserves are large areas that have important natural qualities
     and that are preserved by public or institutional ownership. Because these large
     open spaces can serve as recreational resources, they are also discussed in the
     recreation element.
     Scenic Corridors are broad linear bands of open space along major roads in which
     recreational uses are acceptable when compatible with the open character of the
     corridor.
     Greenways are corridors of natural beauty often enhanced by landscaping. They
     provide pleasant traveled ways for motorists, cyclists, those on foot and equestrians
     that link portions of the planning area. A number of greenways are proposed in the
     plan along roads and natural features such as canyons, streams and woods.
     Open Space - Limited Development is the term assigned to those areas outside of
     the town that because of hazardous natural conditions, scenic beauty, limited
     access, remoteness, inadequate utilities or similar reasons are not appropriate for
     other than open space with very limited development. These areas should be kept
     essentially in their natural state with only minimal disturbance. These areas are
     shown on the General Plan Diagram, Part 5, of the General Plan.
     Agricultural Lands occupy a large portion of the Stanford-owned Webb Ranch.
     These lands consist of alluvial soils and are well suited for agriculture. In addition,
     most of the area is within the flood plain of the Searsville Lake dam. Uses occupying
     this area include cultivated agriculture and boarding stables.
     Residential Open Space Preserves are parts of residential developments that are
     kept as open space because of environmental constraints such as steep terrain,
     unstable land, and sensitive habitat. Also, these areas are visual assets for residents
     of the development in which they are located as well as the town. Where
     appropriate, access to portions of these areas by local residents can be an ancillary
     use by means of public trails and paths and thereby serve in part as a recreation
     function. (See also Section 2109 of the residential areas section in the land use
     element.)
2204 The Portola Valley town council, after much consideration, adopted the following
     definition of “open space preserve” by resolution No. 2490 on May 12, 2010.
     Consequently, whenever an area is owned by the town, it must comply with the
     following definition.
     Open Space Preserves are areas to be kept largely in a “natural” condition with
     limited permitted uses as described below:
                                       Open Space
                                            2

1.       Open Space Preserves are areas where the character and intended use of
         the land warrant retaining the land in a natural condition. Such preserves
         provide visual pleasure and accommodate very limited access and use.
2.       Open Space Preserves are named, located and described in the General
         Plan. The descriptions include permitted uses consistent with the
         provisions of this definition.
3.       Permitted outdoor uses are those that do not require structures, other
         than those provided for elsewhere in this definition, and do not result in
         modification of the site. Typical uses include nature study, congregation of
         residents in time of emergencies, and unorganized activities such as tossing
         Frisbees and kite flying.
4.       Permitted structures include occasional benches, trail and path signs,
         temporary scientific instruments, and bridges and board walkways in
         marshy areas for the purpose of viewing natural aspects of the site.
5.       Permitted access is on permeable trails and, where appropriate, paths
         designed for disabled persons.
6.       Consideration may be given to allowing existing structures to remain if they
         are consistent with and enhance the open space character of the land
         and/or are of historic value.
7.       Activities to care for the land, such as controlling invasive plants and
         reducing fire hazards, are permitted provided they are undertaken in a
         manner that balances preservation of the natural vegetation and the need
         for reduction of fire hazard potential and are reviewed with input from
         town committees and staff.
8.       Activities that seek to return the land to a prior more natural state are
         permitted provided such activities are reviewed with input from Town
         committees and staff.
9.       Uses in addition to those above specified subsections 1. – 8. may be
         permitted by the town council provided such uses are consistent with the
         purposes of open space preserves as described in section 2204 and
         contribute to a person’s enjoyment of, and do not detract, from a natural
         and tranquil setting.
(When considering residential open space preserves, see also Section 2109 of the
general plan.)
                                 Open Space
                                       3

2205 Open space land is defined in state law [Government Code, Section 65560 (b)]. The
     definition is intended as a guide to cities and counties, but does not preclude
     expansion of the list by jurisdictions. Section 65560 (b) states:
     “Open space land is any parcel or area of land or water that is essentially
     unimproved and devoted to an open-space use as defined in this section, and that is
     designated on a local, regional or state open-space plan as any of the following:
     1.        Open space for the preservation of natural resources, including but not
               limited to areas required for the preservation of plant and animal life,
               including habitat for fish and wildlife species; areas required for ecologic
               and other scientific study purposes; rivers, streams, bays and estuaries; and
               coastal beaches, lake-shores, banks of rivers and streams, and watershed
               lands.
     2.        Open space used for the managed production of resources, including but
               not limited to, forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands and areas of
               economic importance for the production of food or fiber; areas required
               for recharge of groundwater basins; bays, estuaries, marshes, rivers and
               streams which are important for the management of commercial fisheries;
               and areas containing major mineral deposits, including those in short
               supply.
     3.        Open space for outdoor recreation, including but not limited to areas of
               outstanding scenic, historic and cultural value; areas particularly suited for
               park and recreation purposes, including access to lakeshores, beaches and
               rivers and streams; and areas which serve as links between major
               recreation and open-space reservations, including utility easements, banks
               of rivers and streams, trails, and scenic highway corridors.
     4.        Open space for public health and safety, including, but not limited to areas
               which require special management or regulation because of hazardous or
               special conditions such as earthquake fault zones, unstable soil areas, flood
               plains, watersheds, areas presenting high fire risks, areas required for the
               protection of water quality and water reservoirs, and areas required for the
               protection and enhancement of air quality.”
     5.        (Pertains to military installations and therefore is not listed here.)
2206 Open space lands can be grouped under the following scales of open space by their
     size and character. These descriptions are of assistance when considering the
     functions of different types of open space:
                                       Open Space
                                             4

     1.        Macro-Scale Open Space – Lands where the sense of openness is
               extensive. Views of such space include large expanses of water,
               undeveloped or primarily undeveloped lands, or rural lands with minor
               development. Micro-environments may exist within such a space, such as
               a clearing in the woods, or a small wooded valley or a cluster of trees in the
               otherwise grass covered rolling hills; but continuity and large size give
               macro-scale open spaces their dominant character. Categories of open
               space that are usually of this type include: residential open space
               preserves, scenic corridors, greenways, open space-limited development
               areas and large open space preserves.
     2.         Intermediate-Scale Open Space – Lands of intermediate scale include
                areas generally ranging in size from 5 to 50 acres. The unifying element is
                the sense of openness in the middle ground with a definite background
                limit to one’s view. Categories of open space that are usually of this type
                include community open space preserves and neighborhood open space
                preserves.
     3.         Micro-Scale Open Space – Spaces that are of a small or intimate nature.
                Generally, the observer intimately confronts objects in this size of open
                space.
2207 Size is not a limiting factor for open space, nor is public ownership necessary. In
     Portola Valley, concern for the preservation of open space should include all scales
     of open space from hillside watershed areas of large expanse to natural and
     landscaped areas on residential and other developed properties.
2208 Preservation for the public interest does not necessarily mean public access to open
     space lands. For example, public access might be incompatible with other open
     space uses, such as wildlife habitat, flood control, maintenance of the natural
     drainage system, or establishing or maintaining fragile plant growth. It may also be
     incompatible with individual property owner’s rights to privacy.
2209 Many open spaces are best preserved and managed if the town or another public
     agency has responsibility or regulatory authority through fee title, easement or
     special zoning. This is especially true of public parks, flood plains, natural areas
     along travel corridors, creeks and riparian lands, wilderness areas or other wildlife
     habitat of shy or endangered species, and areas that represent a potential danger to
     health and safety.
2210 Implementation of the open space proposals was largely covered in the adopted
     Open Space Program, Town of Portola Valley, 1971, but is now addressed in Open
     Space Element Appendix 2, Implemention of the Open Space Element. The major
     open spaces are shown on the comprehensive plan diagram, Part 5.
                                        Open Space
                                            5

2211  The open space element includes: objectives, principles and standards; and a
      description of an action program.
Objectives
2212  1.       To preserve open space in order to maintain the natural environmental
               qualities that make Portola Valley an unusual and special place in which to
               live.
      2.       To provide visual enjoyment by means of a continuous flow of open space
               and natural ground contours throughout the entire planning area.
      3.       To retain the wooded outlines of the skyline ridge and lesser ridges.
      4.       To retain and enhance important vistas, including the view of the skyline
               ridge as seen from below and the view of the valley as seen from the
               hillsides.
      5.       To protect and enhance more intimate views for the enjoyment of local
               residents.
      6.       To protect and maintain those areas necessary to the integrity of the
               natural processes with special emphasis on, but not limited to, the
               watershed.
      7.       To preserve and, where appropriate, enhance and restore streams, and
               lesser drainage courses and their corridors, unique resources in the area, in
               a manner that will assure maximum retention of their value as wildlife
               habitat and provide for their use and enjoyment by local residents.
      8.       To provide scenic corridors along routes of major movement.
      9.       To provide greenways along local corridors of movement.
      10.      To provide for the retention of vegetative forms that contribute to the
               public safety and help maintain the natural processes and aesthetic
               qualities of the town.
      11.      To preserve as open space, insofar as necessary, those areas subject to
               inherent natural hazards in order to ensure the public safety and welfare.
      12.      To preserve and protect areas vital as wildlife habitat or of a fragile
               ecological nature.
                                      Open Space
                                          6
       13. To preserve those areas of cultural and historic significance to the town,
           the Midpeninsula, and the Bay Area.
       14. To provide open space to shape and guide development and to enhance
           community identity.
       15. To ensure connectivity between open spaces to provide for wildlife
           movement.
       16. To preserve those lands with high agricultural capabilities for agricultural
           and open space purposes where appropriate.
Principles
2213   1.  In any land development project, the basic visual character of the planning
           area should be conserved through regulation or through public acquisition
           of less than fee title.
       2.  All major visual features should be preserved through public acquisition of
           fee title or lesser interest.
       3.  Structures and land uses should be subordinate to the dominant natural
           land forms and vegetation of the planning area. Only in the confines of
           individual sites should structures be allowed to be dominant. To preserve
           open space in the residential open space preserve areas, clustering of
           housing units outside these areas should be required to the maximum
           extent possible.
       4.  Roads and other public works should incorporate beauty as well as utility,
           safety and economy.
       5.  The scale and type of materials used in developments should be
           harmonious with the surrounding natural scenery.
       6.  Open spaces should be linked together visually and physically to form a
           system of open spaces.
       7.  Common open spaces intended to serve the immediate residents should be
           owned by the residents through a homeowners’ association, condominium
           association, or other similar legal instrument.
       8.  A variety of vistas should be provided and preserved, ranging from the
           small enclosed private views to the more distant views shared by many
           people.
                                    Open Space
                                         7

9.  Open space along creeks, streams and scenic trails should be protected
    from encroachment through flood plain zoning, development setbacks,
    conservation easements, public acquisition of streamsides and other
    appropriate devices which will help preserve them in an essentially natural
    state.
10. A qualified biologist should delineate those areas rich in wildlife, or of a
    fragile ecological nature. These areas should be preserved through land
    use regulation or through dedication or acquisition where necessary.
11. Environmental impact studies should take into consideration the impact of
    development proposals on wildlife habitats.
12. Land use regulations should be used to prevent damage to vegetative
    ground cover.
13. The contribution of vegetation and water areas in maintaining air quality
    should be considered in any major land use proposals.
14. Areas hazardous to the public safety and welfare should be retained as
    open space. Areas that fall into this category include:
    a.        Slopes generally over 30 percent.
    b.        Fault zones - bands on either side of known fault traces sufficient
              to include lands of probable ground rupture.
    c.        Areas of geologic instability.
    d.        Streams and their flood plains.
15. Streams, stream sides, ponds and trails should be preserved as scenic open
    spaces through regulation, dedication and, where necessary, by public
    acquisition.
16. Scenic corridors should be protected so as to maximize their scenic quality.
17. Scenic corridors and greenways
    a.        Scenic corridors and greenways should be of a width suitable to
              preserve the natural quality of the area through which the
              corridor passes and provide space for appropriate uses.
    b.        Development within scenic corridors and greenways should not
              detract from the essential qualities of the corridor or greenway.
                           Open Space
                                8
                c.         Scenic corridors and greenways should be designed to insulate
                           residential areas from noise and activity on trafficways and to
                           provide buffers between other incompatible uses.
      18.        New residential developments should provide for the clustering of
                 residences so as to leave larger natural areas (residential open space
                 preserves and other open space preserves) as undisturbed open space
                 with limited local use by trails and paths. (When considering residential
                 open space preserves, see also Section 2109 of the general plan.)
Standards
2214   Specific standards are and will be included within the zoning, subdivison and site
       development ordinances.
Description
2215  Extensive open lands presently exist within Portola Valley, much of which is in
      private ownership. The open space proposals in this element define those lands that
      enhance the character of the town. The primary open space function of these lands
      is for one or more of the following uses: preserving natural resources, managing
      production of resources, providing outdoor recreation, or protecting the public
      health and safety.
2216  The land use categories that are of major importance in assuring a continued quality
      of open space and make up the open space classification system for Portola Valley
      are:
           1.      Neighborhood Open Space Preserves - A number of neighborhood
                   preserves are shown on the plan diagram. The specific sites for two of
                   the preserves, Ridge Rest Open Space Preserve and Frog Pond Open
                   Space Preserve, are defined through the general development plan for
                   the Portola Valley Ranch “planned community” zoning. A third preserve,
                   Coalmine Ridge Open Space Preserve, includes a small lake and is located
                   at the edge of the town adjoining Los Trancos Woods.
                   The exact locations of the remaining preserves shown on the plan
                   diagram for the undeveloped lands of the town’s western hillsides,
                   should they ever be developed, should be determined by the town when
                   more precise plans are made for this area. The distribution indicated on
                   the plan diagram generally provides a neighborhood preserve within a
                   radius of from 1/4 to 1/2 miles of all potential residential sites. Steep
                                        Open Space
                                              9

      grades and canyons have necessitated modifications of required
      standards in a few instances.
   2. Community Open Space Preserves - The Orchard Preserve is an existing
      apple ranch known as the Jelich Ranch. It contains three historic
      structures included in the historic element: the Jelich house, the tank
      house and the Chilean Woodchopper’s house. The property and
      structures help identify the rural nature of the town. If they ever cease
      to be in private ownership, the town should attempt to retain them as
      historic resources and open space for limited recreation and perhaps
      agricultural use.
      The Meadow Preserve, the large field adjoining Portola Road and north of
      The Sequoias, lies astride the San Andreas Fault and is visually important
      to the entire quality of the valley. This preserve should be kept in a
      natural condition and the existing agricultural character preserved. A
      southern portion of the preserve is owned by the Midpeninsula Regional
      Open Space District and is a part of the Windy Hill Open Space Preserve.
      The parking lot serving the preserve should be maintained so as to cause
      minimum conflicts with the meadow and remain compatible with the
      natural setting to the maximum extent possible.
      The Morshead Community Preserve should capitalize on the natural and
      man-made lake of the property. It is shown by symbol on the plan
      diagram without specific recommendations with regard to size or shape
      of the preserve.
      The Stables Preserve is between the town center and the Orchard
      Preserve. The front part of the property is owned by the town and forms
      part of the open space corridor along Portola Road. This area should be
      kept as a natural resource with very limited access by individuals. Distant
      views from this part of the Stables Preserve are to be preserved.
      The boarding stable buildings are on the rear of the preserve and set back
      approximately 700 feet from Portola Road. The boarding stable is one of
      the recreation facilities in the town. Should the boarding stable ever
      cease, the town should attempt to see that this part of the property is
      retained as open space.
3.    Large Open Space Preserves –A number of large open space preserves
      are shown on the plan diagram. Each of these preserves is briefly
      described below.
                            Open Space
                                 10

The Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve includes Jasper Ridge, Searsville Lake
and the marsh area at the south end of Searsville Lake. The Preserve is
owned by Stanford University and is used by the university for biological
studies. This is a unique resource in the planning area and should
continue as a wildlife preserve and a scenic location. Increased use by
the general public is encouraged provided it is handled in a manner so as
to not interfere with the basic purposes of the preserve for biological
studies. It is also important as an entry to Portola Valley along Portola
Road.
Several properties owned by the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space
District are shown as open space preserves on the comprehensive plan
diagram. These lands are to be kept primarily as undeveloped open areas
while allowing low intensity recreational uses that do not conflict with
the essential open space character. Impact on the town from the use of
these preserves should be minimal, and most vehicular access should be
from roads on or near the boundaries of the town. These properties
include:
    •   Coal Creek Open Space Preserve
    •   Los Trancos Open Space Preserve
    •   Montebello Open Space Preserve
    •   Russian Ridge Open Space Preserve
    •   Windy Hill Open Space Preserve
The Windy Hill Open Space Preserve, owned by the Midpeninsula
Regional Open Space District, consists of a major portion of the eastern
side of Windy Hill and is the only one of these preserves located within
the town boundaries. Windy Hill is a visually dominant element for
much of the town and the South Bay Area. The preserve serves as an
adjunct to the balance of Windy Hill which is shown as a part of the
Skyline Corridor. The natural character of the open ridge leading up to
Windy Hill should be maintained. The lower part of the preserve, west of
the Willowbrook Subdivision, includes a beautiful stretch of Corte
Madera Creek, adjacent oak covered slopes and higher wooded knolls
which open on to oak studded grassland. The preserve provides an
extensive open space and trail system with opportunities for nature study
as well as hiking and scenic enjoyment. The preserve is strategically
located at the intersection of several main trails and paths where it can
be an important destination for users of the trail and path system. The
area should remain largely in its natural state. Besides use as a preserve,
this land provides an important visual backdrop for the Willowbrook
subdivision.
                      Open Space
                          11

   Because large open space preserves also serve as recreational resources,
   they are also discussed as regional parks or private recreational facilities
   in the recreation element.
4. Scenic Corridors –Scenic corridors are broad linear bands of open space
   along major roads in which recreational type uses are compatible with
   the open character of the scenic corridor.
   a.          Alpine Scenic Corridor - The Alpine Scenic Corridor includes
               Alpine Road and those portions of Los Trancos and San
               Francisquito creeks adjacent to the road. This corridor is of a
               smaller scale than the Skyline Scenic Corridor and will be
               primarily for the use of the residents of the planning area. A
               variety of uses would be compatible within the corridor, such
               as the existing tennis and swim clubs, equestrians, cyclists,
               runners and walkers. See the Alpine Scenic Corridor Sub-Area
               Plan for more information and policies regarding the Corridor.
   b.          Portola Road Scenic Corridor – The Portola Road Scenic
               Corridor extends from the intersection with Alpine Road to
               the northerly town limits. The corridor runs through the
               “valley” in the town and to a large extent does and should
               continue to reflect the open space values of the town. Views
               to the western hillsides from this corridor should be protected
               or reestablished, and increased pedestrian, bicycle and
               equestrian use along the corridor should be encouraged. See
               the Portola Road Corridor Plan for more information and
               policies regarding the Corridor.
   c.          Skyline Scenic Corridor - The Skyline Scenic Corridor is one of
               two major regional facilities within the town, the other being
               the Windy Hill Open Space Preserve. The corridor is
               composed of a broad band of natural area and will require
               controls over adjacent lands to assure compatibility with the
               corridor. A variety of uses would be appropriate in the
               corridor including scenic lookouts, trails and paths, and special
               scenic and natural scientific attractions. In addition to its
               primary function it would provide some local recreation. (See
               also the scenic roads and highways element.)
5. Greenways – Greenways are corridors of natural beauty, often enhanced
   by landscaping. They are pleasant traveled ways for motorists, cyclists,
   those on foot and equestrians linking portions of the planning area. A
   number of greenways are proposed in the plan along natural features
                         Open Space
                              12

                 such as canyons, streams and woods. The essential natural qualities of
                 greenways should be maintained and enhanced by careful management
                 of plant materials.
     6.          Open Space - Limited Development – These are areas which because of
                 hazardous natural conditions, scenic beauty, limited access, remoteness,
                 inadequate utilities or similar reasons are not appropriate for other than
                 very limited development. These areas, which are outside of the town,
                 should be kept essentially in their natural state with only minimal
                 disturbance. Four areas are shown in this category on the
                 comprehensive plan diagram: a portion of the town’s southern sphere of
                 influence, land west of the Skyline Scenic corridor, and two areas in the
                 hills of Palo Alto.
     7.          Agricultural Lands – A substantial portion of the Stanford-owned “Webb
                 Ranch” is shown as agricultural land. This area lies predominantly
                 between Ladera and the Junipero Serra Freeway. Most of the lands are
                 currently used for cultivated agriculture and boarding stables. The lands
                 are basically on alluvial soils and well-suited to agriculture. In addition,
                 most of the area is within the flood plain of the Searsville Lake dam. This
                 area should be retained primarily for agriculture with a limited amount of
                 compatible recreational uses of low intensity such as the existing
                 boarding stables.
     8.          Residential Open Space Preserves- Residential open space preserves
                 serve developments in which they are located. In addition they are
                 important open space assets since they provide undisturbed natural
                 areas for visual enjoyment by all town residents. Some of the preserves
                 will be accessible for use by other than local residents by means of public
                 trails and paths. (See the Residential Areas section of the land use
                 element.)
2217 Historic sites include areas and trails of historic significance and open space
     potential that may be lost if not protected from development. Such areas and trails
     are limited in quantity in the planning area, but should be preserved whenever
     possible. (See the historic element.)
2218 Areas of particular biotic importance should be kept in their natural state because
     they play a vital role in natural processes and are of importance to the welfare of the
     town. These include wildlife, riparian corridors, wetlands, and vegetative and biotic
     communities. The protection of these areas is to be achieved by land use policies
     and by the open space proposals previously listed which include the biotically
     important steep canyons, streams, forests, wetlands and similar areas.
                                       Open Space
                                            13

2219   Areas of importance for public health and safety purposes should by and large be
       kept in their natural state because they present potential hazards due to earth
       shaking, earth movement, fire, flooding, erosion and siltation. These areas are not
       shown separately on the comprehensive plan diagram, but are included in the open
       space proposals previously listed in this element and are described in the safety
       element.
2220   Appendix 1 to this Open Space Element indicates the responsiveness of the Portola
       Valley open space proposals to state law requirements. Appendix 2 discusses the
       implementation of the open space element to ensure the systematic preservation of
       the open space character of Portola Valley.
Action Program
2221    The zoning, subdivision and site development ordinances have been prepared and
        administered to preserve and protect major open spaces in the town through a
        variety of provisions. These include:
        •   planned community zoning districts,
        •   slope-density combining zoning districts,
        •   open area zoning districts,
        •   special building setbacks along the Alpine Scenic Corridor and Skyline Parkway,
        •   planned unit development provisions permitting cluster development,
        •   dedication requirements for park areas,
        •   requirements for open space easements,
        •   trail and path dedication requirements,
        •   limitations on grading and tree removal,
        •   wide rights-of-way to provide open space along roads,
        •   required building setbacks along major town creeks, and
        •   setbacks and controls on planting along major roads.
        These provisions have secured many of the open space proposals in the general
        plan and will continue to be used to secure additional open spaces. The tools are in
        place and need only to be administered as development projects come before the
        town.
2222    While most of the open space proposals in the plan can be achieved through
        regulation, there may be instances where the town may wish to purchase land or
        rights in land in order to secure open spaces. It is not possible at this time to
        determine which parcels would require such treatment. In order for the town to be
        in a position to purchase land if needed, the town should maintain an open space
        fund and an acquisition process plan.
                                        Open Space
                                            14

2223  Several large parcels have been purchased by the Midpeninsula Regional Open
      Space District to form the Windy Hill Open Space Preserve. In the future, MROSD
      may purchase some additional parcels which are now indicated for residential
      development. Such purchases cannot be anticipated in this general plan but would
      be reviewed by the town at that time.
General Plan Diagram
2224  Modify the general plan diagram legend as follows:
      • Change the heading “Preserve” with respect to “Neighborhood” and
          “Community” to read “Open Space Preserve.”
      • Change “OPEN SPACE PRESERVE” to read “LARGE OPEN SPACE PRESERVE.”
      • Change “AGRICULTURE” to read “AGRICULTRAL LANDS.”
                                    Open Space
                                        15

Open Space Element Appendix 1:
State Requirements for Open Space Planning
California state law (Section 65560 et seq.) requires each municipality to prepare a local plan
“for the comprehensive and long-range preservation and conservation of open space land
within its jurisdiction.” (§ 65563) The open space element of the general plan is meant to
satisfy this state requirement.
In the legislation, “open space land” is defined as “any parcel or area of land or water which is
essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space used as defined in this section, and
which is designated on a local, regional or state open-space plan as any of the following:
    (1) Open space for the preservation of natural resources
    (2) Open space for the managed production of resources
    (3) Open space for outdoor recreation
    (4) Open space for public health and safety (§ 65560).
The table below illustrates how the various open space categories in the Portola Valley open
space element relate to the purposes of open space land as defined by the State of California.
       Portola Valley                               Purpose of Open Space
      Open Space and          Preservation of     Managed           Outdoor       Public Health and
   Recreation Categories     Natural Resource   Production of      Recreation           Safety
                                                 Resources
 Residential Open Space              P                                  s                 P
 Preserve
 Scenic Corridors                    P                                  s                 s
 Greenways                           P                                  s                 s
 Open Space-Limited                  P                                  s                 P
 Development
 Open Space Preserve                 P                                  s                 s
 Agriculture                                         P
 Community Park                      s                                 P                  s
 Community Preserve                  P                                  s                 s
 Neighborhood Park                   s                                 P                  s
 Neighborhood Preserve               P                                  s                 s
 Trails and Paths                                                      P                  s
 Historic Sites                      s                                 P
Key:     P - indicates the primary purpose of the category of open space
         s - indicates the secondary purpose of the category of open space
                                       Open Space: Appendices
                                                 16

Open Space Element Appendix 2:
Implementation of the Open Space Element
Actions to date:
1.      The town has acquired a number of easements that preserve the open space quality of
        land while retaining it in private ownership. Notable open space, scenic or conservation
        easements occur in the following subdivisions: Portola Valley Ranch, Westridge Unit
        #10, Sausal Vista, The Hayfields, Applewood, Rossotti, Portola Glen Estates, Meadow
        Creek Estates, Blue Oaks and the Woodside Priory.
2.      The Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District has acquired extensive open spaces as a
        part of the Windy Hill Open Space Preserve. This preserve provides for major hiking and
        nature study opportunities.
3.      See also list of actions in Recreation Element Appendix 1: Implementation of the
        Recreation Element.
Future actions:
1.      Studies should be made of the major riparian corridors in the town and
        recommendations made for protecting wildlife habitats and also protecting
        development from flooding.
2.      Studies should be made of any other fragile biotic habitats in the town and
        recommendations made for their protection.
3.      Recommendations should be made for any necessary amendments to the zoning,
        subdivision and site development regulations to help implement the general plan
        provisions relating to topics 1. and 2. above.
4.      The Open Space Action Program should be implemented in order to further protect
        open space in the town. This program is described below.
Open Space Action Program
The preservation and enhancement of the natural beauty of Portola Valley can be achieved
through a variety of methods, ranging from individual efforts of concerned property owners to
various forms of public control of open space lands, including outright purchase. This program
is based on officially adopted policy of the town as expressed in the general plan. While there
may be interest from time to time in open space acquisitions beyond those recommended in
the general plan, such acquisitions are not included in this program.
In the text below, methods of preserving open space are described under two headings—
regulatory and non-regulatory approaches. Each type of open space is then matched with
applicable methods of implementation in a summary table.
                                       Open Space: Appendices
                                                  17

Regulatory Approaches
The natural character of Portola Valley can be preserved in large part by ensuring that new and
existing development is controlled by suitable regulation—mainly zoning, subdivision and site
development regulations. These regulations are applied by the town as part of its “police
power,” which is the right of government to enact laws which are in the public interest and
which are directly related to the health, safety and general welfare of the community. In the
case of Portola Valley, it is clear that a major objective of the community is the preservation
and enhancement of its natural setting. However, these regulations will only achieve town
objectives with careful and imaginative guidance by town staff, elected representatives and
citizens. In other words, these regulations are tools which need to be properly utilized.
Zoning
The zoning ordinance has been tailored to carry out the open space provisions of the general
plan. Control of lot sizes, permitted land uses, and building bulk, height and coverage
requirements limit the type and intensity of activities or intrusiveness of buildings. Review of
new buildings and remodels by the Architectural and Site Control Commission provides close
control of the compatibility of development with the natural setting. Following are brief
descriptions of those provisions of the zoning ordinance that work most directly to preserve
open space:
     Planned Community District
         Provisions in the ordinance permit the phased development of parcels of land larger
         than 60 acres according to an agreed-upon plan tailored to the specific land involved.
         This provision encourages orderly development of major tracts and benefits both the
         town and the subdivider. Cluster development is encouraged so as to leave substantial
         areas in a natural state.
     Planned Unit Development
         Parcels of 10 acres or more, or in some cases of smaller sizes, may be developed in
         specified zoning districts upon approval of a conditional use permit. Planned unit
         development allows flexibility in site design beyond that allowed in conventional
         subdivisions. This provision, as well as the planned community district, encourages
         cluster development and the resulting preservation of open space. Through careful
         design, development can be disposed on the land so as to minimize disturbance to the
         natural terrain and sited to preserve special features.
     Slope-Density Districts
         Slope-density combining districts limit the density of development based on the average
         steepness of terrain. This provision in the zoning ordinance does much to help relate
         the amount of development to the ability of the terrain to accommodate such
         development.
                                       Open Space: Appendices
                                                  18

     Open Area District
         The purpose of this district is “to protect the open quality and preserve the natural
         characteristics and scenic qualities of lands in visually important locations.” The district
         permits agricultural and low intensity recreation uses. Residential planned unit
         developments are also permitted. For non-residential uses, stringent building coverage
         and grading regulations are included.
     Special Building Setbacks – S (Scenic)
         Special building setbacks of 75 feet and 200 feet are in force along portions of Alpine
         Road and Skyline Boulevard, respectively. These setbacks are designed to help achieve
         an open quality along the corridors. Projects are subject to architectural and site plan
         review with the objective of conserving the existing terrain and vegetation.
Subdivision Control
Because a subdivider is in effect creating a new part of a community, the state enabling
legislation governing local subdivision ordinances gives to local communities considerable
latitude in requiring a subdivider to provide a range of amenities. The town can make
provisions to ensure that future residents of new subdivisions are assured a desirable
environment. Also, the town can assure that development is compatible with the rest of the
community.
The subdivision, zoning and site development ordinances are highly interrelated and in
combination form a powerful set of tools for carrying out the general plan. Many provisions of
the subdivision ordinance are relevant to the open space program and as each subdivision is
reviewed, all pertinent aspects of the ordinance must be brought to bear on each application.
Some of the most important provisions are briefly described below.
     Cluster Subdivisions
         Deviations from certain subdivision standards are permitted as a part of a cluster
         subdivision pursuant to the planned unit development procedures of the zoning
         ordinance. Common open areas must be covered by appropriate maintenance
         agreements.
     Open Space Easements
         Dedication of open space easements may be required for the purposes of protecting
         natural vegetation, terrain, water courses, waters and wildlife and for preventing or
         limiting drainage and erosion problems. This provision when linked to another
         requirement of the subdivision ordinance—that the subdivision comply with the general
         plan—provides a basis for securing open space easements over major undeveloped
         canyons designated as “residential open space preserves” on the comprehensive plan
         diagram.
                                       Open Space: Appendices
                                                   19

    Park and Recreation Lands
        To provide park and recreation areas, the subdivision ordinance requires payment of a
        fee or dedication of land according to two formulas. For subdivisions of less than 50
        lots, a fee must be paid that is equal to the formula: .005 x land value per acre x number
        of residents. For subdivisions of 50 or more lots, a dedication of land must be made that
        is equal to the formula: .005 acres x number of residents in the subdivision. A
        combination of fees and land dedication is also possible.
        If proposed park and recreation areas in the subdivision exceed the amount required for
        dedication, the town could enter into a binding agreement to purchase the property
        within a two year period. This provision, permitted by state law, would need to be
        added to the subdivision ordinance at least 30 days prior to imposing such a
        requirement.
    Pedestrian Pathways, Hiking, Cycling and Equestrian Trails
        Public easements for paths and trails and the construction of trails and paths may be
        required as a part of the subdivision process.
    Grading and Tree Clearance
        These are controlled through the site development ordinance, which is incorporated by
        reference in the subdivision ordinance.
    Road Standards
        The subdivision ordinance requires generous rights-of-way from 60 feet to 100 feet to
        provide open corridors for roads. These corridors are considered important because
        they are the traveled ways from which most persons, resident and visitor, perceive the
        town.
    Landscaping
        The subdivision and site development ordinances require protection of existing
        vegetation and the planting of additional vegetation if necessary. New plantings are
        required to conform to the adopted town native plant list.
Site Development
The site development ordinance sets standards for grading and controls removal of vegetation
with the intent of creating “a superior community environment,” and “maximum preservation
of the natural scenic character” of the town. Site development permits are necessary for work
that exceeds certain minimum quantities. Provisions include the following:
    Grading
        Final contours of excavations and fills must be shown to be compatible with the terrain
        and not cause erosion.
                                     Open Space: Appendices
                                                  20

     Driveways
         Standards are set for suitable grades and widths, to require adjustment to the terrain
         and to allow only a single driveway access to each residential lot.
     Vegetation
         Approval is needed for removal of vegetation in excess of 5,000 square feet from any
         vacant parcel or any parcel of land in excess of 10 acres. Suitable planting is required to
         return graded land to a natural condition and to prevent erosion.
Non-regulatory Approaches
As described in the preceding section on regulation, the preservation of many open spaces and
the careful siting of development can be obtained through the regulation of private
development. The town can go only so far, however, in conserving open space through
regulation. There will be instances where regulations will not provide a basis for achieving
open space goals and other approaches will be needed.
Types of Ownership
There are two basic types of land ownership—full or fee title, and partial title such as through
an easement or ownership of development rights. Each of these types of title is implicit in the
regulations previously discussed. For example, dedication of a park to the town would consist
of dedication of the fee title. On the other hand, dedication of limited rights to implement a
residential open space preserve would consist of an easement. Under such an easement the
property owner would still own the land but would make a dedication to the town limiting the
uses she or he could make of the property.
Such differences in title are particularly pertinent in considering nonregulatory open space
implementation. For example, if the town is going to be required to purchase some open
space, the amount of interest purchased in the land should be the minimum consistent with the
purpose for which the open space is intended. Thus, if the objective is to merely protect a
view, then a view easement may be all that is required. A park needed for active use, on the
other hand would probably require obtaining full title to the land. Purchase of partial rights can
be used to permit access, prohibit altering of natural features, or control development. The
appropriateness of purchase of partial interests needs to be questioned in each instance where
its use is contemplated. Where development is imminent, the cost of partial interests in the
land may be very close to the cost of obtaining a fee title.
Donation of Property
Where open space or interests in open space are to be acquired by donation, the differences in
types of ownership perhaps become most important. Donations of land or interests in land
must be tailored to the needs of the individual making the donation. The types of
arrangements can be many and varied. There are many source materials which probe this
subject area in some depth. It is a specialized area requiring an understanding of human
nature, estate planning, assessment procedures, tax laws, etc. For the purposes of this
                                      Open Space: Appendices
                                                  21

program, a few examples will suffice. Land may be donated to preserve an area or building
which has particular sentimental value to the donor. Easements may be appropriate when an
individual wants to preserve a low intensity use such as a farm or large estate and is willing to
donate development rights and thereby receive a reduction in assessed value and taxes.
Others may want to donate money for the purchase of property or development of a project as
a memorial to a member of the family. These are but a few of the many situations possible.
Citizen Support
Citizen attitude and effort toward the open space program in Portola Valley is perhaps the most
important part of the implementation work. Citizen support of official actions of the town and
grass roots citizen programs, as well as the continued maintenance of private property, are all
needed. Residents should be encouraged to continue to maintain and improve their properties
so as to preserve and enhance the natural qualities of the town. This message should be given
to residents through many means including official actions and the actions of local groups.
Official town recognition should be given to outstanding actions by citizens.
Public Information
The town should also pursue an active public information program to assure that citizens are
informed of and understand the underlying reasons for public policies and actions. Periodic
reports should be issued to the residents indicating the accomplishments and programs of the
town. Intergovernmental arrangements should play a large role in the ultimate realization of
the open space program. Several of the open space proposals for Portola Valley, and indeed
the framework of open space outside the town, require cooperation with other jurisdictions.
The town should initiate programs as necessary and continue those in effect toward achieving
interjurisdictional open space proposals. Major proposals include the Alpine and Skyline Scenic
Corridors, a trail and path system for the mid-peninsula, and the maintenance of open areas
such as the Stanford Biological Preserve.
Sources of Funds
While most of the open space proposals can be achieved through regulatory means, there may
be instances where some purchases of property or rights in property may be necessary to carry
out the plan. Although such purchases cannot be determined with accuracy at this time, it
would be advisable for the town to have in mind approaches to securing funding if the need
arises. In addition, approaches to voluntary contributions of land or rights in land may be
appropriate. Some sources of funding or contributions are listed below.
    Town Sources
         The town can draw on its own bonding and tax powers to meet open space acquisition
         needs. The town-imposed utility users tax is one source of open space funds.
    Fund Raising
         The town can sponsor special events that would bring the community together for fun
         and recreation and for the purpose of raising funds to assist in open space acquisition.
                                     Open Space: Appendices
                                                22
    Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District
        MROSD has made major purchases of open space in the town. The district could be the
        source for additional purchases.
    Peninsula Open Space Trust
        POST, a private non-profit corporation, has purchased open space in the town and could
        be a source for additional purchases.
    Contributions from Private Sources
        Private contributions can assist in many ways. There are many incentives toward
        helping the community through donations. These include the ability to make a direct
        contribution to the continued quality of the town, the creation of a memorial which
        present and future town residents will use and enjoy, substantial tax benefits and
        increased property values.
Relationship of Implementation Devices to Open Space Proposals
The following table relates implementation devices to the several types of open space in this
program. In the following examples, emphasis is given to achieving the maximum results
through regulation. Acquisition is cited where regulation may be inadequate to accomplish the
open space purposes. While not stated below, it is recommended that if regulation is not
sufficient, donations should always be sought before moving to acquire by purchase.
                                     Open Space: Appendices
                                                23
       Open Space Proposal                    Implementation
Neighborhood Open Space    Regulation: Most of these are so located that it is likely that they will be
Preserve                          retained as open space as a part of subdivisions.
                           Acquisition: In those instances where regulation will not achieve the
                                  objective, purchase by the town may be necessary.
Community Open Space       Regulation: As these lands come before the town for development
Preserve                          permits, the town should work with the property owners to assure
                                  the retention of these important open space preserves.
                           Acquisition: There may be instances where the town will decide to use
                                  some of its open space funds to in order to achieve its objectives.
Large Open Space Preserve  Several open space preserves, both within and outside of the town are
                           owned by the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District. Stanford
                           University owns the biological preserve adjoining the town. The town
                           should support the continuation of these preserves.
Skyline Scenic Corridor    Regulation: Zoning and site development regulations provide considerable
                                  protection.
                           Acquisition: Purchase, such as by MROSD, is necessary to make lands
                                  available for general public use.
Alpine Scenic Corridor     Regulation: Zoning can be useful in controlling the form of development
                                  on the edges of the corridor.
                           Acquisition: All of the parcels between the Alpine Road and Los Trancos
                                  Creek from the town boundary south to Arastradero Road should be
                                  acquired, or kept in private ownership, but retained as open space
                                  with compatible uses.
Greenways                  Regulation: A combination of land in fee title and conservation easements
                                  should be obtained at the time of subdivision. Special building
                                  setbacks might also be established in already subdivided areas.
                           Acquisition: Purchase should only be used where there is little or no
                                  likelihood of protecting the greenway through regulation.
Open Space-Limited         Extensive areas in unincorporated San Mateo and Santa Clara Counties are
Development                shown in this category. The town should support the continuation of this
                           designation and as well as its application to a small area in Palo Alto.
Agricultural Lands         The agricultural areas lie outside of the town limits. The town should,
                           however, cooperate with San Mateo County and Stanford University to
                           retain these areas in agricultural use for the foreseeable future.
Residential Open Space     Regulation: Open space easements to be dedicated at time property is
Preserve                           subdivided.
                           Acquisition: To be used only in rare cases where an open space preserve
                                   covers such a large portion of a parcel that no reasonable use would
                                   remain for the owner if the open space is preserved.
                                Open Space: Appendices
                                               24
Recreation Proposal        Implementation
Neighborhood Park          Regulation: Dedication at time of subdivision.
                           Acquisition: Purchase will be necessary if the park is not included in a
                                  subdivision. Purchase will also be needed when a park will serve a
                                  substantially different area from the subdivision or the land area
                                  exceeds the amount the town can require through dedication.
Community Park             Regulation: Dedication if part of large subdivision and substantially
                                  related thereto.
                           Acquisition: Purchase will be necessary if the park is not included in a
                                  subdivision. Also needed when a park will serve a substantially
                                  different area from the subdivision or the area exceeds the amount
                                  the town can require through dedication.
Regional Parks and Private These facilities already exist and include such as Foothill Park, the Stanford
Regional Facilities        Golf course, Windy Hill Open Space Preserve, the Alpine Tennis and Swim
                           Club and local boarding stables
Trails and Paths           Regulation: Many needed trails and paths can be obtained by dedication
                                  at time of subdivision. Improvements can also be obtained at the
                                  same time.
                           Acquisition: Purchases should be made only when acquisition by
                                  regulations or voluntary contribution appears unlikely.
Historic Resources         Regulation: The Historic Resources Combining District in the zoning
                                  regulations requires review of historic resources when part of an
                                  application before the town to help ensure compliance with
                                  provisions of the Historic Element of the general plan. Also, review
                                  of changes to structures that may meet historic criteria is required
                                  pursuant to CEQA.
                                Open Space: Appendices
                                               25
Town of Portola Valley General Plan
  Circulation Element
     Last amended March 11, 2015
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
   Definitions ................................................................................................................................... 2
Objectives ....................................................................................................................................... 3
Principles ......................................................................................................................................... 3
Standards ........................................................................................................................................ 4
Description ...................................................................................................................................... 5
   Freeways ..................................................................................................................................... 5
   Arterials ....................................................................................................................................... 5
   Major Collectors.......................................................................................................................... 6
   Minor Collectors ......................................................................................................................... 7
                               Circulation Element
Introduction
3100   The circulation system is designed to provide for all necessary types of movement
       of people and goods within and through the planning area. All routes and facilities
       are interrelated and form a comprehensive system.
3100a  The proposed system of circulation facilities includes riding and hiking trails, bicycle
       and walking paths, bicycle lanes, local roads and thoroughfares. This system would
       provide for a variety of types of travel throughout the planning area and would link
       related land uses. Thus, local trails would provide for movement for local residents
       within the planning area, whereas major trails connecting the planning area with
       other areas would be set apart on different alignments. Thoroughfares, including
       freeways and arterials, link the planning area to adjoining areas, provide channels
       of movement for through traffic and handle longer distance local trips. Local roads
       including land service roads, minor collectors and major collectors would provide
       access to abutting properties, handle short distance local trips and form connecting
       links with thoroughfares. Wherever possible, thoroughfares and major trails are
       combined in corridors of movement set in scenic corridors or greenways.
3100b  While the circulation element provides the necessary roads to serve the planning
       area, it does not necessarily provide sufficient capacity on all roads to permit a free
       flow condition at all times. There may be portions of some of the two-lane roads
       where congestion will require reduced speeds at times and where special traffic
       control measures may be necessary in order to improve safety. These decisions
       will have to be made as an alternative to providing additional traffic lanes
       inasmuch as additional traffic lanes within the town with accompanying adverse
       environmental impacts are not compatible with major community goals.
                                       Circulation
                                             1
           Furthermore, it has been assumed that there will be greater reliance on public
           transportation in the future which could serve to reduce the need for additional
           traffic lanes. In line with this possibility, attention will need to be given to possible
           public transportation stops along the more major trafficways within the planning
           area.
Definitions
3100c      1.      Freeway. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full control of
                   access. Trafficways carrying primarily inter-regional and inter-county traffic
                   should be of freeway level.
           2.      Arterial Road. A trafficway for through traffic with intersections at grade
                   but with direct access to abutting property limited to the greatest extent
                   feasible. Routes accommodating heavy volumes of traffic and connecting
                   other local roads with inter-community, inter-county or inter-regional routes
                   should be of arterial road level.
           3.      Major Collector. A surface street with points of access to abutting property
                   controlled or restricted, designed for local trips and mainly connecting minor
                   collector streets and land service roads with arterial roads, and freeways.
           4.      Minor Collector. A surface road with no major limitation to access to
                   abutting property and designed for shorter distance local trips. Minor
                   collectors usually serve one of two functions: a) provide a route of travel
                   alternative to that provided by major collectors; or, b) serve as a collector-
                   distributor providing connections between land service roads and major
                   collector roads or thoroughfares.
           5.      Land Service Road. A road primarily for access to abutting property and not
                   designed for general traffic use.
           6.      Scenic Corridors and Greenways. See definitions in Section 2302.
           7.      Emergency Access Road. A road for vehicle use only in the event of an
                   emergency. Such roads are gated, constructed to blend as much as possible
                   with the surroundings, and with a surface appropriate for emergency use.
                   Such roads are intended to provide an alternative route in emergencies to
                   and from areas otherwise reached by a single means of access that is not
                   considered sufficient for public safety.
                                             Circulation
                                                  2
Objectives
3101   1.    To provide for movement within and through the planning area by
             automobile, bicycle, horse and foot on an integrated system of circulation
             facilities. (See the trails and paths element for proposals for movement by
             bicycle, horse and foot.)
       2.    To accommodate the reasonable needs of each mode of transportation on a
             route designed and located to provide for the enjoyment and safety of the
             individual and to cause minimum interference with adjacent uses of land.
       3.    To locate, design and develop circulation facilities so as to conserve the
             natural beauty of the area and minimize adverse effects on adjoining uses of
             the land.
       4.    To provide a circulation system correlated with the land use element.
       5.    To provide trafficways: a) to connect the planning area with adjoining areas;
             and, b) to the extent made necessary by physical conditions, to provide for
             travel through the planning area.
       6.    To provide for safe and reasonably expeditious movement for local residents
             and minimize the disruptive influences of through traffic.
       7.    To provide adequate local roads to: a) afford access to individual properties;
             b) permit safe, pleasant travel between parts of the planning area; and, c)
             connect local areas within the planning area to thoroughfares.
       8.    Trafficways should be of a character and size that is compatible with the
             rural character of the town.
3102   (Not Used.)
3103   (Not Used.)
3104   (Not Used.)
Principles
3105   1.    Through traffic should be handled on trafficways on the periphery of the
             planning area to the maximum extent possible.
       2.    All thoroughfares and major local roads should be carefully located,
             designed and landscaped to preserve the beauty of the area, prevent ground
                                         Circulation
                                              3
          failure and erosion, limit impervious surface and help shield residents from
          noise and air pollution. Particular care should be given to retaining trees and
          other vegetative cover. Cuts and fills should be minimized and molded to
          natural contours.
      3.  Scenic routes through the area should be developed as greenways and
          scenic corridors.
      4.  Thoroughfares and major collector roads should be located and designed so
          as not to separate residents from local service facilities.
      5.  The system of thoroughfares should be coordinated with thoroughfares in
          adjacent areas.
      6.  All thoroughfares should have rights-of-way of sufficient width to permit
          planting of trees and shrubs to provide a substantial buffer between the
          roadway and adjoining properties.
      7.  Where choice is required between a direct route which has adverse impact
          on local residents or disrupts the natural features of an area, and a less
          direct route which has less adverse impact, the second alternative should be
          preferred.
      8.  Roads should be designed for safe travel at moderate speeds and to
          minimize the cost of maintenance.
      9.  On-road parking should be discouraged.
      10. Trafficways within the town and its spheres of influence, other than Junipero
          Serra Freeway, should be limited to two lanes except where additional lanes
          are needed for turning movements.
Standards
3106  1.  Standards of curvature, grade, alignment and sight distance should be
          conducive to safe, convenient travel on the following classes of trafficways:
          freeways, arterial roads, major collectors, minor collectors, and land service
          roads. Within limits imposed by safety, these standards should be modified
          in steep and difficult terrain to ensure that the scenic qualities of the area
          are not damaged. Also, the "country lane" quality of roads should be
          fostered to the maximum extent feasible and still meet an acceptable level
          of safety.
                                    Circulation
                                         4
          2.      Adequate provision should be made for pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian
                  crossings at appropriate locations. Specific locations should be controlled to
                  provide adequate sight distance and minimize hazard. Such crossings should
                  be clearly distinguished by signs and lane markings.
          3.      All traffic entering thoroughfares or major collector roads should be
                  controlled by stop signs, channelization or other appropriate devices.
          4.      Where warranted by traffic volume and physical conditions, appropriate
                  means of traffic control should be employed on roads other than
                  thoroughfares and major collectors in order to provide safe, expeditious
                  movement of traffic.
Description
3107      A system of freeways, arterials, and major and minor collectors provide for
          movement within and through the planning area. Major through traffic would use
          routes either on or near the boundaries of the planning area leaving most of the
          planning area with only local roads to serve local traffic.
Freeways
3108      The Junipero Serra Freeway is shown on the plan diagram. The Junipero Serra
          Freeway has had a very significant impact upon the planning area in terms of
          accessibility, noise and change to the landscape. Significant steps were taken to
          help assure that its design is compatible with the natural setting. Of particular
          concern have been the crossings over San Francisquito and Los Trancos Creeks.
          These crossings are on structures designed to minimize interference with the
          character of the creeks. At both of these crossings, there should be safe provisions
          for through trails and paths.
Arterials
3109      Nine arterials are shown on the plan diagram and described below.
3110      Alpine Road. Alpine Road serves as an arterial from Junipero Serra Boulevard to
          Portola Road. It is one of the two major arterials providing access to the majority
          of the planning area. It should remain as a two lane road within the town limits.
          This is described in detail in the Alpine Scenic Corridor Plan, Part 6.
3111      Portola Road. Portola Road should remain as a two lane road. As the main road
          through Portola Valley, it is important to control the development along the road
          and to carry out a planting program where natural vegetation is lacking. Buildings
                                            Circulation
                                                 5
          should be well set back from the roadway in order to preserve the open qualities
          essential to the present rural quality of the valley. The corridor along Portola Road
          is discussed in detail in the Portola Road Corridor Plan, starting with Section 6400
          of this General Plan.
3112      Skyline Boulevard. Skyline Boulevard is a State Scenic Highway. The general plan
          designates the route as a scenic corridor. It is envisioned that this will remain a
          two-lane facility passing through largely undeveloped land within the planning
          area. As a part of the scenic corridor, several stopping points with outstanding
          vistas are proposed. Also, the route will be a corridor for trails and paths. Special
          building setbacks and design controls should be maintained on lands fronting on
          the road.
3113      Sand Hill Road. That portion of Sand Hill Road from Junipero Serra Freeway to
          Portola Road should be adequate as a two-lane road.
3114      Junipero Serra Boulevard. Junipero Serra Boulevard is a two-lane facility within
          the planning area.
3115      Old La Honda Road. Most of Old La Honda Road is outside the planning area. It is
          shown, however, because it provides the principal access to the portion of Portola
          Valley along Skyline Boulevard and also because of its importance as a route
          between the bayside and coastside of the peninsula. This road, which would be
          very difficult to widen, will be pushed to its capacity limits.
3116      Whiskey Hill Road. Whiskey Hill Road is now developed as a two-lane road and
          should have sufficient capacity.
3117      Arastradero Road. Besides accommodating traffic to and from the residential
          areas in the Palo Alto Foothills, Arastradero Road provides an important link for
          some residents of the planning area traveling to the south Palo Alto area. Two
          lanes should be sufficient.
3118      Page Mill Road. Page Mill Road will be an important road providing access to and
          from residential development in the lower Palo Alto Hills and Los Altos Hills. In
          addition, it plays an important role as a connection between the lower portion of
          Palo Alto and the Skyline Scenic corridor and the Palo Alto Foothill Park.
Major Collectors
3119      The plan diagram indicates several major collectors: Westridge Drive, Alpine Road
          from Portola Road to Willowbrook Road, Los Trancos Road from Alpine Road to Los
          Trancos Woods, and the La Mesa-La Cuesta loop in Ladera.
                                           Circulation
                                                6
Minor Collectors
3120      Some of the minor collectors indicated on the plan diagram are existing while
          others are proposed. The existing ones are proposed to follow essentially the
          existing alignments while the proposed routes are only general in location. Not all
          of the minor collectors are shown on the plan diagram. Additional minor collectors
          will be needed, and in the main these can be constructed in conjunction with
          private development.
3121      Alpine Road, from Willowbrook Drive, is designated a minor collector to its
          intersection with Ciervos Road (approximately 1,000 feet southeast of Joaquin
          Road). This length of road passes through a steep-sided, narrow canyon of great
          natural beauty. Accordingly, this canyon is designated as a greenway. This length
          of road can not be widened without great harm to the environment and should
          therefore remain a narrow road. It is likely it should remain a one-lane facility with
          increased places for passing. Southeast of Ciervos Road the grade and alignment
          are extremely poor and it is recommended that the road continue to be closed to
          other than emergency vehicles and used for trail and path purposes.
3122      While the comprehensive plan diagram does not show road connections from the
          floor of the valley to Skyline Boulevard within the planning area except for Old La
          Honda Road, it is recognized that some minor connections will be appropriate.
          Such connections should be for emergency purposes only.
                                           Circulation
                                                7
Circulation Element Appendix 1:
Implementation of the Circulation Element
Actions to date:
1.     Alpine Road and Portola Road carry the major traffic in the town. The town has
       installed speed limits of 35 mph and 45 mph on these roads.
Future actions:
1.     The intersection of Alpine Road- Junipero Serra Boulevard - Santa Cruz Avenue poses
       major traffic problems for residents of the town during morning and afternoon
       commute hours. The town should continue to work with neighboring jurisdictions to
       develop improvements to this intersection.
2.     The town should monitor intersections on Alpine and Portola Roads to identify any
       safety problems and then develop appropriate traffic engineering solutions where
       problems require action.
                                     Circulation: Appendix
                                                8
Town of Portola Valley General Plan
    Scenic Roads and
   Highways Element
     Last amended March 11, 2015
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
Objectives ....................................................................................................................................... 2
Principles ......................................................................................................................................... 2
Description ...................................................................................................................................... 3
   State Highways............................................................................................................................ 3
   Local Scenic Roads ...................................................................................................................... 4
   Connecting Roads ....................................................................................................................... 5
                                        Scenic Roads and
                                    Highways Element
Introduction
3300   The state scenic highway legislation passed in 1963 set up a plan and program for
       the designation of “Official State Scenic Highways.” These were to be limited to
       state highways that traversed corridors of outstanding natural scenic beauty. The
       routes, nominated by local jurisdictions, were included in a master plan approved
       by the state. Official state designation comes only after the local jurisdiction
       provides assurance that the scenic quality of the road will be maintained and after
       such plans are approved by the Department of Transportation. Skyline Boulevard
       in San Mateo County, between Route 92 and the boundary with Santa Clara
       County, was the second highway in the state to receive official designation. Scenic
       highway law also authorizes the State Department of Transportation to designate
       county highways as “Official County Scenic Highways.”
3301   In 1973, the legislature required all cities and counties to prepare a scenic highway
       element; however, the law was subsequently changed to make this an optional
       element. Inclusion of roads in this element could in some cases be a first step
       toward official designation as state or county scenic highways. The legislation also
       provides for “unofficial” scenic highways and is not meant to preclude local
       agencies from developing and adopting local scenic routes.
                               Scenic Roads and Highways
                                            1

Objectives
3302    1.     To provide policies with respect to designation of highways within the
               planning area that are or may be eligible for scenic highway designation by
               the state.
        2.     To provide guidance regarding the maintenance of the scenic qualities of our
               major roads. Because Portola Valley is a place of unusual natural beauty, all
               roads in Portola Valley can be considered “scenic.” However, it is possible
               that the pressure of increasing development and the resultant traffic could
               lead to the erosion of the aesthetic quality of our roadsides if care is not
               taken.
Principles
3303    These principles are intended to guide future actions of the town and private
        parties.
        1.     Regulate density and land use, as provided in the general plan and zoning
               ordinances, with special attention to the view from the road.
        2.     Give special consideration to site development, including controlled access
               for driveways and special setbacks for buildings.
        3.     Keep the amount of roadway cuts and fills required in road maintenance or
               construction to a reasonable minimum.
        4.     Contour and plant cut and fill slopes as an integral part of the road design,
               construction and maintenance process.
        5.     Carefully control earth moving, grading, contouring and replanting in areas
               adjacent to and visible from the road.
        6.     Keep traffic signs and markers to a minimum and place with consideration
               for the visual quality of the road. In addition, all commercial signs on scenic
               routes must be of such design as to be in keeping with a rural and natural
               atmosphere.
        7.     Control the design of all structures abutting scenic routes, including review
               by the Architectural and Site Control Commission.
        8.     Landscape all development along scenic routes and maintain such
               landscaping.
                                Scenic Roads and Highways
                                              2

          9.      The town and user groups should be responsible for the regular pick up of
                  trash in the rights of way of town scenic routes.
          10.     Encourage planting of native wildflowers, shrubs, and trees on public and
                  private property. Wherever possible, remove aggressive exotic volunteers
                  such as yellow star thistle, pampas grass, acacia, Scotch and French broom
                  and eucalyptus.
          11.     Provide hiking and riding trails and bicycling paths separated from the
                  pavement, where possible, as a part of future road improvements.
          12.     As a condition of their conditional use permit, require commercial
                  developments along scenic roads to maintain a neat and tidy appearance.
                  Surroundings of the buildings must be kept clean, and planted areas must be
                  maintained.
          13.     Give high priority to placing underground all existing overhead utility lines,
                  and structures to the extent possible, along the town scenic roads. Do not
                  erect new or additional overhead facilities.
Description
3304      The regulations of the Town of Portola Valley are designed to protect the natural
          beauty of the whole area, including roadways. Skyline Boulevard is already an
          officially designated State Scenic Highway. It is not anticipated that official state
          designation will be sought for the Alpine or Portola Roads. Nevertheless it is the
          intention of the town to protect and enhance the appearance of scenic roads and
          highways by careful attention to adopted design principles.
State Highways
3305      The two state highways designated in this plan as scenic highways are Skyline
          Boulevard and Highway 280.
3306      Skyline Boulevard (Route 35), from the intersection with Route 92 south to the
          county border, became the second officially designated scenic highway of the state
          on January 22, 1968. The town, by Town Council Resolution No. 38-1965, joined
          with the Town of Woodside and San Mateo County in requesting the designation.
          Town regulations for that part of the Skyline corridor lying within the town, as
          approved by the state, may be found in pages 58 to 76 of A Proposed Corridor Plan
          for a Scenic Highway, Skyline Boulevard, San Mateo County published by San Mateo
          County in September of 1967.
                                   Scenic Roads and Highways
                                                 3
3307      Special town regulations adopted for the Skyline corridor should continue to
          provide for special building setback lines and design reviews.
3308      Part of Highway 280 is within the planning area and the sphere of influence of the
          town. The town recommended and the state designated Interstate Highway 280 as
          a state scenic highway because of the beauty of the countryside through which it
          passes and because of the many excellent features of its design.
Local Scenic Roads
3309      The two roads designated in this plan as local scenic roads are Alpine Road and
          Portola Road.
3310      Alpine Road is now a route of great natural beauty and variety. The creeks it
          follows through the foothills are lined with tall trees, and the countryside has kept
          much of its rural tranquillity. The mountain canyon is still wild and new views open
          up at each turn of the road. A superb scenic route already exists. It is threatened
          by change. The challenge is to find and pursue the ways that can protect and
          preserve this route through the mountains for our present enjoyment and the
          delight of future generations.
3311      The town has, since its incorporation, endeavored to protect the scenic quality of
          the Alpine corridor. From a policy statement adopted in July 1969:
3312      “The policy of the Town of Portola Valley has always been to maintain a tranquil,
          rural atmosphere, and to preserve a maximum of green open space. The Alpine
          Scenic corridor should be developed in accordance with the policy. The natural
          look and feeling of the land between the road and the creek should be maintained.
          Trees and natural growth should be preserved and increased. Recreational uses
          should be in keeping with a peaceful and rural atmosphere.”
3313      In May, 1971, the town adopted the Alpine Parkway Plan, subsequently renamed
          the Alpine Scenic Corridor Plan, as a part of the town general plan which includes
          detailed description of the road and of related design policies (see part 6). Special
          provisions to implement the plan and to protect the corridor include:
          1.     Open space zoning for sections of the corridor.
          2.     Special setback lines along a major portion of Alpine Road.
          3.     An open space program which does and should include recommendations
                 for land acquisition and regulations pertaining to the corridor.
          4.     The recreation element and the trails and paths element which include
                 proposals for trails and paths in the corridor.
                                  Scenic Roads and Highways
                                               4

3314     Alpine Road above the intersection with Ciervos Road is a recreation route
         restricted to horse, bicycle, pedestrian and emergency vehicle traffic. The town
         endorses this designation. Nothing in this plan is meant to negate this provision.
3315     Portola Road within the confines of Portola Valley is the most “urban” of the scenic
         roadways. It is nevertheless a road of more than usual natural beauty, running
         through what may be considered the heart of the townthe floor of Portola Valley
         including residential areas, The Sequoias, the meadow, orchards, stables and
         properties. Special consideration should be given to building size, design and
         setbacks along this road. The Portola Road Corridor Plan was adopted in 2015 as
         part of this General Plan and includes detailed goals, objectives and policies for the
         corridor.
3316     It is town policy that land abutting our scenic routes should be zoned to maintain
         the maximum possible open space and scenic quality. Land to the south and west
         of Portola Road is under special restriction, local and state, because it is underlain
         by major fault traces. The regulations of the town, and the design principles for
         Portola Valley scenic roads, should be sufficient to preserve the natural rural
         beauty of this corridor.
Connecting Roads
3317     Scenic roads in other jurisdictions such as Woodside, Menlo Park, Palo Alto and San
         Mateo County which connect to Portola Valley scenic roads are to be encouraged
         so as to provide a continuous quality of road corridor. All scenic roads in Portola
         Valley do, in fact, continue into adjoining jurisdictions. Also, the small portion of
         Arastradero Road in the town should be treated so as to be compatible with the
         scenic character in Santa Clara County and Palo Alto.
                                  Scenic Roads and Highways
                                              5

Scenic Roads and Highways Element, Appendix 1:
Implementation of the Scenic Roads and Highways Element
Actions to date:
1.     Adopted a special building setback line requiring a buildings to be set back at least 200
       feet from the right-of-way of Skyline Boulevard.
2.     Adopted a design review combining district in the zoning regulations that requires
       special design review of all development that borders Skyline Boulevard to the east.
3.     Cooperated with the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District in the establishment of
       open space preserves that border Skyline Boulevard.
Future actions:
1.     The town should continue to administer the zoning regulations that help ensure the
       quality of the scenic highway.
2.          The town should continue to cooperate with the Midpeninsula Regional Open
            Space District in its efforts to preserve open space along the highway.
                              Scenic Roads and Highways: Appendix
                                                  6
Town of Portola Valley General Plan
 Conservation Element
      Last amended May 25, 2011
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
   Definitions ................................................................................................................................... 2
Objectives........................................................................................................................................ 2
Principles ......................................................................................................................................... 4
Standards ........................................................................................................................................ 7
Description ...................................................................................................................................... 7
   Education .................................................................................................................................... 7
   Regulation ................................................................................................................................... 7
   Acquisition .................................................................................................................................. 8
   Incentives .................................................................................................................................... 8
   Technical Advice.......................................................................................................................... 9
   Remedial Work Programs ........................................................................................................... 9
   Miscellaneous Private Efforts ................................................................................................... 10
                        Conservation Element
Introduction
4200   The lands and waters of Portola Valley and its planning area comprise nearly one-
       half of the headwaters of the San Francisquito Creek watershed and a substantial
       amount of the natural foothills and hillsides remaining on the Midpeninsula. The
       town and its residents are the stewards of these natural resources and should
       cooperate with surrounding jurisdictions on watershed management and regional
       conservation.
       Runoff from many tributaries in the watershed become concentrated in the San
       Francisquito Creek as it passes through Palo Alto and discharges into the San
       Francisco Bay. Flooding of these lower lands is an ongoing concern of Palo Alto and
       neighboring communities. Efforts to minimize flooding problems and preserve the
       health of the system will continue through actions of federal, state and local
       agencies. Portola Valley is and will continue to be a participant in these endeavors.
       The conservation element concerns four basic categories: water--creeks, ponds,
       ground water, and imported water; vegetation--both native and exotic; soils and
       geology; and wildlife. This division is for convenience only; the interrelationships of
       these resources should be recognized and cherished.
4201   The conservation element provides a programmatic approach for the conservation,
       restoration, development and utilization of natural resources. Some aspects of
       conservation programs can be accomplished solely through public efforts while
       others can only be effectuated by identifying self interests or appealing to the
       community spirit of the owners of private property within the town. This element
       is concerned with programs, requiring both public and private action, that will
       conserve and enhance the natural qualities of the planning area.
                                      Conservation
                                             1
4202      The effective conservation, restoration, development and utilization of natural
          resources cannot be accomplished without professional study and evaluation of
          critical areas or needs. The conservation element generally describes those fragile
          areas of the ecosystem that must be protected. It provides, in addition, policies
          that will help ensure that in planning and development of specific land use
          proposals environmental impact is not overlooked, that conservation actions are
          considered, and that such evaluations and actions are sufficiently comprehensive in
          accordance with professionally established guidelines.
Definitions
4203      Public Conservation Programs are largely carried out by local govenments such as
          cities and counties. The town of Portola Valley can implement conservation
          measures through its regulatory powers including its zoning, subdivision and site
          development ordinances. Special districts as well as non-profit organizations also
          play roles. The Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District addresses conservation
          issues on land it owns in and adjoining the town. In addition, the Peninsula Open
          Space Trust, a non-profit trust, acquires land that will ultimately be retained as
          open space and held in a natural condition. Also included are those educational,
          technical assistance, incentive, acquisition and protective work programs that can
          be pursued by public agencies.
4204      Private Conservation Programs include protective work programs sponsored by
          private organizations and individual efforts for the conservation of natural
          resources on private sites. Private groups can, through the dissemination of
          conservation information, educate those unaware of environmental problem areas
          and, more importantly, values to be conserved. In addition, private dedication of
          conservation easements and/or financial donations for the protection of the
          natural processes would enhance all conservation efforts.
Objectives
4205      The conservation element includes: objectives, principles and standards; and a
          description of programs.
4206      For the objectives of the conservation element to be implemented, public and
          private efforts cannot be carried out in isolation of each other. It is the purpose of
          this element to provide a unified framework for the achievement of the
          conservation objectives.
4207      WaterCreeks, Ponds, Ground Water, and Imported Water
          1.     To protect the area against excessive storm water runoff, flooding, erosion
                 and other related damage.
                                         Conservation
                                               2

     2.   To protect natural ground water recharge areas.
     3.   To maintain standards to insure a high water quality.
     4.   To preserve the natural character of all watershed land.
     5.   To prevent obstructions to the natural flow of water that would adversely
          affect natural processes.
     6.   To maintain a healthy ecological system for plants and animals in and along all
          bodies of water.
     7.   To encourage the conservation of water resources.
     8.   To encourage the recycling of water, both domestic and imported.
4208 VegetationBoth Native and Exotic
     1.   To minimize disturbance of the natural terrain and native vegetation.
     2.   To preserve and protect all native and naturalized plants with special
          attention to preservation of unique, rare or endangered species and plant
          communities such as oak woodland and serpentine grasslands.
     3.   To encourage the planting of native plant species as part of any site
          development for ecological, aesthetic and water conservation purposes.
     4.   To ensure that when changes in natural grades or removal of existing
          vegetation is required on any public or private project, remedial measures call
          for the restoration or introduction of native vegetative cover for ecological as
          well as erosion control purposes.
     5.   To ensure that all thoroughfares and local roads are designed and planned to
          preserve the natural beauty and character of the corridor to the maximum
          extent possible.
     6.   To encourage the planting of native trees and shrubs to provide a substantial
          buffer between roadways and adjoining properties in harmony with the
          general character of the town.
     7.   To encourage the removal and prevention of the spreading of aggressive
          exotics such as pampas grass, acacia, yellow star thistle, French broom, Scotch
          broom and eucalyptus.
     8.   To preserve and maintain an area of native vegetation along creek corridors in
          order to separate turf and impervious surfaces from the creeks.
                                   Conservation
                                         3

        9.    To protect forests and other vegetation for their roles in helping maintain and
              improve air quality.
4209   Soils and Geology
        1.    To prohibit the quarrying of rock, sand and gravel, as such uses are
              incompatible with basic town objectives.
        2.    To prevent, control and correct the erosion of soil.
        3.    To prohibit the dumping of any waste material that may harm or destroy soil
              quality and character.
        4.    To encourage wise soil husbandry and soil enrichment with organic wastes
              and other soil building materials.
        5.    To limit, and where determined necessary for public safety, prohibit
              development in hazardous geologic areas.
        6.    To encourage agricultural uses on soils suited for agricultural purposes when
              appropriate.
4210    Wildlife
        1.    To ensure that in the design and construction of public and private
              developments, the habitat of all wildlife will be protected to the maximum
              extent feasible, with special emphasis on protecting the habitat of any
              endangered species.
        2.    To maintain and protect creek corridors for wildlife who use this resource for
              food, shelter, migration and breeding.
        3.    To protect large and small natural systems for the purpose of supporting
              wildlife.
Principles
4211    WaterCreeks, Ponds and Ground Water
        1.    Recognizing that we live in a semi-arid area with increasing demand on limited
              water supplies, water conservation methods must be a guiding principle in all
              land use planning.
                                       Conservation
                                             4

     2.   Environmental impact reports or studies, prepared professionally, should be
          required of public and private projects that propose extensive grading or
          vegetation removal on watershed lands.
     3.   Dumping of waste materials into creeks or streams or within their established
          undeveloped drainage basins should be prohibited.
     4.   Use of agricultural fertilizers and chemicals in areas along creeks should be
          tightly controlled so as to avoid adverse impacts.
     5.   The town shall require that there be no significant alterations of stream
          channels or obstructions to the natural flow of water. Creeks should be
          maintained in their naturally meandering channels consistent with
          geomorphic processes. Where channels are damaged or property threatened,
          bank stabilization by biotechnical methods are preferable to engineered
          solutions such as concrete walls and similar structures.
     6.   The natural flow of streams should be maintained and not diverted for other
          uses.
     7.   To protect water quality, the town shall encourage development to maintain
          an undisturbed or enhanced protective buffer between all cut and fill slopes,
          non-native turf or areas under chemical management or impermeable
          surfaces, and any creek corridors.
     8.   To require management practices that will reduce the amount of pollution
          entering water bodies.
     9.   Development should be restricted in areas subject to flooding.
4212 Vegetation
     1.   Removal of native vegetation should be minimized, and replanting required
          where necessary to maintain soil stability, prevent erosion and maximize
          reoxygenation.
     2.   Forest resources should be protected from harvesting.
     3.   Mature native trees and shrubs should be conserved.
     4.   Plantings in public trail easements or public road rights of way shall be of
          native plants and trees and shall not interfere with the use of the easements
          for public purposes such as equestrians, hikers, pedestrians, bicyclists, runners
          and vehicles.
                                     Conservation
                                           5
      5.    The town should encourage restoration of unique or rare vegetation and
            habitats.
      6.    Along creeks, indigenous vegetation should be protected and, where
            necessary, restored and enhanced.
      7.    Management of native vegetation for the purpose of fire safe management
            practices should be done only to the extent necessary to meet reasonable fire
            safety objectives while still seeking to protect the biologial resources of the
            environment.
 4213  Soils and Geology
       1.    Zoning and other land use regulations should be used to limit, and in some
             cases prohibit, development in geologically hazardous areas. The degree of
             development limitation provided for in such regulations should be
             commensurate with the degree of hazard involved and the public costs likely
             to be incurred if emergency or remedial public action becomes necessary in
             these areas.
       2.    Land use regulations should allow for and encourage using the best soils for
             agriculture when appropriate.
4214  Wildlife
      1.    An environmental impact report or study, prepared by a qualified biologist,
            should be required to determine if the habitat of wildlife is being impacted,
            particularly of endangered species, by any proposed public or private project
            where such encroachment appears likely.
      2.    All subdivision and site development proposals should be reviewed to ensure
            that they do not obstruct wildlife access to important water, food and
            breeding areas.
      3.    Designate creek corridors as sensitive areas which provide important aquatic
            and terrestrial wildlife habitat. Setback requirements should be established
            by zoning for all new development along creeks. All new subdivisions and site
            development proposals should contain setback area sufficient to buffer
            wildlife inhabiting the creek corridor from the impacts of development.
      4.    Protect lands and habitat that support endangered or protected species
            wherever possible and consistent with state and federal requirements.
      5.    Give attention to restoring native habitat for wildlife when reviewing
            development proposals and initiating town projects.
                                      Conservation
                                            6
Standards
4215      Specific standards are and will be included within the zoning, subdivision and site
          development ordinances.
Description
4216      Several conservation program areas are proposed. Each program area is based on
          conservation of the natural processes or ensuring public health and safety. Specific
          recommendations made are directed at the objectives of the four categories of
          concern: water (creeks, ponds, groundwater and imported water); vegetation
          (native and exotic); soils, geology; and wildlife.
4217      The program areas proposed are not meant to be the basis for the establishment
          and implementation of specific conservation programs in isolation of one another
          as the entire ecosystem is closely interrelated. They provide, rather, a unified
          framework for inter-relating action programs, projects, and other actions to ensure
          that conservation efforts will be of maximum efficiency and effectiveness.
4218      Each program area proposed could be designated as the responsibility of either the
          public or private sector; however, it is necessary for program implementation that
          all programs are understood and supported by both sectors. Further, conservation
          is dependent upon each individual's realization of his or her intimate relationship
          with the environment. All the public efforts are of limited value without citizen
          participation in protecting the environment.
Education
4219      Public education and information programs detailing conservation values and
          problem areas and providing guidance of protective actions should be organized
          and administered by town staff and elected and appointed officials in cooperation
          with schools at all levels. This would include, in addition, special public meetings
          and information sessions with established private clubs or groups. Private
          conservation groups can also play an important part in citizen education.
Regulation
4220      The natural character of Portola Valley can be conserved in large part by ensuring
          that new and existing development is controlled by suitable regulation – mainly
          zoning, subdivision and site development regulations. These regulations are
          applied by the town as part of its “police power,” the right of government to enact
          laws which are in the public interest and which are directly related to the health,
          safety and general welfare of the community. Ordinances adopted in 1967 and as
          subsequently amended seek to preserve the natural setting. The zoning,
                                          Conservation
                                                7

           subdivision and site development regulations provide much of the framework
           within which the town will develop and are sufficient to achieve many of the
           objectives of the conservation element by ensuring that development projects are
           always considered in the context of conservation of the environment and that
           conservation easements are dedictated when appropriate. The regulations should
           include control over development in areas where natural hazards exist. These
           regulations will only achieve the objectives with careful and imaginative guidance
           by town staff, elected representatives and citizens.
4221       The town has established special setbacks along the major creeks in the town,
           which are: Los Trancos Creek, Corte Madera Creek and Sausal Creek. The purposes
           of the setbacks are to improve the quality of creekbank protection measures,
           reduce risk to property improvements, protect scenic values and protect the
           riparian habitat important to wildlife. Administration of these provisions by town
           officials and staff will be a major factor in protection of these important habitats.
4222       The town is served by septic systems and sewers. The comparative merits of these
           two methods of sewage disposal should be studied further.
4223       The town’s report “Portola Valley Sensitive Biological Resources Assessment and
           Fuel Hazard Assessment” dated 2008 and 2010, includes GIS maps of vegetation,
           soils and fire hazard and also provides extensive technical information on native
           vegetation. Guidelines for protecting habitat are included and should be consulted
           regularly by planning staff and decision-making bodies in conjunction with the
           review of development proposals. Futhermore, the report includes guidelines for
           protecting biological resources when undertaking vegetation management for the
           purpose of fire hazard mitigation.
4224       The implementation of this element with regard to water resources shall be
           coordinated with any countywide water agency and other agencies that have
           developed, served or conserved water for any purpose for the town.
Acquisition
4225       There are cases where regulation will not provide a basis for achieving conservation
           objectives. In these situations, a town program for acquisition may be needed.
           There are two basic types of land ownership – full or fee title, and partial title, such
           as through a conservation easement or ownership of development rights. For a
           discussion of acquisition, see Open Space Element Appendix 2: Implementation of
           the Open Space Element.
Incentives
4226       For effective conservation of natural resources, a program of public incentives
           should be considered. Incentives in the form of tax relief or some other financial
                                           Conservation
                                                  8

          form (e.g., Williamson Act, income tax allowance for gifts, etc.) could be used for
          the conservation of large areas critically important to natural processes. Changes in
          this type of incentive would require a higher level of public involvement (state and
          federal legislation) to increase flexibility at the local level. The town has already
          adopted policy in favor of such incentives now permitted at the local level.
          Incentives could also take the form of allowing modification of normal regulations
          for special conservation considerations by the property owner or developer.
Technical Advice
4227      Professional technical advice is essential for full understanding of the natural
          processes. As noted above, the town’s report “Portola Valley Sensitive Biological
          Resources Assessment and Fuel Hazard Assessment” dated 2008 and 2010 provides
          detailed mapping of vegetation in the town along with lists of endangered and
          threatened species associated with such vegetation. A system for applying the
          information in the planning program and in particular when reviewing development
          proposals should be developed.
4228      The town has adopted a Geologic Map and Ground Movement Potential Map along
          with an implementing policy statement and zoning ordinance provisions. These
          documents provide significant guidance in helping ensure the safety of
          developments in areas subject to landslides and other geologic hazards and also in
          avoiding damage to the natural environment including erosion and flooding. This
          information will guide public decision makers and should be available to the private
          sector for both education and advice.
4229      Information on available professional services and sources of professional advice
          including county, state and federal agencies, professional societies, conservation
          groups, and appropriate local professionals (e.g., landscape architects, geologists,
          biologists and hydrologists) should be made available at the Portola Valley town
          hall and through the town library and public schools within the town as well as at
          the high school and community college levels.
Remedial Work Programs
4230      Remedial work programs directed at specific conservation problem areas can
          prevent irreversible damage to the environment. Also, programs requiring
          organized private group efforts, clean up campaigns, etc., can help to improve the
          environment and bring people together in a common effort. Town sponsored
          projects such as litter removal and removal of invasive vegetation, as well as other
          programs, can make a substantial contribution to the conservation of the
          environment.
                                         Conservation
                                                9

Miscellaneous Private Efforts
4231      For the conservation program to be effective, individual, organized and
          unorganized private efforts are necessary. These efforts include individual lot
          maintenance to high standards based on the preservation of the natural character
          (e.g., care in controlling site drainage, use and control of exotic plants to prevent
          widespread weed growth, etc.), dedications of conservation easements and
          financial donations with the requirement that they be spent for the protection of
          the natural processes.
                                           Conservation
                                                10
Table 1. Guide to Park, Recreation, and Open Space Proposals in the General Plan
     Park, Recreation or Open Space           Park and        Open        Trail &      Scenic Roads    Land Use
                                             Recreation      Space         Path       and Highways      Element
                                              Element       Element      Element         Element
Neighborhood Preserve                             -             X
Neighborhood Park                                 X
Community Preserve                                -             X
Community Park                                    X
Other Community Parks or Preserves                X             X
Regional Park or Private Regional Facility        X             X
Open Space Preserve                                             X
Scenic Corridor                                   -             X
Greenway                                          -             X
Open Space Limited Development                                  X
Agricultural Lands                                              X
 Secondarily Park, Recreation, or Open
                 Space*
Residential Open Space Preserves                                                                           X
Trails and Paths                                                             X
Scenic Roads and Highways                                                                    X
* These land use categories serve primarily for residential or circulation purposes, but have secondary uses as
parks, recreation areas, or open spaces.
                                                   Conservation
                                                         11
Conservation Element Appendix 1:
Implementation of the Conservation Element
Actions to date:
1.     The town has added to its zoning, subdivision and site development ordinances general
       provisions that provide a basis for protection of the natural environment, especially with
       respect to controlling grading and protecting forested areas. In addition, the zoning
       ordinance allows the clustering of development which can reduce the impact on the
       natural environment.
Future actions:
1.     The town should undertake the studies and actions as specified in Open Space Element
       Appendix 2: Implementation of the Open Space Element
                                    Conservation: Appendix
                                                12
Town of Portola Valley General Plan
    Historic Element
      Last amended April 22, 1998
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
   Background of Community ......................................................................................................... 1
   Purpose ....................................................................................................................................... 2
   Scope ........................................................................................................................................... 2
   Definitions ................................................................................................................................... 2
Objectives ....................................................................................................................................... 3
Principles ......................................................................................................................................... 3
Standards ........................................................................................................................................ 4
   Historic Resource to be Preserved.............................................................................................. 4
   Historic Resource to be Noted with a Plaque ............................................................................. 5
   Historic Resource Listed for Further Consideration ................................................................... 5
   Historic Resource Listed to Provide a Record of History ............................................................ 5
Description ...................................................................................................................................... 5
                                              Historic Element
Introduction
Background of Community
2500     Portola Valley's early heritage is largely tied to the natural beauty and resources
         abundant in the valley floor and the redwood covered mountainsides. The earliest
         reported settlers of the area were the Ohlone Indians who lived lightly off the land,
         gathering seeds, berries and nuts, fishing and hunting the valleys and foothills for
         deer, rabbits, squirrels, duck and other game.
2501     Permanent settlement of the valley began in 1833, when Maximo Martinez and
         Jose Domingo Peralta received the first Mexican land grant in what is now San
         Mateo County for the Rancho el Corte de Madera. Redwood lumbering dominated
         the valley's activities for the rest of the century with the Town of Searsville, located
         near the present day Searsville Lake, springing up to support the logging industry.
2502     By the turn of the century, beauty and serenity became more significant lures, as
         wealthy San Franciscans assembled large estates in the area. Andrew Smith
         Hallidie donated land for the Village of Portola, a post office and the town's first
         school. The valley became a popular summer retreat and vacation spot and in the
         1920s and 1930s many vacation cottages were built in the newly subdivided areas
         of Brookside Park, Woodside Highlands, and Los Trancos Woods. Subdivision of the
         Westridge, Alpine Hills, and Arrowhead Meadows areas took place in the 1940s and
         1950s, rapidly expanding the population of the area and establishing the residential
         character that exists today.
2503     Structures and other remnants of early settlement in the area tend to be spread
         throughout the valley. There is no central historic area. Each of these resources is
                                             Historic
                                                 1
          an important piece of the town's heritage and should be preserved for future
          generations.
Purpose
2504      The historic element identifies principal historic resources and sets objectives for
          their preservation, enhancement and maintenance. It guides Portola Valley and
          other city and county agencies in decisions which might directly or indirectly affect
          these resources. The historic element is a strong policy statement for the
          continued preservation of the town's historic environment.
Scope
2505      The historic element includes objectives, principles, standards and descriptions. A
          list of the town's historic resources is included in the descriptions section. Historic
          Element Appendix 1, the Historic Resources Inventory, describes in more detail
          each of the historic resources in the town. Appendix 2, Implementation of the
          Historic Element, outlines implementation strategies and programs for preserving
          the resources.
Definitions
2506      Historic Resource: A man-made or natural physical feature which is of value
          because it documents the history of the town and represents an architectural,
          cultural, archaeological, community or aesthetic value and is subject to the
          provisions of this element. More specifically, it shall possess one or more of the
          following attributes:
          1.       Yield or be likely to yield information that is important in pre-history or
                   history.
          2.       Be associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
                   patterns of life in the town.
          3.       Be associated with lives and cultures significant with the town's past.
          4.       Embody the distinctive characteristics of the time, period or method of
                   construction, especially if it is the last remaining such structure, represents
                   the work of a master, and/or possesses high artistic value.
          5.       Possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship and
                   feeling of its original nature.
2507      Categories of Historic Resources: Historic resources of the town are grouped into
          five categories. These categories are defined as follows:
                                                Historic
                                                   2
       1.     Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
              permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including, but without
              being limited to, buildings, bridges, fences, gates, gazebos, swimming pools,
              towers and walls.
       2.     Site: Any parcel or portion of a parcel.
       3.     Trail: A marked or unmarked track, course or path, which is or was followed
              with regularity.
       4.     Road: Any open way, paved or unpaved, for vehicles, persons and/or
              animals to travel, or on which they have traveled, with regularity.
       5.     Natural feature: Any tree, plant life, geographical or geological site or
              feature.
Objectives
2508   The objectives of the Town of Portola Valley in adopting this element of the general
       plan are:
       1.     To preserve, protect and enhance the historic resources of the planning area
              because they are unique and valuable assets for the planning area, San
              Mateo County, the Peninsula or the entire San Francisco Bay Area.
       2.     To build civic pride in Portola Valley's unique qualities by fostering citizen
              efforts to preserve and enhance historic resources.
       3.     To promote community awareness of local history and historic resources for
              the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the town.
Principles
2509   The following several principles are intended to guide the town and private parties
       in future actions.
       1.     Each resource in the element is classified according to whether it is to be
              preserved, denoted by a plaque, listed for further consideration or simply
              listed to provide a record of history.
       2.     While it is the intent to preserve identified resources for the benefit of the
              town, it is recognized that there will be circumstances where it will not be
                                          Historic
                                             3
                   possible to achieve preservation. Such determinations cannot always be
                   made in advance and therefore prudent decisions must be made when
                   individual resources are before the town for action.
           3.      When evaluating the preservation of an historic resource, consideration
                   should be given to preserving any immediate physical surroundings that
                   contribute to the historic quality of the resource.
Standards
2510       Under the description section of this element, each historic resource is noted as to
           whether it is to be preserved, identified with a plaque, listed for further
           consideration, or simply listed to provide a record of history. Each of these
           classifications are described below.
Historic Resource to be Preserved
2511       1.      A historic resource noted for preservation shall have its exterior appearance
                   retained to the maximum extent possible. This does not preclude:
                   a.    Exterior alterations necessary to ensure safety which conform to the
                         historic character of the resource.
                   b.    Additions which conform to the historic character of the resource.
                   c.    Additions or changes required to conform with the Americans with
                         Disabilities Act.
           2.      Any additions or alterations pursuant to Section 2511.1. shall be
                   accomplished in such a manner that they can be removed at a future time to
                   reveal the historic resource as it appeared prior to such additions or
                   alterations.
           3.      A historic resource which at some time has been partially or entirely
                   destroyed may be reconstructed to its original design.
           4.      A historic resource noted as to be preserved shall not be removed unless one
                   of the following conditions has been determined to exist; however, if one of
                   the conditions is determined to exist, time shall be provided to allow the
                   town to consider alternate ways in which to retain the resource.
                   a.    The resource is a potential safety hazard and alterations to provide
                         safety and retain its historic character are unreasonable.
                                               Historic
                                                  4
                  b.      The resource has been so altered or modified that its historic
                          significance no longer exists.
                  c.      Retention of the historic resource is an unreasonable burden on a
                          property owner.
           5.     It is intended that resources noted as to be preserved should at an
                  appropriate time have a plaque installed in a location visible by the public
                  unless otherwise indicated in the description section of this element.
Historic Resource to be Noted with a Plaque
2512       1.     Plaques are intended to assist the public in identifying sites of former
                  structures, trails, roads and natural features.
           2.     Plaques should be located where they can be read by the public without
                  entering private property.
Historic Resource Listed for Further Consideration
2513       1.     This category is intended for those resources where available data is not
                  conclusive as to the appropriateness of preserving the resource.
           2.     It is intended that prior to any exterior modification to or removal of such
                  resource, a determination shall be made as a part of an application before
                  the town as to whether to reclassify the resource as to be preserved or
                  reclassified to be added to the list to provide a record of history. Concurrent
                  with such determination, this element shall be modified as appropriate.
Historic Resource Listed to Provide a Record of History
2514       1.     These resources are included in the element to help complete the
                  identification of historically significant resources in the town.
           2.     These resources are either located outside of the town limits, or are features
                  which do not require identification with a plaque.
Description
2515       Historic resources included in this element are listed below by type and shown on
           the map, “Sites for Historic Element - within city limits” which is a part of this
           element and is incorporated herein. Detailed descriptions of these historic
           resources are included in Historic Element Appendix 1, Historic Resources
           Inventory, dated December 1, 1989 and revised October 27, 1993. Also listed
                                              Historic
                                                  5

     below are the historic resource numbers which correspond with the numbers on
     the historic resources map and in the inventory.
2516 For each resource a designation is assigned which indicates the how the resource
     should be treated. These designations, “Preserve,” “Plaque,” “List for further
     consideration,” and “List to provide a record,” are defined in Sections 2511- 2514.
2517 Structures
      Name                       Location/Description/Comments          Map  Treatment
                                                                        No.
      Casa de Tableta (Alpine    3915 Alpine Rd.                          4  Preserve
      Beer Garden)
      Fitzhugh “Windmill”        380 Portola Rd. (see sites also, “Site  14  Preserve
                                 of Corte Madera brewery and
                                 Nahmen House”)
      Freeman House               940 Los Trancos Rd., “Heptagon        15 A Preserve
                                 Ranch”
      Mariani Barn                                                      15 B Preserve
      Allen-Woods House and      800 Los Trancos Rd. (see natural        19  List for further
      grounds                    features also)                              consideration
      Fromhertz House            210 Portola Rd.                         21  Preserve
      Searsville District School Town of Portola Valley, 765 Portola     25  Preserve
      Bell                       Rd.
      Portola School District    Town of Portola Valley, 765 Portola     27  Preserve
      Primary School             Rd.
      Hallett Store              846 Portola Rd. (now office space)      28  Plaque
      Our Lady of the Wayside    930 Portola Rd.                         30  Preserve
      Chilean Woodchopper's      Jelich ranch, 683 Portola Rd.          31 A List for further
      House                                                                  consideration
      Jelich House               683 Portola Rd.                        31 B List to provide a
                                                                             record
      Tank House                 683 Portola Rd.                        31 C Preserve
      Conolley-Melchor House     555 Portola Rd.                         32  Preserve
      Alpine Road Gate           4670 Alpine Rd. “Lauriston” –          33 A Preserve
                                 Willowbrook Farm"
      Terraces                   4670 Alpine Rd. “Lauriston” –          33 B List to provide a
                                 “Willowbrook Farm”                          record
      Terraces                   200 Willowbrook Dr. “Lauriston” –      33 B Preserve
                                 “Willowbrook Farm”
      Superintendent's house     451 Portola Rd. “Lauriston” –          33 D Preserve
      and office                 “Willowbrook Farm”
      “Villa Lauriston” Entry    5050 Alpine Rd.                        34 A  Preserve
      (gate and bridge)
      “Villa Lauriston” Main     5050 Alpine Rd.                        34 B Preserve
      Residence
      “Villa Lauriston”          5020 Alpine Rd.                        34 C Preserve
                                          Historic
                                              6

      Name                       Location/Description/Comments           Map  Treatment
                                                                         No.
      Superintendent's House
      “Villa Lauriston” Stables  5030 Alpine Rd.                         34 D List to provide a
                                                                              record
      “Villa Lauriston”                                                  34 E List to provide a
      Homestead Ruins                                                         record
      Gov. James Rolph's         Outside the town's jurisdiction, on the  35  List to provide a
      Carriage House             Home Ranch.                                  record
      Mangini Roadhouse          4139 Alpine Rd. (2nd Town Hall)          37  Preserve
      Catoctin Estate            #3 Grove Court                          42 A Preserve
      Catoctin Estate            #4 Grove Court                          42 B Preserve
      Catoctin Estate,                                                   42 C Preserve
      stonework in right-of-way
      Willowbrook Farm           211 Willowbrook Drive                    44  Plaque
      (bunkhouse and barn)
2518 Sites
      Name                       Location/Description/Comments           Map  Treatment
                                                                         No.
      Site of Maximo Martinez    ~ 4170 Alpine Rd.                         2  Plaque
      House
      Site of Martinez Adobe     99 Iroquois Trail.                        3  Plaque
      Site of Billar-Cooney      Spring Ridge, near Skyline Blvd.         8A  Plaque
      house
      Site of Orton house        Spring Ridge, near Skyline Blvd.         8B  Plaque
      Site of Bozzo "Spring      Spring Ridge, near Skyline Blvd.         8C  Plaque
      Ranch" house
      Site of Hamm “Mountain     Spring Ridge, near Skyline Blvd.        8D   Plaque
      Home”
      Site of Mastick Lumber     3 Wyndham Dr.                            9A  Plaque
      Mill & Ox Barn
      Site of Second Lumber                                               9B  Plaque
      Mill, Morshead property
      Site of Smith Mill,                                                 9C  Plaque
      Morshead property
      Site of Caldwell Mill,                                             9D   Plaque
      Morshead property
      Sites of St. Dennis Church Outside the town's jurisdiction,         10  List to provide a
      and Cemetery               between the north bank of San                record
                                 Francisquito Creek and the Stanford
                                 Linear Accelerator Center.
      Site of Dennis Martin's    Outside the town's jurisdiction, on the  11  List to provide a
      Second House               southeast side of San Francisquito           record
                                 Creek.
      Site of Corte Madera       380 Portola Rd. (see structures,         14  Preserve
                                          Historic
                                             7

      Name                          Location/Description/Comments            Map    Treatment
                                                                             No.
      Brewery and Nahmens           “Fitzhugh Windmill”)
      House
      Site of Flax Mill             on the east side of the Conolley-         16    Plaque
                                    Melchor Ln.
      Site of Hallidie Tramway      base of tramway is near 875 Portola       17    Plaque
                                    Rd and extends up the western
                                    hillside through the Morshead
                                    property.
      Site of Village of Portola    near 875 Portola Rd, 4.7 ac of            22    Plaque
                                    northeast corner of Morshead
                                    property.
      Site of 1893 school house     765 Portola Rd. (see natural features     26    Plaque
                                    also, “One coast live oak”)
      Site of Ormondale Ranch                                                 43    Plaque
      Buildings
      Site of Hallidie House                                                  45    Plaque
2519 Trails
      Name                          Location/Description/Comments            Map    Treatment
                                                                             No.
      Old Spanish Trail             Along crest of Coal Mine Ridge,            1    Preserve
                                    through “Heptagon Ranch” and
                                    Portola Valley Ranch.
      Jones-Brown's Trail           Along Hamm's Gulch, mainly through         5    Preserve
                                    MROSD property.
2520 Roads
      Name                       Location/Description/Comments                   Map    Treatment
                                                                                 No.
      Pescadero-La Honda         The main portion is located in the Town of       12    List to provide
      Turnpike (Old La           Woodside with a small portion in the                   a record
      Honda Road)                northwestern corner of the town's boundary,
                                 along the Morshead property line.
      Alpine Road                From the Portola Rd. intersection up the         23    Preserve
                                 western hillside to Page Mill Rd.
                                              Historic
                                                 8

      Name                  Location/Description/Comments                       Map     Treatment
                                                                                No.
      Ormondale Ranch       Follows significant portions of present-day          36     List to provide
      Road                  Alamos Rd. and Westridge Dr. to the ranch                   a record
                            house, 99 Iroquois Trail. (see natural features
                            also)
      Remnants of Menlo     One remnant is within the town's jurisdiction,      13 A    List to provide
      Park & Santa Cruz     along the south boundary of Ford Park (No. 13       13 B    a record
      Turnpike (2 prominent B) and the beginning strip of Los Trancos Rd.
      sites)                Another remnant is near the Alpine Rd crossing
                            of the San Francisquito Creek in the
                            unincorporated area of San Mateo County.
      “Willowbrook Farm”    Begins at the 4600's Alpine Rd and extends          33 C    List to provide
      Road                  through the Willowbrook subdivision and along               a record
                            Willowbrook Dr.
2521 Natural Features
      Name                      Location/Description/Comments               Map     Treatment
                                                                            No.
      Sieback Flat              Along the upper portion of Alpine Rd,        6      List to provide a
                                outside the town's jurisdiction in San              record
                                Mateo County.
      Spring Ridge              MROSD property, near Skyline Blvd.           7      List to provide a
                                                                                    record
      Two Sequoia               Near upper part of Morshead property.        18     List to provide a
      sempervirens, “Triple                                                         record
      Top” and “Flat Top”
      Vegetation at Allen-      800 Los Trancos Rd. Hawthorns, osage         19     List for further
      Woods House               oranges and olives. (see structures also)           consideration
      One Coast Live Oak        765 Portola Rd. Marking the site of          26     List to provide a
                                1893 school house. (see sites also)                 record
      San Andreas Rift Zone     Extends along the valley floor through       29     Plaque
      (1906)                    Portola Valley Ranch and the
                                "Heptagon" Ranch.
      "Willowbrook Farm"        On the properties at 4660 Alpine Rd and     33B     List to provide a
      Terraces                  200 Willowbrook Dr.                                 record
      Ormondale Ranch Road      Along side significant portions of           36     List to provide a
      Landscaping               present-day Alamos Rd and Westridge                 record
                                Dr., to the ranch house, 99 Iroquois
                                Trail. (see roads also)
      Elderberry                 On the property line between the            40     List to provide a
                                Ladera Swim Club and Ford Park.                     record
2522 Historic Resources Map. The "Sites for Historic Element--within City Limits" map
     shows the locations of the historic resources in the town. The numbers shown on
     the map correspond with the historic resource numbers listed above and in Historic
                                          Historic
                                              9

     Element Appendix 1, Historic Resources Inventory. The map is located in a pocket
     at the end of this general plan.
2523 Appendix 1, Historic Resources Inventory. Detailed descriptions of historic
     resources in the town's planning area are contained in Historic Element Appendix 1,
     Historic Resources Inventory, prepared by Dorothy Regnery, December 1, 1989 and
     revised October 27, 1993.
2524 Appendix 2, Implementation. Implementation strategies and programs for
     implementing the objectives and principles of the historic element are outlined in
     Historic Element Appendix 2, Implementation of the Historic Element. Ordinances
     and regulations which should be developed or amended and other implementation
     programs are included in this appendix.
                                      Historic
                                        10
Historic Element Appendix 1:
Historic Resources Inventory
Prepared by Dorothy F. Regnery with revisions by Nancy Lund, December 1, 1989; Revised
November 23, 1993.
This appendix includes descriptions of 41 historic resources. The items are in chronological
order without intention to list in order of importance or significance. In addition, the “Historic
Element Diagram” shows the locations of all resources within the town's limits.
No. 1 Old Spanish Trail.
    Along the crest of Coal Mine Ridge within the limits of the Town of Portola Valley and its
    sphere of influence, through “Heptagon Ranch” and Portola Valley Ranch.
    By action in November 1968, the San Mateo County Board of Supervisors declared that any
    portion of the route utilized in subdivisions should officially retain the name, Old Spanish
    Trail.
    SMa-024, Point of Historical Interest. Approved by the San Mateo County Board of
    Supervisors, 8 January 1973; approved by the California Department of Parks & Recreation,
    26 January 1973, and registered as follows:
           Used by Costano Indians crossing to Ano Nuevo Point. San Francisco Presidio
           cavalry used the route when pursuing Pomponio, an Indian renegade, in
           1823. Antonino Buelna used it as a “wagon road” between Ranchos San
           Gregorio and San Francisquito in the 1830's. U.S.G.S. describes the trail in
           1851 as “not a good one...infrequently traveled by ox and horse teams”. The
           Burrell family wrote of using it in 1853. Stock for the first store in Pescadero
           was transported by mules in 1855 over the trail. Whitney noted it in 1865;
           the official 1868 county map shows it; and as late as 1870 it was the main
           route to Pescadero. There is distinct evidence of the trail to be found in
           undisturbed properties.
    The D.A.R. Faxon D. Atherton Chapter marked the trail with a historic landmark plaque for
    its official U.S.A. Bicentennial Project. In 1973, the marker was placed on the Corte Madera
    School grounds. The marker was inscribed:
           Here began the main traveled route across the Sierra Morena Mountains to
           the coast. Used for centuries by the Costano Indians and after 1823 by
           Spaniards, Mexicans and Americans.
    When the lower part of Coal Mine Ridge was being subdivided, the county demanded the
    plaque be placed at the foot of the trail; it was immediately stolen. In 1975 the Portola
    Ranch Homeowners Association dedicated the lower part of the ridge as an open space
                                     Historic Element: Appendices
                                                   11

   preserve, and in 1979 the developer of the subdivision replaced the stolen marker and
   sponsored a rededication in the subdivision recreational facility.
   See Item No. 13. Although it was not the Menlo Park & Santa Cruz Turnpike Company's
   original intent, the Old Spanish Trail was the route utilized by it to reach the summit of the
   mountains.
No. 2 Site of Maximo Martinez House.
   Approximately at 4170 Alpine Road on the west side of Alpine Road opposite Los Trancos
   Road intersection.
   SMa-022, Point of Historical Interest. Approved by the San Mateo County Board of
   Supervisors, 17 March 1972; approved by the California Department of Parks & Recreation,
   25 April 1972, and registered as follows:
          In 1832 Maximo Martinez and Domingo Peralta received permission to
         occupy Rancho la Canada del Corte de Madera. They moved with their
         families from San Jose the following spring. Peralta's wife died, and he
         returned with his children to San Jose. The Rancho was officially granted in
         1834. Martinez received augmentations to the original grant. Martinez built
         a home of whip-sawed redwood 24 plus inch planks, mortised, and reinforced
         with rawhide lashings. This construction was unique for Californios, but was
         natural since wood was available and easier to obtain than adobe block.
         Three generations of the Martinez family owned this wood house. It was
         demolished by its owners about 1940.
   In this century a Sequoia sempervirens was planted at the south end of the house porch;
   now the tree stands in the Alpine Road easement. Near this tree on July Fourth 1976 the
   Town of Portola Valley placed a plaque commemorating the house. The plaque states:
                                        MARTINEZ HOME
          In 1832 Maximo Martinez and Domingo Peralta received Rancho Corte del
         Madera, the first land grant in San Mateo County. In 1834 Peralta
         relinquished his share to Martinez. The house constructed of redwood was
         unusual for Californios. Three generations of the Martinez family lived here.
         It was demolished in 1940. SMa022
   On June 19, 1858, the U.S. Government patented to Maximo Martinez 13,316.05 acres in
   San Mateo and Santa Clara counties under the title of Rancho del Corte de Madera. Its
   boundaries are well defined on U.S.G.S. maps.
No. 3 Site of Martinez Adobe.
   99 Iroquois Trail.
                                  Historic Element: Appendices
                                                12
   About 1838 in order to meet the Mexican Government's rancho grant conditions Maximo
   Martinez built a “permanent structure.” The two room adobe house, whose dimensions
   were about 36 x 18 feet, was one story with a shingled, gable roof. It was occupied by
   Martinez' eldest son, Nicolas. After William O'Brien Macdonough purchased the property
   containing the adobe, it was razed in 1903, and on the same site a substantial house was
   built for the superintendent of the Menlo Stock Farm. Later Joseph Macdonough named it
   the Ormondale Ranch. See Item No. 36.
   A summary prepared by the San Mateo County Assessor, San Mateo County Historical
   Association Report-ASJRC947-1, City of Portola Valley, 1988, 5 pages, misrepresents the
   replacement structure as having been built in 1890 and re-evaluated by its office in 1907.
   The house has had so many renovations and modifications as to be hardly recognizable as
   the 1903 structure.
No. 4 Casa De Tableta (Alpine Beer Garden).
   3915 Alpine Road at the southeast corner of Arastradero and Alpine Roads.
   The following concise inscription is on the plaque given by the State of California.
          This structure built by Felix Buelna in the 1850's served as a gambling retreat
          and meeting place for Mexican Californios. It was strategically located on the
          earliest trail used both by rancheros and the American settlers crossing the
          Peninsula to the coast and served this remote area. Acquired by an American
          in 1868. It has continued to serve under various names as a roadhouse and
          saloon.
          California Registered Historical Landmark No. 825. Plaque placed by the
          State Department of Parks and Recreation in Cooperation with the Town of
          Portola Valley, May 24, 1969.
   On August 14, 1973 the building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places at the
   State Level of Significance. The Historic American Building Survey's 1975 photographic
   study of the saloon is on file in the Library of Congress. There is a pamphlet “Buelna's
   Indestructible Bar” written by Dorothy F. Regnery and published by the San Mateo County
   Historical Association, 1969.
No. 5 Jones-Browns Trail.
   A trail in Hamm's Gulch from the summit of the Sierra Morena to just south of the bridge at
   the entrance to Lauriston off Alpine Road.
   William G. Jones in the 1850s made use of a trail, probably established by Indians. In 1857
   and 1859 Santa Clara County rejected petitions to convert it into a wagon road to connect
                                    Historic Element: Appendices
                                                   13

   with the San Francisquito Creek Embarcadero, near the present Newell Street Bridge in Palo
   Alto. (It is interesting to note the trail was not and never has been in the jurisdictional
   territory of Santa Clara County.)
   Early in its history, the trail was used primarily for removing timber and tanbark. Stanford
   students hiking to Pescadero referred to the trail as the “Goat Ranch Road.” In the 1920s
   Herbert Law upgraded and maintained it as a private riding trail, but during John Francis
   Neylan's ownership when an upper curve slipped out it was never repaired. So-called
   “Inspiration Point” just below the damaged portion was considered to provide a most
   spectacular view.
No. 6 Siebeck Flat.
   East of the Alpine Road entrance to the Rolph Ranch, near where the road is presently
   closed. It is beyond the town's boundary, but within its sphere of influence and in San
   Mateo County.
   In the early 1860s, William W. Manning and John Center fanned hope of finding coal on
   Rancho del Corte de Madera. They negotiated agreements with Maximo Martinez and his
   son Antonio Martinez for the right to mine on the rancho. Hence, the basis for the name
   Coal Mine Ridge. In 1861 Manning sold his mining rights to Julius and Gustave Siebeck.
   Perhaps their name was attached to the venture because they were last to mine there.
   In 1890 there was a tremendous land slide of the east side of the upper Corte Madera Creek
   canyon, covering the coal mine tunnel site and creating two sag ponds which still exist
   (around which residences now cluster). The George Fromhertz family, who were living near
   the summit of Coal Mine Ridge on the Los Trancos Creek watershed distinctly heard the
   frightening sounds the slide made during the night. The following morning after
   investigating the cause of the noise George Fromhertz prophetically said, “No one will ever
   use Siebeck's Flat again”. The steep slope was left raw until landscaped in 1915-16 to
   enhance a new entrance to Governor James Rolph's ranch.
   The slide caused Bromfield's 1894 survey for Alpine Road to depict a sharp switch back to
   cross the creek and climb the opposite slope. His maps label it “Large Slide”. The same
   slide area was active again in 1967 and 1969. Vista Verde Way dropped approximately ten
   feet with the loss of a house on the southwest corner of Vista Verde Way and Old Spanish
   Trail.
No. 7 Spring Ridge.
   A ridge running north-south about midway of the Sierra Morena on the southern boundary
   of the town, near Skyline Boulevard.
                                    Historic Element: Appendices
                                                  14

   The treeless ridge, stretching from the summit to the floor of the valley, is a striking natural
   geological phenomenon. Its lack of trees is in contrast to the ridges on either side and
   produces a demarcation of flora species.
   The ridge oozes moisture. This unusual feature was noted on the 1832 diseno, and the
   rancho grantee referred to it as “Spring Ridge.” The earliest reference in English to the
   name Spring Ridge was recorded in 1862 in San Mateo County Deeds 3, page 197. The
   excessive drainage from the ridge stimulated the growth of an abundance of willows at its
   base. In the 1930s sixty-four springs were counted within its area; the majority being at the
   highest elevation. Some are pure, some are heavily impregnated with sulfur.
   The name Windy Ridge, or Windy Hill, was recently applied by the U.S.G.S. following a
   personal interview with James Rapley. The U.S.G.S. recorded his statement, “This is where
   the fog draws over in summer from San Gregorio Creek Valley.” Since 1974 the U.S.G.S.
   map has labeled the summit as “Windy Hill” and the ridge by its historic name “Spring
   Ridge”.
   The upper portion of the ridge, or 525 acres, was donated in 1979 to the Peninsula Open
   Space Trust (POST), and subsequently in 1981 purchased from POST by the Midpeninsula
   Regional Open Space District (MROSD). In 1987 another 429 acres were purchased by
   MROSD and added to the “Windy Hill Open Space Preserve”.
No. 8 Sites of Four Early Houses on Spring Ridge.
A. Site of Billar-Cooney house.
   On the upper third, or 147.73 acre portion, of Spring Ridge, Francisco Billar built a house in
   the 1860s on the sunny, protected, east slope facing Hamm's Gulch. It was conveniently
   placed near a fresh spring in a draw. The house is mentioned in Maximo Martinez' 1863
   will; it is indicated on 1866 and 1877 county maps.
   Bryan Cooney purchased the property in 1873. He and his wife made it their residence until
   their deaths in the late 1890s. The house was demolished by John F. Neylan in the late
   1930s. Some apple trees were still bearing fruit in 1964. Heavy bridge timbers crossing a
   tributary of Hamm's Gulch for the upper reaches of the Jones-Brown trail and the early road
   cut rounding the face of the ridge leading to the Orton house can be detected easily during
   winter and early spring months.
B. Site of the Orton house.
   Following the marriage in 1888 of the Cooney's daughter Lucy to Wellington E. Orton, the
   couple built a house and barn west of the Cooney house. It was on the north face of the
   windswept upper reaches of the exposed ridge. For miles the white house was visible
   against a dark backdrop of cypress planted as a windbreak against the prevailing fog and
   wind which rushes over the mountain crest.
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                15

    The structures were demolished by John Francis Neylan in the 1930s. Some of the timbers
    were used to build a corral near the gate at the lower edge of the property. The century old
    cypress are beginning to die and to fall. Below their house the Ortons planted a double row
    of apple and plum trees. Each spring these trees valiantly continue to blossom, as though to
    remind the whole valley of a past era.
C. Site of Bozzo “Spring Ranch” house.
    About mid-way on Spring Ridge on a very conspicuous slump.
    In 1872 Emmanuel Bozzo built a house and barn on the lip of the slump, or “slip-out.” By a
    quirk of circumstances this property remained in Bozzo's possession following the 1875
    bank failures. Thenceforth, his oldest son managed the ranch, and in the 1890s Bozzo
    retired there from a business in San Francisco. His son-in-law Charles Kreiss assumed
    responsibility for it in this century until retiring in 1918 to Redwood City.
    During Prohibition, an Italian family whose still in Portola Valley had been “pushed over”
    leased the ranch. Utilizing its isolation as a “front,” huge quantities of booze came off the
    ridge in milk cans. Vandalism in the 1930s caused the Kreiss family to demolish all the
    structures.
D. Site of Hamm “Mountain Home”.
    East of the present parking and picnic tables designated Windy Hill.
    In the 1860s Albert N. Hamm and his wife Mary Ann built a house overlooking the coast,
    snuggled into a “V” of the hills as though clinging to the windswept summit. The large, two-
    storied house was in keeping with the fashion of the era with two parlors and a big porch
    around all four sides. Seeking additional income the Hamms converted their residence into
    a summer resort, popularly known as the “Mountain Home.”
    During Prohibition, two men leased it from Herbert Law and obviously with his knowledge
    used the house for a “front.” The interior of the house was gutted to disguise a still. Their
    illegal activity was thinly veiled in the pretense of a dairy-farm. The vacated shell of the
    “Mountain Home” burned down ca. 1929.
No. 9 Sites of Early Lumber Mills.
    A good information source is Frank Stanger's book Sawmills in the Redwoods, 1967. In the
    text each site is mapped and discussed.
A. Mastick Lumber Mill & Ox Barn.
    Now occupied by the Wyndham Drive subdivision, 3 Wyndham Drive.
                                     Historic Element: Appendices
                                                    16

    Stanger dates this mill as beginning in 1852 and classifies it “one of the earliest mills”. Frank
    Mastick was primarily concerned with obtaining timber pilings, essential for Mastick's
    Wharf in San Francisco. John Duzanica recalled that the heavy timbered ox barns were still
    in existence when he came to the area in the early 1900's.
B. Mastick Second Lumber Mill.
    Below Morshead's tennis courts on the south branch of Bull Run Creek and below the sag
    pond, which was enlarged and now is known as the “Brow Lake”.
    Stanger dates this mill 1853-1856 and ponders if it was not Mastick's first mill moved up the
    slope. There are extant photographs taken after Hallidie purchased the property and prior
    to the turn of the century showing its barn built of heavy timbers, probably much like the
    one of the first mill site. Hallidie's map of the property labeled the road to reach the site as
    the “Mastick Mill Road” or the “Old Mill Road”.
C. Smith Mill.
    On the east side of Bull Run Creek (occasionally referred to as Smith Creek) east of the
    present man-made Creigh's Lake on Morshead ranch.
    Stanger dates the construction of a steam mill in 1853 by W.C.R. Smith. In the 1960s, heavy
    iron fragments at the open site made the site easily identifiable.
D. Caldwell Mill.
    In the uppermost reaches of Bull Run Creek, not far from the summit.
    Stanger concludes this mill could have been Mastick's which was moved a third time to the
    upper reaches of Bull Run Creek. According to Alan Brown, another county historian, Smith
    sold to John Caldwell in the 1860s. He and his partner moved the Smith mill (Item no. 9-C)
    to the near summit site, where it was operating in 1861. There is a log skidway in fairly
    good condition in the steep canyon near the top of the ridge.
No. 10 Sites of St. Dennis Church and Cemetery.
    On the north bank of San Francisquito Creek between the creek and the Stanford Linear
    Accelerator Center (S.L.A.C.). Town of Portola Valley's sphere of influence. Limited access.
    St. Dennis was the first Catholic church between Mission Dolores and Mission Santa Clara.
    The first services were held on October 9, 1855; the last mass was on May 16, 1871,
    although services, such as weddings and funerals continued there. The structure was razed
    in 1899.
    The death in 1856 of Patrick Martin, the brother of Dennis Martin, demanded a cemetery.
    The last burial was Dennis Martin's in 1890. Although Archbishop Joseph S. Alemany
                                     Historic Element: Appendices
                                                   17

   blessed the church and Patrick's grave, he refused to consecrate either the church or the
   cemetery.
   In 1953 in anticipation of a proposed housing development remains were exhumed and
   reburied at Holy Cross Cemetery in Menlo Park. In 1962 the Linear Accelerator was
   constructed adjacent to the cemetery. A marker placed on Sand Hill Road in 1953 by the
   Stanford University regarding the sites was moved as the result of construction of Highway
   280. The marker is now in an obscure place on the west side of the present Sand Hill Road.
   Stanford Historical Society has the permission of Stanford University and is placing
   designated obelisks at each site.
No. 11 Site of Dennis Martin's Second House.
   On the southeast side of San Francisquito Creek near an early ford. Town of Portola Valley's
   sphere of influence.
   After Dennis Martin was evicted by court order in 1864 from the ranch on the northwest
   side of San Francisquito Creek, he and his family moved a short way down and across the
   San Francisquito Creek near a well-used ford. Coombe's 1885 map shows the location of
   the house. [The site of first house is within the boundary of Jasper Ridge Biological Reserve
   and is not in the sphere of influence of the Town of Portola Valley.]
No. 12 Pescadero-La Honda Turnpike (Old La Honda Road).
   The main portion is located in the Town of Woodside with a small portion within the
   northwestern corner of the town's boundary.
   The road developed to meet the demands of lumbering on the Dennis Martin Creek
   watershed. In the pre-American period, Jose Pacheco had a saw-pit on the east side of the
   trail which eventually developed into a road. In the early 1850s the Martins developed two
   sawmills on the watershed which determined the road's present lower route. In 1860, the
   San Mateo County Board of Supervisors received a petition for a road from Searsville to San
   Gregorio; the “Survey of a Road from Searsville to the Southern Boundary of the County”
   was conducted in 1861. The Civil War interrupted its completion. In 1864, Governor
   Frederick Low signed a bill to finish the construction. Through the years its route and grade
   has remained amazingly unchanged.
   After 1872, a stage began daily utilization of the road. In 1874, the Searsville & La Honda
   Turnpike Co. was organized to reroute the road on the coastside. The county purchased the
   road and assumed responsibility for it in 1878. Documents, maps and surveys are on file in
   the San Mateo County Engineer's and County Clerk's offices.
                                  Historic Element: Appendices
                                                18

No. 13 Menlo Park & Santa Cruz Turnpike (remnants).
A. Pre-1950 Alpine Road crossing of San Francisquito Creek.
   The road bed is now used as a pedestrian and bicycle trail. It merges with the present Alpine
   Road about 400 feet south of the present bridge. It is located outside the town limits but
   within its sphere of influence.
B. Crossing of Los Trancos Creek.
   The turnpike crossed Los Trancos Creek into the J.J. Felt (after whom Felt Lake is named)
   Ranch at the present La Mesa intersection. This location is outside the town limits but
   within its sphere of influence. For a distance the road then followed Felt's western property
   line in Santa Clara County before emerging again into San Mateo County. In 1988, the town
   purchased a remnant of the turnpike which is now the south boundary of Portola Valley's
   Ford Park. Ford Park is named for Dorothy Ford, whose son Thomas Ford provided financial
   assistance to the town in the purchase of the property.
   In 1867, land developers, owning land along its proposed route, organized a company to
   construct a turnpike road intended to connect the communities of Menlo Park and Santa
   Cruz with a branch road to Pescadero. Much of the present route of the present Alpine
   Road (until 1950 called Portola Road) from the intersection with Junipero Serra to Portola
   Road was determined by its survey. The toll gate was south of the junction of Los Trancos
   and San Francisquito creeks, or presently at the northbound (to San Francisco) access road
   to Highway 280.
   This was one of many road projects considered in the county in the 1860s and 1870s. The
   company had a short life, and its primary impact was the naming of Santa Cruz Avenue, the
   main cross street in Menlo Park. Documents, maps and surveys are on file in the San Mateo
   County Engineer's and County Clerk's offices.
No. 14 Site of Corte Madera Brewery, Site of Nahmens House, Fitzhugh “Windmill”.
   Triangular 3-acre parcel, the most easterly portion of a lot now designated 380 Portola
   Road. Corte Madera Creek is the west boundary of the parcel; its apex is the junction of
   Georgia Lane and Portola Road.
   The Corte Madera Brewery, which was actually not a brewhouse but a saloon, was operated
   from ca. 1873 to 1876 by William Tate Philpot on land given to his wife for tutoring the
   children of Antonio Martinez. By the turn of the century, the only possible remnant of the
   “brewery” was described as comparable to a “mushroom house.”
   Edwin Nahmens, a son of Gerrett C. Nahmens, purchased the three acres in 1902 and resold
   it in 1905 to his brother William. The property had a significant role that year when Gerrett
   Nahmens and his sons began to raise strawberries at the rear of the present Stonegate
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                19

   Subdivision. By controlling both banks of Corte Madera Creek the Nahmens assumed the
   right to divert the creek water and by gravity flow to irrigate their berry crop.
   In 1913, the three acres were sold to Mary E. (Mrs. William) Fitzhugh. Obtaining sufficient
   water for her adjoining 81.36 acre estate (now Stonegate Subdivision) was a problem. In
   1917, a well was dug on the triangular parcel and a facsimile of a simplistic windmill was
   built to disguise the well pump. The structure, now replaced by a replica, was built by
   Fitzhugh as a caretaker's residence in the early 1920s. It is often erroneously referred to as
   the “William Nahmens' House”. (See also No. 42)
No. 15 Mariani Ranch.
   Located on what during this century has been known as the Mariani Ranch, then the
   Unicorn or Heptagon Ranch, and currently the proposed Blue Oaks Subdivision. Entrance to
   the property is at 940 Los Trancos Road.
A. Freeman House.
   In 1874, Maria Louisa Martinez, the eldest daughter of Antonio Martinez, married Charles
   Freeman, a Protestant-German immigrant. Freeman rented 120 acres about midway on
   Coal Mine Ridge from his father-in-law “for shares of produce.” Upon his death, Martinez
   bequeathed the ranch to his daughter. It was originally reached via the Old Spanish Trail.
   Freeman worked the land intensively, and specimens of his century-year-old orchard still
   exist.
   Martinez had a three-room, simple gable redwood board and bat house (ca. 20 x 27 feet)
   built for them, with a lean-to kitchen-dining room across the rear and an open porch across
   the front. There are two bays on the front with a central door and three bays on each side.
   Built on a slight slope, it has a basement under all of the main house. Although larger, it is
   similar in style to the so-called “Chilean woodchopper's house” considered in Item No. 31A.
   In 1907, Stephen Mariani, a wealthy San Francisco hardware merchant, purchased the
   Freemans' and the adjoining property. Recognizing the historic aspects of the house, the
   Mariani family made a definite effort to maintain what they referred to as a “typical
   Mexican house”.
   Its exterior was resurfaced with shingles. Its foundation was replaced with a more
   substantial concrete one. Glazing was replaced with double panes; a south front room
   window was replaced with a multi-pane square window. A half-size lean-to was added on
   the back; a modern bathroom was added in the northeast corner of the house.
   Nevertheless, the house retained the essence of its originality as well as characteristics such
   as original doors, hardware, single thickness wall construction, etc.
   After his mid-1970s acquisition of the property, H.R.H. Prince Faissal Al Saud renovated the
   sloping attic space of the Freeman house into a “living” space and appended a minuscule
                                    Historic Element: Appendices
                                                 20

   room by means of the protrusion of a gable on the rear. Access to the “second floor” was
   through the trap door in the ceiling. Both ends of the gable were opened with windows.
   The porch and underpinnings were strengthened. The interior of house was most
   elaborately decorated. The floors were covered with linoleum and modern appliances and
   plumbing were installed.
B. Barn.
   Vera Mariani, now in her 90s, reported in a May 1, 1993 interview that her father had built
   this barn and that it was used to store hay and as shelter for their two horses. This agrees
   with the judgment of Sally Woodbridge, an architectural historian who reviewed the
   property in approximately 1990. Her estimate was that it was built in the 1910s (the
   Marianis bought the land in 1907), as its gable roof, high central bay and two side bays were
   common features of rural barns of the Bay area in that era. We believe it to be the last
   surviving building of its type from its era within the borders of Portola Valley.
No. 16 Site of Flax Mill.
   On the east side of the Conolley-Melchor Lane, or west of the Sequoias.
   In 1887, several farmers in Portola Valley vicinity began extensive cultivation of flax. To
   manufacture twine and linseed oil from the flax and its seed, William M. Hatfield
   constructed a two-story rectangular building with an associated smaller building to the rear
   on this site. It was considered to be the first flax mill in California.
   By the turn of the century the mill was idle but all its equipment remained in place; much of
   it was still there in the 1950s. The picturesque “old red mill,” frequently considered by
   many to be a barn, was a favorite subject for artists. It was razed as a fire hazard in 1963
   after “The Sequoias” came into existence.
No. 17 Site of Hallidie Tramway.
   Stretching from near the present Episcopal Church on the valley floor to the summit of the
   Old La Honda Road.
   In the 1850s, Andrew Smith Hallidie invented a “ropeway,” or aerial tramway, to meet
   demands of rugged mountain terrain to carry supplies and ore. In 1870, Hallidie went a
   step further and provided San Francisco with its first cable car system using a similar
   principle underground.
   In 1893-94, Hallidie constructed a 7,351 foot long “ropeway” on his local ranch as a sales
   demonstration of his product to be shown prospective customers who came to San
   Francisco from all over the world. Numerous fantasies regarding its purposes, usage, etc.
   are assigned to the spectacular specimen.
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                 21

   Chinese laborers, housed in tent camps on Hallidie's “Eagle Home Farm,” cleared the route
   and helped build the wooden towers (some traces of which remained in 1964 in remote
   places). The donkey engine and valley terminal, neatly fenced off, were located about
   where the Episcopal Church now stands. Buckets suspended from the cable swung out over
   newly planted orchards and mounted the steep slopes, keeping a straight course over
   canyons, gulches and hills to the 1,168 foot summit turn-around platform. Shortly after
   Hallidie's death the tramway was sold, dismantled and removed to a Mexican copper mine.
   There are numerous books written regarding the life story of Hallidie with reference to the
   ropeway. Regnery wrote an article about it for La Peninsula in October 1959, and David F.
   Myrick included a discussion of it in the same journal in February 1973 for the 100th
   anniversary of the cable car.
   Hallidie should be revered in Portola Valley as the founder of a community to substitute for
   the loss of the Town of Searsville, designator of the town's name Portola and donor of the
   Portola school site (now the Town Center), as well as his significant leadership in California
   education.
No. 18 Two Sequoia Sempervirens, referred to as “Triple Top” and “Flat Top”.
   On the upper reaches of the Hallidie/Morshead property.
   These two trees were by-passed in the 1850s harvesting of redwoods probably for the same
   reason of their designation today. Not only are their age and existence important, but they
   are significant natural landmarks for the route of the Hallidie tramway.
No. 19 Allen-Woods House, the “Hawthorns”, and surviving specimens of hawthorns, osage
oranges, and olives.
   800 Los Trancos Road.
   In 1885, Ida Mary (Davis) Allen, the wife of James M. Allen, an attorney, a judge of the
   Superior Court of San Francisco and a director of the Bank of California, purchased 82.62
   acres, now known as the Woods ranch. They planted seven acres in grapes and about 500
   olive trees, and although the latter thrived, most of them were recently uprooted when a
   fringe portion of the property was sold. Alternating pink and white hawthorns outlined the
   boundary on Alpine Road, hence the place name; osage oranges thrived near the original
   Los Trancos Road intersection with Alpine Road.
   By 1888, the Allens and their five children were comfortably established in a stick-style
   residence on the ranch. The house designed by W. F. Smith provides the distinction of
   being the first architecturally designed house within the present town boundary. The San
   Mateo County Assessor's 1988 summary erroneously states this house was built in 1900.
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                22

   Judge Allen commuted to the city daily by railroad. The reason traditionally given for the
   Allens selling their year-round home was that the older children were an age to attend
   boarding schools, but it was undoubtedly prompted by the health of Judge Allen, who died
   in 1913 shortly after the sale. Frances Newhall (Mrs. Frederick) Woods, Jr., granddaughter
   of the Gold Rush pioneer Henry Mayo Newhall, purchased the property. She modified the
   house very little.
No. 20 Not Used.
No. 21 Fromhertz House.
   210 Portola Road.
   The George Fromhertz family lived near the summit of Coal Mine Ridge. This meant long,
   daily treks (generally down the Old Spanish Trail) for the children to reach the school at
   Searsville. Being very aware of the essential need of education, Fromhertz leased a 6.81
   acre lot in the valley, agreeing to build a house and a barn on the land and to cultivate the
   land. In 1889, Fromhertz hired a man named Snow to help him build the structures.
   Thenceforth during school term his wife and children lived in the valley “town house.”
   Meanwhile George Fromhertz, a member of the Searsville District School Board, led a
   concerted and successful campaign to locate the school in the valley. Fromhertz died
   before the termination of the valley lease, but his widow purchased the lot in 1895 and held
   it until 1900. Since then the property has gone through three ownerships. It has been well
   maintained and distinctly resembles its original appearance.
No. 22 Village of Portola.
   Located on 4.7 acres in the northwest corner of the Hallidie property, west of the present
   entrance of the “Morshead Ranch”, near 945 Portola Road.
   Remnants of the grade “Moss Lane” parallel to Portola Road are still visible.
   SMa-021, Point of Historical Interest. Approved by the San Mateo County Board of
   Supervisors, 17 March 1972; approved by the California Department of Parks & Recreation,
   21 April 1972, and registered as follows:
         In 1892 when the village of Searsville was abandoned, Andrew Smith Hallidie
         helped to create another village. On the valley floor of his estate Hallidie set
         aside 4.7 acres and built a store and blacksmith shop. A remnant of the
         upper street, known as Moss Lane, parallel to Portola Road is still visible. On
         the other valley corner of the property the Hallidies gave land for a school.
         Due to a post office, operated at the general store, the United States
         provided the official designation, Portola. Other businesses followed: a hotel
         built on the principle of a modern motel; a hall for a community center and
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                 23

         Saturday night dances. After Mr. Hallidie's death and contrary to the family's
         wishes the last proprietor operated a saloon and abandoned the post office.
         This caused Mrs. Hallidie to repurchase the property in 1902 and all the
         buildings were moved or demolished.
   Dedicated with a brass plaque placed on the road easement nearby and presented by the
   Town of Portola Valley on July Fourth 1976. It states:
                                        VILLAGE OF PORTOLA
         In 1892 Andrew Hallidie created a new community here after the newly
         constructed reservoir destroyed the town of Searsville. The town consisted of
         a post office, store, hotel, and community center. In 1902 the town was
         abandoned. The adjacent property was donated by the Hallidies for the
         school. SMa021
No. 23 Alpine Road.
   Above its present intersection with Portola Road to Page Mill Road.
   Previous to 1893, there was only a semblance of a trail snaking its way up the canyon,
   fording Corte Madera Creek seven times before reaching the Fitzpatrick ranch (the
   presently named Ruolf (sic) Trail), with a branch to a coal mine near the present switch-
   back or the beginning of the ascent of the mountain slope.
   The purpose in 1893 of a such costly road, designated Alpine Road, was to divert the flow of
   rich agricultural produce of the mountains away from Santa Clara County's Page Mill Road
   into San Mateo County. The road survey was hailed as a triumph of road engineering. The
   Third District and the county each bore half the cost, and construction bidding was divided
   into seven sections of the road. Generally, each winter the road had to be closed, not only
   because of the lack of an all-weather road surface, but because slides and erosion of its
   shelf-like construction blocked passage.
   The upper segments on the mountain slope were closed to vehicular traffic by the county in
   the late 1960s because of misuse by motorcyclists and others. The well engineered road
   bed serves as a recreational trail through a very beautiful part of the Sierra Morena. San
   Mateo County Engineer's office has the 1893 original topographic road construction maps
   and road accounts. The Town of Portola Valley has a photographic reproduction of one of
   the maps.
No. 24 Not Used.
No. 25 Searsville District School Bell.
   The bell is presently mounted on a frame in front of the library and to the rear southeast
   corner of the 1910 school, 765 Portola Road.
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                24
   After the school site on the shore of Searsville Lake was sold, Martha Elizabeth (Mrs.
   Andrew Smith) Hallidie gift-deeded land for another school site in the heart of the valley. It
   is now the nucleus of the present town center.
   When a school house was being built on it in 1894, a bell cast by The C. S. Bell Company of
   Hillsboro, Ohio, was placed in its steeple. There are no cast marks on the bell, but the yoke
   gives the style, size No. 24 and the name of the manufacturer. Although this foundry had
   existed in Hillsboro since 1858, the company was not incorporated by this name until 1894.
   Thus, the date of the school construction and the incorporation name provide the date of
   origin of the bell. This company specialized in school and church bells, known as “steel alloy
   bells,” pitched to create a very mellow tone. Their bells became famous throughout the
   world.
   The school was demolished in 1950, and the bell was stored until ten years later when
   parents mounted it for everyone to admire. When the city acquired the school site, the bell
   was remounted as it is presently.
No. 26 Two Coast Live Oaks, marking the site of the 1893 school house.
   East of the Portola Primary School in the landscaped area in front of the present library, 765
   Portola Road.
   Two young coast live oaks were planted on each side of the new 1894 school. They
   flourished and have grown to giants in the past century. Now they are living place marks for
   the building demolished at mid-century.
No. 27 Portola School District Primary School, recently referred to as the “Red Schoolhouse”.
   Now a part of the town center, 765 Portola Road.
   On 28 June 1974, the building was placed on the National Register of Historic Places at the
   Local Level of Significance.
   Historic American Building Survey's measured drawings and study, CA-1992, and the 1975
   photographic study of the school are on file in the Library of Congress.
   SMa-025, Point of Historical Interest. Approved by the San Mateo County Board of
   Supervisors, 15 December 1973; approved by the California Department of Parks &
   Recreation, 3 January 1974, and was registered as follows:
         The Portola Valley school building is one of the few remaining turn-of-the-
         century examples of Mission Revival styled schools. It is a conspicuous effort
         to execute the style on a small scale in wood construction. The Mission
         Revival style developed in part from the shingle tradition. Therefore, the
                                  Historic Element: Appendices
                                                 25

          extensive usage of shingles in this interpretation is significant. The result was
          uniquely attractive. It was especially appropriate to use wood in the heart of
          virgin redwood country.
   Built in 1909, the school was in continuous use until 1950 when it lay idle for one year. In
   1951, it was utilized to house the first kindergarten class in the district. By mid-year
   enrollment increased so rapidly that to obtain another class room, the building was divided
   in half and entrances opened on the sides. It was thereafter used as class rooms or
   administrative offices. For a brief period, it served as the first office for the Town of Portola
   Valley.
   The town placed a brass plaque which states:
                                    PORTOLA PRIMARY SCHOOL
          was built in 1909. The bell was moved in 1893 from the abandoned Searsville
          school. The building served as the first town hall when the town of Portola
          Valley was incorporated in 1964. It was acquired by the town in 1975.
          Placed on the National Register of Historic Places. SMa-025
No. 28 Hallett Store (now office space).
   846 Portola Road.
   The building has been greatly renovated throughout the years. Although it has lost its
   architectural integrity, the building retains much of its historic essence.
   Coinciding with the closure in 1902 of the Hallidies' “Portola Store,” Harry E. Hallett
   purchased a 100 foot square lot across the Portola Road east of the first store, and in 1904
   constructed a small store with residence in the rear. This was the origin of the present
   structure. Across its typical false facade was painted “Portola Store,” the name of its
   predecessor, but the local populace referred to it as “Hallett's Store.”
   In 1906, the building was shaken off of its foundation. In 1908, an addition was made on
   the front to accommodate another enterprise, a saloon, which immediately became the
   chief source of revenue. Hallett sold the property in 1918. Through the years, the building
   ran a gauntlet of owners and lessees, operating as a well patronized speak-easy. After
   Prohibition it was known as The Portola Club, or “Pearl's.” In 1972, it was extensively
   remodeled by Wright & Co. for professional offices.
No. 29 San Andreas Rift Zone.
   This has been charted by U.S.G.S. and Town of Portola Valley geologists. Extends along the
   valley floor through Portola Valley Ranch and the “Heptagon” Ranch.
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                  26

    It is the hope of many in the community to mark in some manner the path/route of the
    1906 rift(s) within the town's boundary. In so doing attention would be directed to
    landmarks, such as the two coast live oaks between which the rift passed on the present
    Portola Valley Ranch.
No. 30 Our Lady of the Wayside.
    930 Portola Road.
    The following concise inscription is on the plaque given by the State of California:
            Built in 1912 this country church was the first executed design of noted
           architect Timothy L. Pflueger, who had just begun work for James Miller. An
           awareness of the Spanish California missions inspired the style, which
           contrasts with the large commercial buildings and art deco theaters for which
           Pflueger later became notable. Construction of this Catholic Church was
           initiated by a non-denominational club, The Family.
            California Registered Historical Landmark No. 909 Plaque placed by the State
           Department of Parks and Recreation in Cooperation with the Town of Portola
           Valley, September 4, 1977.
    On 22 November 1977, the building was listed on the National Register of Historic Places at
    the State Level of Significance. Historic American Building Survey's photographic study of
    the church is on file in the Library of Congress.
No. 31 Jelich Ranch Complex.
    683 Portola Road.
A. Chilean Woodchopper's House.
    According to Alan Brown, this was one of several houses built in the 1850s by Maximo
    Martinez to accommodate the Chilean workers who converted the willows in the valley into
    the charcoal which was much in demand in San Francisco. There were several other houses
    almost exactly like it throughout the valley. One, which burned, was behind the present
    Jelich house. The house has been renovated but retains the same essence, size,
    construction and style of the houses built by Martinez after 1850.
B. Jelich House.
    Walter Jelich, Sr. built the house in 1915, and for many years it was the center of local
    Dalmatian* affairs in the valley. It was considered a “mansion” by his countrymen and other
* Dalmatia is a coastal region of the former Yugoslavia.
                                       Historic Element: Appendices
                                                    27

   local valley residents. It had electricity and modern plumbing. The San Mateo County
   Assessor's 1988 summary does not include this house.
C. Tank House.
   An old water tank on an enclosed base located on Portola Road opposite Westridge Drive.
No. 32 Connelley-Melchor House.
   555 Portola Road, about mid-way of Spring Ridge.
   This house holds the distinction of being the second house designed by an architect in
   Portola Valley. Edward D. Conolley, owner of the Spring Valley Lumber Co., purchased the
   lower third of Spring Ridge in 1912 and had a house built on it in 1914. The house was
   designed by Stanton Dewey Willard, his brother-in-law. Its Italian villa plan built around an
   open court was his first commission and shows ingenuity and foresight of modern style.
   The property was purchased in 1921 by John Rosenfeld & Sons, and was subsequently
   owned by Clarence S. Crary, who lost it during the 1930s Depression to John Francis Neylan.
   The present owner, Jack Melchor, has shown sensitivity in its restoration. The San Mateo
   County Assessor's 1988 summary does not include this house.
No. 33 “Lauriston” – “Willowbrook Farm”.
   A segment of the Corte Madera Creek Valley with a narrow extension at its north end was
   owned by Herbert Edward Law from 1913 to 1920.
   A popular published source of information regarding Nos. 33 and 34 was compiled and
   published by Sewall Bogart as Lauriston: An Architectural Biography of Herbert Edward Law
   in 1976.
A. Alpine Road gate (gate to house)
   This remains at the intersection of Alpine Road, and a road leads to several residences
   numbered in the 4600s on Alpine Road.
B. Terraces
   Portions of the terraces below the residence are included in the residential properties at
   4670 Alpine Road and 200 Willowbrook Drive (terraces restored).
C. “Farm” Road
   The entrance off Alpine Road shortly after it begins to dip into the valley is in fairly good
   condition. Remnants of the road exist in the valley and along its north side.
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                 28

D. Superintendent's house and office at 451 Portola Road.
    A narrow arm of land was secured at the north end of the farm in 1914 to provide access to
    Portola Road. On it two structures, a house and a office, were built of rock retrieved from
    the adjacent creek bed. The imaginative turret feature of the “lodge” arouses much
    interest. It is now generally misconstrued as a gatehouse for the farm.
No. 34 “Villa Lauriston” (later a portion of Neylan's “Rancho Corte Madera”).
    In 1914, Herbert E. Law began amassing a large estate on the slopes of the Sierra Morena
    which he named “Lauriston.” It was acquired in 1937 by J. F. Neylan adjacent to his Spring
    Ridge properties. The complex on the upper hillside (B, C & D below) was built in the 1920s.
A. Entry,
    This includes a gate and bridge, at ~5050 Alpine Road.
B. Main Residence
    With a separate garage/apartment, swimming pool, solarium, etc.
C. Superintendent's house.
D. Stables
    These were so extensively altered into a residence as to lose their historical and
    architectural integrity.
E. Homestead Ruins.
    Damaged by a 1971 fire and vandalism, these magnificent ruins are all that remain of a
    mansion begun in 1929 by Herbert Law for his daughter, Patricia, then five years old.
No. 35 Governor James Rolph's Carriage House.
    Located on the Los Trancos Creek watershed at the top of Coal Mine Ridge on property
    identified as the “Home Ranch,” or by its subsequent owner as “Pony Tracks Ranch.”
    Town's sphere of influence.
    In 1916, Rolph had several elaborate barns built. The one referred to as the “carriage
    house” was built around an open courtyard with entry through an archway. It served as
    guest rooms, office, a garage, etc. It is one of the few remaining structures left from
    Governor Rolph's era.
No. 36 Ormondale Ranch Road.
    Follows significant portions of the present-day Alamos Road and Westridge Drive to the site
    of the ranch house, 99 Iroquois Trail.
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                  29

   Joseph Macdonough's 1927 purchase of the Burke Ranch, now the Ladera subdivision,
   stimulated the creation of a “main drive” crossing the 1,400 acre ranch, which was renamed
   Ormondale Ranch. The road had little utility value and consequently was seldom used.
   John McLaren was commissioned to landscape the picturesque drive. He specified the kinds
   of trees and supervised their planting. Young trees from gallon-sized containers were
   planted at about fifty foot intervals allowing for a 100-foot wide roadway.
   The road, which looped through Ladera up to the present Castanya Way, was lined with
   pepper trees. The next section, which entered the present Westridge subdivision,
   connected with the present Alamos Road and swung onto the present Westridge Drive, was
   planted with cypress, cedar and pine. For an interval, the native growth was left
   unhampered. From the Escobar-Favonio intersections extending to the Goya Road
   intersection, coast live oaks were planted. This was interrupted briefly again by natural
   growth. Oaks were planted through the open wheat and hay fields from the Paloma Road
   intersection to the Mapache/Cervantes intersection. Near the present Corte Madera Creek
   crossing, the road turned east to reach the ranch house and was lined with redwoods.
No. 37 Mangini Roadhouse, also the second Town Hall.
   4139 Alpine Road.
   After Prohibition, in 1939 Andrew and Ida Mangini built a stone building for a bar and
   restaurant, which existed for two decades as the headquarters of a popular Italian picnic
   park. The park was replaced by the Alpine Tennis & Swim Club.
   In 1964, the new town of Portola Valley was seeking a “town hall.” After a short stint in the
   1909 Portola Primary School House, the town office moved into the stone structure for a
   decade. It has been utilized since as a nursery school.
No. 38 Not Used.
No. 39 Not Used.
No. 40 Elderberry, Sambucus mexicana.
   On east side of Alpine Road right-of-way at the junction of Ladera Swim Club and Ford Park
   properties.
   This is an unusually large specie of elderberry. Most persons think of elderberry as having a
   bush shape and proportions. This specimen resembles a tree. The circumference of the
   trunk at 4-1/2 feet height measures over nine feet. Undoubtedly it has been permitted to
   live because it existed on an early property line.
                                  Historic Element: Appendices
                                                30

   According to the U.S. Forestry Department's National Register of Big Trees, a larger
   specimen exists in New Mexico – larger not in the circumference of its trunk but in the
   spread of its foliage.
No. 41 Not Used.
No. 42 Catoctin Estate.
   In 1913, William and Mary Fitzhugh purchased 81 acres in the area around today's Grove
   Drive and Stonegate which they called “Catoctin.” They built two houses, #3 and #4 Grove
   Court between 1913 and 1917. At #1 Grove Court, the Catoctin swimming pool/reservoir
   still exists, and vestiges of the original gardens designed by John McLaren and his assistants
   can be found throughout the subdivision. The Fitzhughs sold the property for subdivision in
   1948. Both houses are essentially unchanged.
A. #3 Grove Court.
   #3 had a billiard/sitting room, two bedrooms and a screened porch on the street floor. The
   upstairs had two bedrooms, a bath and a sewing room. Servants' quarters, a wine cellar,
   washroom and storage rooms remain under the rear of the house. A wing of two bedrooms
   and a bath, which no longer stands, connected the two buildings.
B. #4 Grove Court.
   #4 consisted of a bedroom, kitchen, bath and a very large living-dining room with a large
   fireplace and Japanese cedar walls. A tent house, used by family and guests, still stands on
   the property.
C. Stonework on Grove Court.
   Much of the stonework along the roads remains although in deteriorating condition.
No. 43 Site of Ormondale Ranch Buildings.
   These houses have been so altered over the years that any historic significance is lost.
   However, they indicate the site of the headquarters of the Menlo Stock Farm, later called
   Ormondale Ranch. William O'Brien Macdonough bought the 1,191 acre ranch in 1891 to
   raise race horses. As many as 200 horses were housed in various barns. A 3/4 mile race
   track existed approximately at the site of Ormondale School. Ormonde, the ranch's most
   famous horse, was considered the most outstanding horse of the 19th century. Among his
   descendants was Citation.
   The superintendent's house, number 99, was built in 1903 on the site of the Martinez
   adobe. The house at number 55 was originally used, in a slightly different location, to house
   silk worms during Nicola Larco's ownership of the land in the 1870s. After 1906, it was
   moved and served as a bunkhouse for Ormondale Ranch hands. The house at 234 Shawnee
   Pass is part of the ranch headquarters complex and was where Macdonough stayed when
                                    Historic Element: Appendices
                                                  31

    he was on site. An original pump house and another outbuilding still exist. The spring-fed
    pond dates from ranch times.
No. 44 Willowbrook Farm; Bunkhouse and Barn.
    This private residence, considerably modified, served as a bunkhouse and barn for the
    workers of Willowbrook Farm, which produced herbs for Herbert Law's patent medicine
    viavi. It was built in 1912 and is located at 211 Willowbrook Road.
No. 45 Site of Hallidie House (Morshead Property).
Andrew Hallidie's house stood in a secluded valley up the slope from the present Morshead
home. Construction began in 1884. There were two residences, one for servants and the other
for family and guests. Nearby was a miniature school for the Hallidie son. Simple but formal
gardens surrounded the buildings. An orchard contained 20,000 trees. Further to the south
were stables built with 10 x 10 timbers. Thousands of feet of water pipe were laid and
reservoirs were built. Most of the buildings were dismantled in 1930, and the main house was
then moved and renovated. It was razed in 1959.
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                  32
Historic Element Appendix 2:
Implementation of the Historic Element
Actions to date:
The following ordinances and regulations have been developed or amended to implement the
objectives and principles of the historic element.
1.      A new chapter of the zoning ordinance, Chapter 18.31, titled “Historic Resources.”
2.      Amendments to the zoning ordinance re: conditional use permits, variances, and
        administration.
3.      Amendments to the subdivision ordinance.
4.      Amendments to the site development ordinance.
Future actions:
The following programs should be developed to implement the objectives and principles of the
historic element.
1.      Establish a historic marker program to clearly identify historic resources in the town
        with appropriate and informative markers. The program should address marker design
        standards and review procedures. Consider incentives which would offset the cost to
        the property owner, such as reduced permit fees if the property owner purchases the
        marker, and development of a historic marker fund, with donations coming from the
        Town, local citizens and preservation organizations. This program is being
        implemented.
2.      Adopt the state historic building code. The town should adopt the California Historical
        Building Code (Part 8) of the Uniform Building Code which deals specifically with existing
        structures listed on the local register. (Discuss with building inspector and town
        attorney.)
3.      Request correction of San Mateo County Assessor's Historical Association Report, Town
        of Portola Valley, 1988, to match the town's data on the following resources:
        a.  No. 3, Ormondale Ranch house built in 1903.
        b.  No. 19, Allen-Woods house built between 1885 and 1888.
        c.  No. 31 B, Jelich House built in 1915.
        d.  No. 32, Conolley-Melchor House built in 1914.
4.      California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Utilize the environmental review process
        through initial studies, negative declarations, mitigation measures, and EIRs for all
                                   Historic Element: Appendices
                                                  33

   development applications on properties with historic resources to ensure full
   preservation of these resources. When justified, the responsible body should require
   further study and, as appropriate, investigation of alternatives and mitigation of
   impacts. Mitigation actions can affect tentative subdivision maps, conditional use
   permits, variances, building permits, site development permits, demolition permits and
   all city discretionary processes.
5. Architectural Historian. Review qualifications of architectural historians and develop a
   list of one or more historians who will be available to advise the town from time to time
   on specific applications.
6. Educational Programs. Develop educational programs to kindle public interest in
   historic preservation and local history. One program could be the preparation of a local
   guide to historic sites and features of the town. The guide could be designed as a local
   walking, driving and/or bicycling tour pamphlet that gives locations of sites and
   structures along with a brief history and historic pictures. The guide could serve as an
   educational tool for local schools and area residents.
7. Archives. The town historian, the archives committee, and the Portola Valley branch
   library should coordinate in establishing and maintaining a collection of historic data on
   Portola Valley settlement and historic resources.
8. Coordination with Adjoining Jurisdictions. Work with the appropriate adjoining
   jurisdictions, including cities and the counties of San Mateo and Santa Clara, to develop
   preservation programs for historic resources identified in the town's inventory but
   located outside its incorporated limits.
                                Historic Element: Appendices
                                             34
Town of Portola Valley General Plan
      Noise Element
     Last amended March 25, 2009
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
   General Objectives ...................................................................................................................... 1
   The Noise Environment .............................................................................................................. 1
   Transportation Generated Noise ................................................................................................ 2
   Non-Transportation Generated Noise ........................................................................................ 2
   Conclusions ................................................................................................................................. 3
Goals ............................................................................................................................................. 10
   Transportation Generated Noise (Policies 1–3) ....................................................................... 10
   Non-Transportation Noise (Policy 4) ........................................................................................ 10

                                                         Noise Element
Introduction
4300      The noise element establishes policies for the preservation of tranquility within the town
          consistent with its rural character.
General Objectives
4301      1.      To maintain an acoustical environment in harmony with the pastoral nature of the
                  community.
          2.      To provide peace and quiet for the enjoyment and self-renewal of the town's
                  residents and visitors.
          3.      To preserve for the residents of the town a sense of privacy attainable only in the
                  absence of intrusions by unwarranted noise.
The Noise Environment
4302      In general, Portola Valley enjoys a low ambient noise level. This low level of noise
          contributes to the “rural” quality of the community. Exceptions to this, however, include
          traffic noise along some major roads and certain non-transportation generated noise.
4303      Although no federal or state highways pass through the town, motor vehicles constitute
          the primary source of consistent noise pollution. Alpine Road and Portola Road are the
          major sources of traffic noise. Outside town boundaries but within its planning area lie two
          major traffic arterials: a portion of the Junipero Serra Freeway (I 280) and a portion of
          Skyline Boulevard (State Highway 35). In 1969, a major jet noise burden was placed on the
          town as the result of an FAA air corridor revision; since that time the town has worked to
          lessen the impact of aircraft noise over Portola Valley. Private airplanes and helicopters,
          however, remain as sources of aircraft noise. Non-transportation sources constitute
          another noise source category, with construction noise, barking dogs, yard maintenance,
          and mechanical equipment as the primary irritants.
                                                 Noise
                                                   1

Transportation Generated Noise
4304     The State Office of Planning and Research Guidelines related to the preparation of the
         Noise Element of the General Plan mandate that noise exposure levels be prepared in
         terms of the day/night average sound level (Ldn) or the community noise equivalent level
         (CNEL). Ldn is currently the preferred metric and is used to characterize the 24-hour
         average noise exposure level with a 10 dBA penalty added to noise at night (10pm to 7am).
         All sound levels in this element are A-weighted sound levels abbreviated dBA. For
         definitions of technical terms see Table 1, “Definitions of Acoustical Terms Used in this
         Report.”
4305     Noise exposure from traffic is depicted in the form of noise exposure contours along the
         major roadways. Noise exposure contours are lines of equal loudness, similar to elevation
         contours that are lines of equal elevation. Noise exposure contours for the Town were
         calculated using a traffic noise model developed by the Federal Highway Administration
         and the California Department of Transportation. The traffic noise model was calibrated
         using the actual measured noise levels in Portola Valley. Noise exposure is presented in
         terms of the Ldn noise metric. The results of the traffic noise modeling are shown on Figure
         1, “Noise Contour Map.” The noise contour map is incorporated into the Town’s graphic
         information system (GIS) software.
4306     The noise measurement survey along roads was completed in 2007. Long-term
         measurements made hour by hour over a period of several days provide information on
         how noise levels vary throughout the community day and night and from day to day. A
         series of attended short-term measurements were also conducted to identify specific noise
         sources. (For a complete list of measurements and a map showing noise measurement
         locations see Noise Element Appendix 1, Table 3 and Figure 1.)
Non-Transportation Generated Noise
4307     Non-traffic generated noise levels are measured in terms of Leq, which is the average noise
         level during a specific noise period. It is important to know how noise levels vary within
         each hour of the day and night. The Leq is the energy average, or equivalent, sound level
         during a specified time period, often one hour is used. The Lmax is the maximum
         instantaneous sound level during a specified time interval. The standard acoustical
         statistical descriptors are the L01, the L10, the L50, and the L90 which represent sound levels
         exceeded 1 percent (near maximum levels), 10 percent, 50 percent (the median level), and
         90 percent of a time interval (representing the background). An index to different noise
         levels in dBA is shown on Table 2, “Typical Noise Levels in the Environment.”
4308     Average noise levels in the town during most of the daytime hours on the days unaffected
         by local neighborhood activities were about 45 dBA Leq. This is about equivalent to the
         noise level in a “Quiet office environment.” During the daytime, noise levels typically
         ranged from 40 to 50 dBA Leq. Noise levels at night were typically 25 to 30 dBA L90
         throughout Portola Valley, except overlooking Interstate 280 where noise levels were
         slightly higher ranging from 30 to 35 dBA L90 during the nighttime and in the very center of
         the quietest portion of the community where noise levels were 20 to 25 dBA L90 during the
         nighttime.
                                                 Noise
                                                    2

Conclusions
4309      By and large, noise levels in the Town are quite low except along several portions of the
          three major roads . Individual non-residential uses have the potential to increase noise
          levels in residential areas above acceptable levels unless properly located and designed.
          Elsewhere, levels are generally within normal standards described on Figure 2.
                                                Noise
                                                  3
                                               TABLE 1
        Definitions of Acoustical Terms Used in this Report
Term                                                              Definitions
Decibel, dB                 A unit describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the
                            base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference
                            pressure. The reference pressure for air is 20.
Sound Pressure Level        Sound pressure is the sound force per unit area, usually expressed in micro Pascals
                            (micro Newtons per square meter), where 1 Pascal is the pressure resulting from a
                            force of 1 Newton exerted over an area of 1 square meter. The sound pressure level
                            is expressed in decibels as 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio
                            between the pressures exerted by the sound to a reference sound pressure (e.g., 20
                            micro Pascals). Sound pressure level is the quantity that is directly measured by a
                            sound level meter.
Frequency, Hz               The number of complete pressure fluctuations per second above and below
                            atmospheric pressure. Normal human hearing is between 20 Hz and 20,000 Hz.
                            Infrasonic sound are below 20 Hz and Ultrasonic sounds are above 20,000 Hz.
A-Weighted Sound Level,     The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the
dBA                         A-weighting filter network. The A-weighting filter de-emphasizes the very low and
                            very high frequency components of the sound in a manner similar to the frequency
                            response of the human ear and correlates well with subjective reactions to noise.
Equivalent Noise Level, Leq The average A-weighted noise level during the measurement period. The hourly Leq
                            used for this report is denoted as dBA Leq[h].
Community Noise             The average A-weighted noise level during a 24-hour day, obtained after addition of
Equivalent Level, CNEL      5 decibels in the evening from 7:00 pm to 10:00 pm and after addition of 10 decibels
                            to sound levels in the night between 10:00 pm and 7:00 am.
Day/Night Noise Level, Ldn  The average A-weighted noise level during a 24-hour day, obtained after addition of
                            10 decibels to levels measured in the night between 10:00 pm and 7:00 am.
Lmax, Lmin                  The maximum and minimum A-weighted noise level during the measurement
                            period.
L01, L10, L50, L90          The A-weighted noise levels that are exceeded 1%, 10%, 50%, and 90% of the time
                            during the measurement period.
Ambient Noise Level         The composite of noise from all sources near and far. The normal or existing level of
                            environmental noise at a given location.
Intrusive                   That noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at a given
                            location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its amplitude,
                            duration, frequency, and time of occurrence and tonal or informational content as
                            well as the prevailing ambient noise level.
                                                     Noise
                                                       4
Town of Portola Valley
     Traffic Noise Contour Map
           N
  Figure 1
 LEGEND
    65 dBA Ldn
    60 dBA Ldn
    55 dBA Ldn
                               Noise
                                5
       Figure 2 – Land Use Compatibility for Transportation Noise
         Land Use Category                      Exterior Noise Exposure (Ldn)
                                                      55      60       65      70
Single-Family Residential
Multi-Family Residential
Outdoor Sports and Recreation,
Neighborhood Parks and Playgrounds
Schools, Libraries, Museums, Hospitals,
Personal Care, Meeting Halls, Religous
Facilities
Office Buildings, Business
Commercial, and Professional
Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
Amphitheaters
            Normally Acceptable: Specified land use is satisfactory, based upon the
            assumption that any buildings involved are of normal conventional
            construction, without any special insulation requirements
            Conditionally Acceptable: Specified land use may be permitted only after
            detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements and needed noise
            insulation features included in the design
            Unacceptable: New construction or development should generally not be
            undertaken because mitigation is usually not feasible to comply with noise
            element policies
                                            Noise
                                             6

TABLE 2 Typical Noise Levels in the Environment
                                  Noise Level
Common Outdoor Noise Source       (dBA)        Common Indoor Noise Source
                                   120 dBA
      Jet fly-over at 1,000 feet                        Rock concert
                                    110 dBA
        Pile driver at 65 feet      100 dBA
                                                 Night club with live music
                                     90 dBA
   Large truck pass by at 50 feet
                                     80 dBA           Noisy restaurant
                                                Garbage disposal at 1 meter
     Gas lawn mower at 100 feet      70 dBA     Vacuum cleaner at 3 meters
  Commercial/Urban area daytime                  Normal speech at 1 meter
 Suburban expressway at 100 feet      60 dBA
          Suburban daytime                       Active office environment
                                      50 dBA
        Urban  area
         fee feet   nighttime
                  feet meters                    Quiet office environment
                                      40 dBA
        Suburban nighttime
           Quiet rural areas           30 dBA              Library
                                                  Quiet bedroom at night
           Wilderness area            20 dBA
                                        10 dBA    Quiet recording studio
    Threshold of human hearing           0 dBA  Threshold of human hearing
                                         Noise
                                            7
Noise Compatible Land Use Planning
Transportation Generated Noise
4310     Much research has resulted in the development of a correlation of exterior community
         noise levels and their acceptability for different land uses. In the mid-1970s the
         Environmental Protection Agency made a finding that an Ldn of 55 dBA (including a 5 dBA
         margin of safety) would have “no impact” on a residence. Following this, the State of
         California established guidelines and suggested 60 dBA Ldn as an upper limit for
         environmental noise in a residential setting. Furthermore, typical California construction
         with windows open provides about 15 dBALdn of noise reduction when going from outside
         to inside, so if the exterior Ldn is 60 dBA or less, the interior Ldn will typically be 45 dBA or
         less. An Ldn of 45 dBA is considered the upper limit of acceptabile interior sound for
         residential development in California (as defined in the State Building Code).
4311     Figure 2 shows the transportation noise and land use compatibility guidelines for Portola
         Valley. Three acceptability categories are identified: “normally acceptable,” “conditionally
         acceptable,” and “unacceptable.” In the “normally acceptable” category a use would be
         acceptable without additional mitigation measures. In the “conditionally acceptable”
         category the use would be acceptable with the application of mitigation measures. In the
         “unacceptable” category the use would unacceptable even after the application of
         available mitigation measures. Based on the existing conditions in Portola Valley an
         exterior noise goal of 55 dBA Ldn has been adopted for single-family residences. This is in
         contrast to the exterior noise goal of 60 dBA generally applied to more urban areas.
4312     One of the requirements of the Noise Element is to facilitate the noise insulation standards
         contained in the State Building Code that are applicable to new multi-family housing
         development. Where the exterior noise exposure level is 60 dBA Ldn or greater, the
         residential building must attenuate the interior noise level to 45 dBA Ldn or less. Existing
         multi-family housing in Portola Valley is limited to The Sequoias and student and faculty
         housing at the Priory.
4313     Mitigation measures for traffic noise consist mostly of modifications to the path and
         receiver of the noise. For instance, earthen barriers and sound walls can be used to reduce
         the noise impact. Also, if new receivers can be located further from the road, the noise will
         be decreased. In addition, controls on the noise generators such as improved pavements,
         and enforcement of state laws regarding noise from mufflers and car radios can help
         reduce the impacts from traffic generated noise.
Non-Transportation Generated Noise
4314     Non-transportation uses such as commercial establishments and public uses generate a
         different kind of noise referred to as non-transportation noise. This noise results from
         sources such as heating, ventilating, and refrigeration equipment, loading dock activities,
         parking lot traffic and maintenance, special events with music, etc. If a residence exists or
         is planned near such a source of noise, special noise guidelines shown in Table 3 that
         address noise during any hour of the day and night are used to evaluate the suitability of
                                                  Noise
                                                    8

            the environment. Whereas traffic generated noise is measured in Ldn, noise from other
            sources is measured in Leq (noise in dBA during any hour) or Lmax (maximum noise in dBA
            during any hour). Thus, rather specific standards are shown for different time periods for
            the various land uses. Also, whereas traffic generated noise tends to follow rather
            consistent patterns and can be well described by Ldn, noises from other sources tend to
            vary by the type of noise source. Accordingly, the measurements for these other sources
            are articulated to specific day and nighttime periods.
4315        The correlations between non-transportation noises and land uses on Table 3 can be
            applied in two ways. First, noise sensitive uses are discouraged where the noise from non-
            transportation sources will exceed the standards on the table. Second, generators of non-
            transportation noise should not be allowed unless they comply with the standards on the
            table.
TABLE 3 Non-Transportation Noise Standards
                                                  Exterior Noise-Level           Interior Noise-Level
                                 Hourly          Standard In Any Hour           Standard In Any Hour
          Land Use           Noise-Level                  (dBA)                          (dBA)
        Receiving the         Descriptor        Daytime        Nighttime      Daytime         Nighttime
            Noise                                 (7am-          (10pm-         (7am-        (10pm-7am)
                                                  10pm)           7am)          10pm)
     Residential                    Leq             50             40             40              30
                                   Lmax             65             55             55              45
     Medical,                       Leq             55             45             45              35
     convalescent                  Lmax             70             60             55              45
     Theater,                       Leq             --              --            35              35
     auditorium                    Lmax             --              --            50              50
     Religious Facility,            Leq             55              --            40              40
     meeting hall                  Lmax                             --            55              55
     Office building                Leq             --              --            45              --
     School, library,               Leq             55              --            40              --
     museum                        Lmax                             --            55              --
     Playground, park               Leq             55              --             --             --
     Notes:
     a)    The Residential standards apply to all residentially zoned properties.
     b)     Each of the noise levels specified above shall be lowered by 5 dBA for tonal noises
            characterized by a whine, screech, or hum, noises consisting primarily of speech or music,
            or recurring impulsive noises.
     c)    The exterior noise standards are measured at the property line of the receiving property.
     d) The thresholds for speech interference indoors are about 45 dBA if the noise is steady and
           above 55 dBA if the noise is fluctuating. Outdoors, the thresholds are about 15 dBA higher.
           Steady noise of sufficient intensity, above 35 dBA, and fluctuating noise levels above about
           45 dBA have been shown to affect sleep.
                                                       Noise
                                                        9
Goals
4316     Goal 1: Develop Land Uses Compatible with the Noise Environment
Transportation Generated Noise (Policies 1–3)
         1.    The town will utilize the noise contours in Figure 1 and noise/land use
               compatibility standards on Figure 2.
         2.    New development of residential or other noise-sensitive land uses are discouraged
               in noise impacted areas unless effective mitigation measures are incorporated into
               the project design to reduce noise levels in outdoor activity areas to 55 dBA Ldn or
               less.
         3.    Interior noise levels shall not exceed 45 Ldn in all new residential units (single- and
               multi-family). Residential development sites exposed to exterior noise levels
               exceeding 55 Ldn shall be analyzed following protocols in the 2007 California
               Building Code (Chapter 12, Appendix Section 1207.11.2) or the most recent revision.
Non-Transportation Noise (Policy 4)
         4.    New development of noise-sensitive land uses are discouraged where the noise
               level due to non-transportation noise sources will exceed the standards of Table 3.
               Where noise sensitive land uses exist or are proposed in areas exposed to existing or
               proposed exterior non-transportation noise levels exceeding the performance levels
               of Table 3, an acoustical analysis shall be submitted by an applicant so that the noise
               mitigation may be included in the design of the new development.
4317     Goal 2: Reduce Noise from Traffic
         1.    Utilizing currently available information, and to the extent feasible, select a
               “quieter” pavement that also meets other criteria established by the Town for
               pavements, and use the quieter pavement when resurfacing roadways.
         2.    Control the sound of vehicle amplification systems, (e.g. loud stereos) by
               encouraging the enforcement of Section 27007 of the California Motor Vehicle
               Code. This section prohibits amplified sound that can be heard 50 or more feet
               from a vehicle.
         3.    Control excessive exhaust noise by encouraging the enforcement of Section 27150
               of the California Motor Vehicle Code.
4318     Goal 3: Mitigate Noise from New Projects
         1.    Noise created by new transportation noise sources (e.g., increased traffic or a new
               roadway) shall be mitigated so as to not cause the following criteria to be exceeded
               or to cause a significant adverse community response:
                                               Noise
                                                 10

                Cause the Ldn at noise-sensitive uses to increase by 3 dBA or more and exceed
                 the “normally acceptable” level. See Figure 2 for the definition of “normally
                 acceptable.”
              Cause the Ldn at noise-sensitive uses to increase by 5 dBA or more and remain
                 “normally acceptable.”
            Where a proposed transportation noise source is likely to produce noise levels that
            would exceed the above standards, an acoustical analysis shall be required as a part
            of project review or as part of the environmental review process so that noise
            mitigation may be included in the project design.
     2.     Noise created by new non-transportation noise sources shall be mitigated so as to
            not cause the land use receiving the noise to exceed interior and exterior noise level
            standards of Table 3. Where proposed non-transportation noise sources are likely
            to produce noise levels that would exceed the standards of Table 3, an acoustical
            analysis shall be required as a part of project review or as part of the environmental
            review process so that noise mitigation may be included in the project design.
     3.     All acoustical analyses shall:
             Be the responsibility of the applicant for the project.
             Be prepared by a qualified person experienced in the fields of environmental
                 noise assessment and architectural acoustics.
             Include representative noise level assessments with sufficient sampling periods
                 and locations to adequately describe local conditions.
             Estimate existing and projected (20 years) noise levels in terms of Ldn and/or
                 the standards of Table 3, and compare those levels to the policies of this
                 Element.
             Recommend mitigation to achieve compliance with the adopted policies and
                 standards of this Element. Where the noise source in question consists of
                 intermittent single events, the report must address the effects of maximum
                 noise levels in sleeping rooms in terms of possible sleep disturbance.
             Describe a post-project assessment program that could be used to evaluate the
                 effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures.
4319 Goal 4: Control Noise from Construction and Yard Maintenance Activities
     1.     Implement appropriate standard controls for all construction projects carried out by
            contractors or homeowners.
     2.     Implement appropriate standard controls for yard maintenance activities carried
            out by commercial companies and homeowners.
     3.     Require ASCC review for all construction projects scheduled for or lasting more than
            24 months and submittal of construction staging, timing and noise management
            plans.
                                            Noise
                                             11

            4.     Develop a guidance manual to provide information to the public regarding noise
                   control.
4320        Goal 5: Control Noise from Other Sources
            1.     Communicate with the FAA through the San Francisco International Airport (SFO)
                   Airport Roundtable, and other government persons and agencies, to minimize the
                   noise impact of commercial aircraft operations.
            2.     Work with local airports to promote a “fly neighborly” program to minimize noise
                   resulting from low altitude aircraft operations and unnecessary general aviation
                   aircraft over Portola Valley.
            3.     Revise the noise ordinance to address ongoing noise issues by using quantitative
                   noise limits where appropriate and establishing comprehensive noise control
                   measures.
            4.     Develop a “quiet neighbor” information program and distribute information to the
                   community defining community norms.
            5.     Develop a program for dealing with chronic noise complaints.
Appendix
The document “Noise Technical Report Supporting the Updates of the Portola Valley Noise Element and
Noise Ordinance, June 18, 2008” prepared by Richard B. Rodkin, PE, is included as an appendix to the
noise element.
                                                  Noise
                                                   12

Noise Element Appendix 1:
2008 Noise Technical Report
                          Noise Element Appendix
                                    13
Town of Portola Valley General Plan
     Housing Element
 Adopted by the Portola Valley Town Council
              January 14, 2015
Introduction ........................................................................................................................... 1
   Public Participation ........................................................................................................... 2
   Consistency with Other General Plan Elements ............................................................. 3
Evaluation of 2009 Element ................................................................................................. 4
   Program 1: Inclusionary Housing Requirements .......................................................... 4
   Program 2: Multifamily Housing ..................................................................................... 5
   Program 3: Second Units ................................................................................................. 6
   Program 4: Waiver of Fees .............................................................................................. 7
   Program 5: Shared Housing ............................................................................................. 8
   Program 6: Emergency Shelters ...................................................................................... 8
   Program 7: State-Required Density Bonuses ................................................................. 9
   Program 8: Fair Housing .................................................................................................. 9
   Program 9: Removal of Constraints to Housing for People with Disabilities.............. 9
   Program 10: Housing Impact Fee.................................................................................. 10
   Program 11: Farmworker Housing Zoning Amendments .......................................... 10
   Program 12: Transitional and Supportive Housing Zoning Amendments ................ 10
   Program 13: Continue Existing Energy Conservation Measures and Implement
   Sustainability Element .................................................................................................... 11
   Summary .......................................................................................................................... 11
Population, Employment and Housing: Conditions & Trends ......................................... 12
   Population Trends ........................................................................................................... 12
   Employment Trends........................................................................................................ 13
   Housing Characteristics .................................................................................................. 14
   Housing Affordability ...................................................................................................... 17
   Rehabilitation and Replacement .................................................................................... 24
   Affordability for Assisted Housing Developments ....................................................... 25
   Regional Housing Needs Allocation ............................................................................... 25
Constraints on Housing....................................................................................................... 27
   Governmental Regulations and Constraints ................................................................. 27
   Nongovernmental Constraints ....................................................................................... 47
   Constraints on Housing for People with Disabilities.................................................... 48
Sites Suitable for Housing ................................................................................................... 51
   A Process of Elimination ................................................................................................. 51
   Inventory of Vacant Parcels............................................................................................ 57
   Analysis of Suitability for Development ........................................................................ 64
   Summary of Site Inventory ............................................................................................. 68
Goals & Policies.................................................................................................................... 71
Programs, Quantified Objectives, and Action Plan ........................................................... 73
                                         Housing Element
Introduction
2400        The housing element of the general plan examines the success of the previous
            housing element, the need for and status of housing in the town, constraints on the
            provision of housing, and sites available for housing. Building on this foundation,
            the element sets forth the goals and policies of the town with regard to housing
            and establishes programs to increase the supply of housing, and especially
            affordable housing, in the town. This version of the housing element is an update
            and revision of the housing element which was first adopted by the Town of Portola
            Valley in 1969.
2401        The element also responds to the state requirements for housing elements as set
            forth in Government Code Section 65580 et seq. Accordingly, this revision of the
            element addresses Portola Valley’s share of regional housing need as determined
            by the San Mateo County subregion allocation process for the 2014-2022 planning
            period.
2402        The element begins with an evaluation of the current housing element, which was
            adopted in 2009. Many programs from that element have been continued into the
            current housing element. Most of the continued programs have been updated and
            changed in response to situations the town has encountered over the years in
            implementing the programs.
2403        Next is a detailed examination of population, employment and housing conditions
            and trends in Portola Valley. The primary findings of this section are that there is a
            need for additional affordable housing for the elderly and for people who work in
            town.
2404        The constraints analysis looks at both governmental and nongovernmental
            constraints. There are a number of constraints, including necessary subdivision and
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             1

            zoning standards, infrastructure and public service constraints, construction costs,
            and the extremely high cost of land in town. The high land cost in particular makes
            it unlikely that any nonprofit housing developer would be able to produce
            affordable housing, or even a mixed income development, if the developer had to
            pay the full land cost. As a result, this element includes programs that are intended
            to mitigate or work around this constraint.
2405        In the site inventory section, information is provided on sites available for
            development in town. The land available for development is limited by factors such
            as the San Andreas fault, steep slopes and landslides. This section demonstrates
            that, as a result of the town’s housing programs, there are sufficient sites available
            for housing to meet the town’s share of the regional housing need.
2406        The town’s goals and policies for housing development in town are then presented,
            followed by detailed descriptions of the programs and quantified objectives
            included in the element. The action plan then summarizes the actions the town will
            need to take to implement the programs and describes the expected results.
2407        This housing element includes seven programs:
            1) Inclusionary Housing
            2) Affiliated Housing
            3) Second Units
            4) Shared Housing
            5) Fair Housing
            6) Energy Conservation and Sustainability
            7) Explore Future Housing Needs and Potential Housing Programs
            Finally, an Action Plan at the end of the element spells out the steps that need to be
            taken in order to implement the program, and when each step should occur during
            the remainder of the 2014-2022 planning period.
Public Participation
2408        During the housing element update process, the town posted information on the
            town’s website, held 10 advertised and open study sessions on various portions of
            the housing element, distributed information through the Town’s e-Notification
            system to anyone who expressed an interest in housing, mailed postcards to all
            town residents, and posted information on the Portola Valley Forum, an active list
            serve with over 2,300 members.
            Town staff also participated in the 21 Elements housing element efforts in San
            Mateo County. This included attending panel discussions focusing on developers,
            housing advocates and funders, special needs and sustainability. In addition,
            information about the town’s housing element update process was provided to
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                              2

            local housing advocates and stakeholders through the 21 Elements list serve and
            more widely to the stakeholder list developed by the 21 Elements effort.
            The draft housing element has been available at Town Hall and at the library, as
            well as on the website. Town residents and others interested in housing in Portola
            Valley have had the opportunity to comment both at meetings and in writing.
            Comments provided at the public study sessions were used to refine the Goals and
            Policies section and the Programs section of the 2014 Housing Element in
            particular.
Consistency with Other General Plan Elements
2409        This element and the adopted elements of the General Plan have been compared
            for consistency. At the same time that the Housing Element is adopted, Section
            2106e of the Land Use Element will be updated to reflect the revised name and
            Section number for the Affiliated Housing Program. No other conflicts with the
            other General Plan elements were found. Any other elements of the General Plan
            that are amended during the planning period will be drafted to be consistent with
            this housing element.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                          3
Evaluation of 2009 Element
2410        Portola Valley’s current housing element was adopted in 2009. The element has
            thirteen programs, which are described and analyzed below.
Program 1: Inclusionary Housing Requirements
2411        This program requires that 15% of the lots in new subdivisions be deeded to the
            town for affordable housing. Each lot can be developed with two to four housing
            units. The lots are to be improved and ready for development as an integral part of
            the subdivision. As an incentive, a density bonus of 10% is also provided.
            Subdividers of sites with fewer than seven lots pay a fee in lieu of providing a lot,
            while subdividers of sites with seven or more lots pay a fee for fractional lots.
            These in-lieu fees are placed in a restricted fund titled the Inclusionary Housing In-
            Lieu Fund for affordable housing programs and projects.
2411a       In 2009, the Town held title to four lots in the Blue Oaks subdivision which had
            been provided to the Town for below market rate, moderate income housing, but
            had been unable to find a developer to build the units. The housing element called
            for the Town to explore two options: 1) building the homes on the lots, or 2) selling
            the lots and using the funds to acquire another site in town. The intention was for
            the eight moderate income units to be built by the end of the planning period.
Status
2411b       To implement this program, the Town first considered the constraints that
            developers had noted concerning development of the lots. These constraints
            included the small size of the project, the hilly topography of the lots, and the
            somewhat remote location of the lots. The Town also looked at a number of
            potential sites, but found that most were constrained by either availability or cost.
2411c       In August 2012, the Town entered into a purchase contract for a 1.68 acre, mostly
            flat former plant nursery located at 900 Portola Road, on one of the major roads in
            town. The Town’s intent was to partner with an affordable housing developer to
            build approximately 8-12 moderate income units on the property. The purchase
            contract had two major contingencies: 1) that the Town be successful in selling the
            four lots in the Blue Oaks subdivision that had been deeded to the Town for
            construction of below market rate housing units; and 2) that the property owner of
            900 Portola Road provide a release from the County of San Mateo that hazardous
            materials contamination on the property was properly remediated by December
            19, 2012. The Town was able to sell the lots in the Blue Oaks subdivision, as is
            discussed below, but the contingency for a closure letter relative to the hazardous
            materials remediation could not be met. The contract lapsed on December 21,
            2012 due to uncertainty as to when the closure letter could be obtained. As of May
            2014, the County had not yet issued a letter of closure for the property. It is now
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                              4

            the Town’s understanding that the property owner and another party have entered
            into a purchase agreement for the site and the Town is not actively pursuing the
            purchase of this property.
2411d       As was mentioned earlier, the other contingency was for the Town to be able to sell
            the Blue Oaks inclusionary housing lots, and this was completed. This involved
            amending the Planned Unit Development Agreement for the subdivision,
            processing a lot line adjustment to create two larger lots out of the four smaller
            inclusionary housing lots, and finally selling the lots. The sale closed on December
            12, 2012 and resulted in the Town receiving $2,790,096 net of closing costs, which
            was deposited in the Town’s Inclusionary Housing In-Lieu Fund.
2411e       Because of the sale of the Blue Oaks lots, the difficulties in attempting to purchase
            900 Portola Road, the upcoming Housing Element Update, and the desire to build
            community consensus for future affordable housing efforts, the Town Council
            created an Ad-Hoc Housing Committee (AHHC) early in 2013. The AHHC was
            charged with developing an affordable housing mission statement for the town
            along with criteria for considering potential affordable housing programs and sites.
            The AHHC completed their work in May and their report was reviewed by the Town
            Council in June 2013. The Town Council accepted the report and forwarded it to
            the Planning Commission for consideration in drafting this 2014 Housing Element
            Update. The report is available on the Town’s website.
2411f       To summarize, the Town worked to implement this program during the planning
            period and was able to make progress by determining that construction of below
            market rate units at the Blue Oaks location would not be feasible and selling the
            lots. The Town attempted to purchase an alternative site but was not able to do so
            because of hazardous materials issues that could not be resolved in a timely way.
            As a result, the Town currently has a total of $2,873,992 in its in-lieu housing fund.
            As called for in Program 7 of the 2014 Housing Element, the Town will be working
            to determine the best appproach to using these funds to provide affordable
            housing to serve, at a minimum, eight moderate income households. This housing
            would be provided in addition to the housing allocated to the Town for the 2014-
            2022 planning period.
Program 2: Multifamily Housing
2412        This program allows multifamily housing to be built on three sites in town: the
            Sequoias, the Priory School, and the Stanford Wedge. Seven housing units have
            been built at the Priory School through this program, and eleven more have been
            authorized there under the Priory’s adopted master plan.
2412a       As was set forth in the adopted 2009 housing element, the town would monitor this
            program, work with the Priory towards construction of their authorized housing
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                              5

            units, and also continue to discuss the program with representatives of both the
            Sequoias and Stanford.
Status
2412b       The Priory School has been working on implementing its master plan as funds allow.
            The school has not yet built the eleven housing units authorized by the master plan,
            but school representatives have stated that the school does still intend to construct
            the housing, although they may first want to amend the master plan to change the
            location of the housing, among other things. In any case, these units are still
            authorized through the approved master plan and could be built when the Priory
            desires to do so.
2412c       Town staff has met with staff at the Sequoias to discuss the possibility of building
            affordable employee housing on their land and to express town support for the
            idea. The staff at the Sequoias are going to explore this option with the non-profit
            management agency and residents.
2412d       Stanford University has expressed no interest in developing the Stanford Wedge
            parcel, and staff have been told that there are currently no plans for the parcel.
2412e       This update of the housing element continues the multifamily housing program
            with no modifications.
Program 3: Second Units
2413        This program allows second units to be constructed throughout most of the town
            on lots one acre or larger in size. The 2009 called for the town to take four actions
            to further encourage second units and increase production so that a total of 34
            second units would be permitted during the planning period. The four actions
            were:
               1. Allow staff-level approval of second units created by converting space on the
                   first floor of an existing home;
               2. Allow staff-level approval of second units that are 400 square feet or smaller
                   that do not require a site development permit for grading or tree removal;
               3. Develop a second unit manual for homeowners and make it available at
                   Town Hall and on the town’s website.
               4. Increase publicity about second units.
Status
2413a       The town has carried out all four of these actions. In January 2011, the zoning
            ordinance was amended to allow staff level approval for units created by
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             6

            converting space on the first floor of an existing home, and also for units 400
            square feet in size or smaller. The second unit manual is complete and was posted
            on the town’s webpage in February 2012. Additional information has been added
            to the town’s website about second units, and a handout about second units has
            been created and is available at Town Hall.
2413b       The table below shows the number of second units that were projected in the
            housing element compard to the actual number of permits issued each year:
                        Year                   2nd Units Projected           2nd Units Permitted
                  2008 (6 months)                      2.5                             1
                        2009                           4.9                             3
                        2010                            6                              8
                        2011                            6                              5
                        2012                            6                              4
                        2013                            6                              8
                  2014 (6 months)                       3                         3 (to date)
                       TOTAL                           34                             32
2413c       The number of second units permitted has been variable, but the total number of
            second units permitted is only two less than the number that was projected in the
            2009 housing element. The average over the past five years, not including 2014 is
            5.3 units per year, which is less than the target of 6 units per year, but it does
            appear that the number of applications for second units are increasing.
2413d       Second units appear to be a very effective way of providing affordable housing in
            Portola Valley. This is probably due to a couple of reasons. First, second units are
            generally smaller and therefore more affordable. Second, second units are often
            used as housing for elderly relatives who may have low incomes, or for staff who
            work at the primary residence. As Portola Valley’s population continues to age,
            second units may be a desirable way for older residents to remain in town, since
            they can rent out one of the homes to relatives or caretakers while living in the
            other. Second units are also the only type of affordable housing that is likely to be
            provided in Portola Valley by market forces, without a significant subsidy. This
            housing element therefore continues the second units program and adds
            components to the program to further encourage second units in the town.
Program 4: Waiver of Fees
2414        This program called for the town to amend its fee ordinances to allow fees to be
            waived for projects that dedicate at least 50% of units for people with moderate
            incomes or below.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             7

Status
2414a       The zoning ordinance was amended to include a fee waiver provision in January
            2011.
Program 5: Shared Housing
2415        The town has encouraged residents to participate in the Human Investment Project
            (HIP) shared housing program for many years. This program matches people
            looking for housing with people who wish to rent rooms in houses they own. The
            quantified objective for this program was to place two to three low or very low
            income persons in houses in the town each year, for a total of 10-15 persons
            placed.
Status
2415a       The town continues to encourage participation in the shared housing program. HIP
            Housing has conducted some outreach in town, including sending information to
            churches, schools, and Town Hall. The organization also presented information
            about the program at a Town Council meeting in January 2014. Approximately 3
            town residents call HIP Housing each year to ask about the program.
2415b       Information on participation was available starting in 1995. Two housing providers
            signed up to participate in the program in the four years from 1995 to 1999 and
            were matched with housing seekers. During that same time period, five other town
            residents who were looking for shared housing signed up with the program and
            were placed in housing outside the town. Between 2000 and 2008, two housing
            providers signed up for the program, and one was matched with a housing seeker.
            In addition, seven residents from Portola Valley were assisted with finding housing.
            From 2009 through 2013, eight Portola Valley residents and nine people who were
            employed in the Town were screened for participation. Two residents and one
            employee were able to find housing through the program.
2415c       Because of the relatively high number of older residents living in town who may
            have homes larger than they need, this program seems like a good match for the
            town. The town will continue this program and will work with HIP Housing to
            provide information about the program to residents. Even though participation is
            low, this program does appear to address a need in the town.
Program 6: Emergency Shelters
2416        This program called for the town to develop and adopt a zoning ordinance
            amendment to comply with SB 2.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                          8
Status
2416a       The zoning ordinance was amended to include provisions allowing emergency
            shelters in January 2011.
2416b       The town continues to believe that homelessness, like most housing problems,
            needs to be addressed on a regional basis. As a result, the town has been involved
            in several regional housing efforts, including HEART (Housing Endowment and
            Regional Trust) of San Mateo County.
Program 7: State-Required Density Bonuses
2417        The 2009 housing element stated that the town would develop and adopt an
            ordinance to implement state density bonus law.
Status
2417a       The Town Council adopted an implementation ordinance on May 14, 2014.
Program 8: Fair Housing
2418        The town provides information about fair housing services that Project Sentinel
            provides under the terms of a contract with San Mateo County.
Status
2418a       Staff at Project Sentinel say that there have been minimal inquiries about fair
            housing issues in the town, and that discrimination and landlord-tenant problems
            do not appear to be significant issues in Portola Valley.
Program 9: Removal of Constraints to Housing for People with Disabilities
2419        The 2009 housing element identified several constraints to housing for people with
            disabilities and called for four changes to be made to the town’s zoning ordinance,
            as well as adoption of a reasonable accommodations ordinance. The four changes
            were:
            1. Allow residential facilties for six or fewer people by right, and ensure that the
                standards for these facilities are the same as for single family homes, as
                required by state law;
            2. Allow group homes with seven or more people in the C-C and A-P zoning
                districts with a conditional use permit;
            3. Update the definitions for residential facilities, group homes, and similar uses
                based on the state’s definitions for these uses and the state’s revised definition
                of “disability;” and
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             9

            4. Allow access ramps to extend into required yards beyond what is currently
                 permitted, and allow associated railings to be at least 42 inches in height to be
                 consistent with Title 24.
Status
2419a       These zoning amendments were adopted in January 2011, and the reasonable
            accommodations ordinance was added to the town’s zoning code at the same time
            as Chapter 18.11.
Program 10: Housing Impact Fee
2420        In order to provide more resources for housing, the 2009 housing element called
            for the town to study the possibility of adopting a housing impact fee.
Status
2420a       This work was delayed first to allow the completion of a comprehensive update of
            all planning, engineering and building fees in 2012 and then to allow staff time to
            be focused on the attempt to purchase a site for the inclusionary housing program
            and then to support the Ad Hoc Housing Committee. In this housing element, this
            program has been combined with the inclusionary housing program, so that the
            town can consider whether or not to adopt an impact fee at the same time that the
            town amends its inclusionary housing program.
Program 11: Farmworker Housing Zoning Amendments
2421        This program called for amendments to the town’s zoning ordinance to treat
            farmworker housing for six or fewer persons the same way as single family homes,
            and for farmworker dormitories to be treated as an agricultural land use.
Status
2421a       These zoning amendments were adopted in January 2011.
Program 12: Transitional and Supportive Housing Zoning Amendments
2422        To comply with state law, the 2009 housing element stated that the town would
            amend its zoning ordinance to provide that transitional and supportive housing be
            treated as a residential land use subject only to those restrictions that would apply
            to other residential uses of the same type in the same zoning district.
Status
2422a       These zoning amendments were adopted in January 2011.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            10

Program 13: Continue Existing Energy Conservation Measures and Implement
Sustainability Element
2423        Portola Valley has had regulations that encourage energy conservation for years,
            including permitting solar installations, supporting energy efficient design, and
            clustered development. The town adopted a Sustainability Element to its general
            plan in 2009, which included the energy conservation program from the town’s
            previous housing element. The 2009 Housing Element called for the town to
            continue existing green and energy conservation measures, and to implement the
            Sustainability Element.
Status
2423a       In 2010, the town adopted several ordinances related to energy and resource
            conservation. These were a green building ordinance using the “Build It Green
            Green Point Rated” system for new homes, major remodeling projects, and
            additions; an indoor water conservation ordinance; and a water conservation in
            landscaping ordinance. The town will be reviewing its green building ordinance in
            2014 in light of the changes to CalGreen 2013.
2423b       The town has also been encouraging energy and water conservation in existing
            homes through the state’s Energy Upgrade California program, California Water
            Service’s rebate programs, and other voluntary measures and tools developed by
            the town’s Sustainability Committee. The town has also appointed an Ad Hoc
            Water Conservation Task Force to focus on water conservation issues, and in 2014
            the town expects to adopt a Climate Action Plan.
Summary
2424        The Town has adopted all of the code changes called for by programs in the 2009
            Housing Element, including provisions related to fee waivers, emergency shelters,
            transitional and supportive housing, farmworker housing, removal of constraints to
            housing for people with disabilities, a reasonable accommodations ordinance, and
            state density bonus law. As a result, Programs 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, and 12 have been
            completed and no longer need to be included in the housing element. The
            remaining seven programs will all be continued in the 2014 Housing Element, with
            modifications as discussed above and in the Housing Programs section of this
            element.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                         11

Population, Employment and Housing:
Conditions & Trends
2425        This section provides information on population trends, employment trends,
            housing characteristics, and special housing needs in Portola Valley. The
            information is required by state law and provides a context in order to assist the
            town in planning for suitable housing in the future.
2426        The analysis shows that there is a particular need for housing that is affordable to
            the elderly and to people who work in the town. The proportion of the town’s
            population over 64 has risen from about 6.7% in 1960 to 27% in 2010, and senior
            citizens comprise the majority of lower income households in town. A survey of the
            town’s largest employers reveals that most of the people who teach the town’s
            children, work for town government, and provide services for the town’s senior
            citizens cannot afford to live in Portola Valley.
Population Trends
2427        According to the U.S. Census, Portola Valley’s population decreased 2.44% between
            2000 and 2010. The table below compares the total population, the population in
            group quarters, the population in households and persons per household in 2000
            and 2010. The population in group quarters likely consists primarily of people
            residing at the Priory School, and does not include the Sequoias. It appears that the
            population at the Sequoias did not report themselves as living in group quarters,
            but rather as living in individual units.
                                    Population Growth: 1990 and 2000
                 Year            Total      Population in Group      Population in         Average
                              Population          Quarters            Households        Persons per
                                                                                         Household
                 2000            4,462                70                 4,392              2.58
                 2010            4,353                44                 4,309              2.47
             Note: A group quarters is a place where people live or stay, in a group living arrangement, that is
             owned or managed by an entity or organization providing housing and/or services for the residents.
             This is not a typical household-type living arrangement. These services may include custodial or
             medical care as well as other types of assistance, and residency is commonly restricted to those
             receiving these services. People living in group quarters are usually not related to each other.
             Group quarters include such places as college residence halls, residential treatment centers, skilled
             nursing facilities, group homes, military barracks, correctional facilities, and workers’ dormitories
             Source: U.S. Census.
2427a       Changes in the age distribution from 1960 to 2010, as reflected in the U.S. Census,
            are shown in the table below. The percentage in all major age groups increased
            slightly between 2000 and 2010 except for people under age five and between the
            ages of 20 and 44. The percentage of people age 65 and over continues to grow.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                              12

             These shifts are important to consider both from the town’s housing and other
             planning/service factors.
               Percentage Distribution by Age Group 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010
              Age Group            1960       1970        1980        1990        2000     2010
               Under 5             11.3         5.1         3.5         5.6        5.0       4.0
                 5-19              29.2        30.1        22.4        15.2       19.2      20.3
                20-44              35.4        32.3        30.5        32.4       21.4      14.3
                45-64              17.4        22.3        29.2        28.1       33.5      34.4
                 65+                6.7        10.2        14.4        18.7       21.0       27
                Totals            100.0       100.0       100.0       100.0      100.0     100.0
     Source: U.S. Census
Employment Trends
2428         The number of employed residents in Portola Valley decreased by nearly 20%, from
             2,008 in 2000 to 1,640 in 2010. This is likely related to the increase in the
             population of residents aged 65 and older, and the decrease in residents aged 20-
             44.
2428a        Through the 2008-2012 American Community Survey, 1,512 Portola Valley
             residents reported place of employment. Approximately one quarter of these
             residents work in town, with another quarter working elsewhere in San Mateo
             County.
                               Portola Valley Residents’ Places of Employment,
                                               1990, 2000 and 2010
                           Location                 1990*      %  2000*      %      2010**     %
              Portola Valley                         358      17%   362     18% 373           25%
              Rest of San Mateo County               565      27%   484     25% 357           24%
              Outside the County                    1,155     56% 1,128 57% 782               52%
              Total                                 2,078 100% 1,974 100% 1,512             100%
             * Source: 1990 and 2000 U.S. Census
             **Source: 2008-2012 American Community Survey.
2428b        The Town Planner estimates that there are likely approximately 1,250 – 1,500 jobs
             in town, based on a combination of information from surveys of employers and
             census data on the number of self-employed residents, plus a margin for household
             staff. This is consistent with the estimate of 1,500 jobs shown for the town in the
             Association of Bay Area Governments’ (ABAG) Projections 2013.
2428c        Little new office and commercial development is anticipated. Only 18 acres of land
             are planned and zoned for commercial and office uses, and most of that land is
             developed. The town continues to provide housing for people who work
             elsewhere, helping to relieve the jobs/housing imbalance in other Peninsula cities
             that have more jobs than employed residents.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            13

2428d       Many employees in town are non-residents, in part because they cannot afford to
            live in Portola Valley. In 2004, surveys of the four largest employers in town (the
            town government, the school district and two institutional employers) revealed
            that only about 4% of those employed in town earned incomes that would be in the
            above moderate income category for a family of three, whereas approximately 85%
            earned incomes in the very low or low income categories. While these numbers
            may have changed somewhat, the overall situation is likely very similar. Unless
            employees have other household members who earn significantly more, it appears
            that most of those who administer the town’s affairs, teach its children, and care
            for its elderly cannot afford to live in town.
Housing Characteristics
2429        Portola Valley is a community of single family residences, mostly on lots ranging
            from one to two-and-a-half acres or more. The exceptions are in the older part of
            the town that has some lots as small as 4,000 square feet, and three other small
            areas with minimum lot sizes of 15,000 or 20,000 square feet. Under conditions
            specified in the general plan and land use regulations, the town permits cluster
            development, second units on single-family parcels one acre or larger, shared living
            arrangements and manufactured (mobile) homes. The location and density of
            housing development is controlled largely by natural conditions, particularly the
            San Andreas Fault, which crosses through the town, steep and potentially unstable
            slopes, and flood hazard areas along creek channels.
2429a       According to the California Department of Finance, the number of housing units in
            Portola Valley is projected to increase by 130 from 1,772 in 2000 to 1,902 in 2013,
            an average of 10 units per year. In comparison, actual numbers from the Town’s
            records show that from the 2000-2001 fiscal year to 2012-2013 fiscal year, a total of
            111 building permits were issued for new home construction. This averages out to
            8.5 units per year, which is slightly less than the state estimate.
2429b       Portola Valley’s housing supply between 2000 and 2013 is summarized in the table
            below, as estimated by the California Department of Finance. According to this
            data, 130 single family homes were added during that period. Although permitted,
            no manufactured homes were added. These estimates indicate that Portola Valley
            has 38 multifamily units in 2-4 unit structures, and 324 multifamily units in 5+ unit
            structures, for a total of 366 multi-family units. Portola Valley does not have a
            significant number of multi-family units other than the housing at the Sequoias and
            the Priory. The annual housing unit count reported by the California Department of
            Finance therefore seems to include the senior housing at the Sequoias and some
            housing at the Priory as multi-family units.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                           14

                                      Housing Units, 2000, 2010-2013
                        Total         Single     Multifamily          Mobile          Occupied
                        Units        Family       2-4       5+        Homes             Units
            2000       1,772          1,479        0        260        0                 1,700
            2010       1,895          1,533       38        324        0                 1,746
            2011       1,898          1,536       38        324        0                 1,749
            2012       1,900          1,538       38        324        0                 1,751
            2013       1,902          1,540       38        324        0                 1,753
           Source: State of California, Department of Finance, City/County Population and Housing
           Estimates, 2000-2008, Report E-5.
Tenure
2429c        According to the 2010 Census, about 80% of homes are owner-occupied, while the
             remainder are rented. This has not changed significantly since 1990, as shown in
             the following table of the number of housing units and percentages by tenure.
                       Tenure of Housing Units: 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2010
                         Renter-Occupied Owner-Occupied                    Total Occupied
                                 Units                   Units                  Units
                 1980      97          (8%)      1,142        (92%)        1,239 (100%)
                 1990 303 (19.60%) 1,327 (81.40%) 1,630 (100%)
                 2000 257            (15.1%)     1,443       (84.9%)       1,700 (100%)
                 2010 354 (20.30%) 1,392 (79.71%) 1,746 (100%)
                Source: 1980, 1990 ,2000 SF 2 and 2010 U.S. Census SF 1.
Overcrowded Households
2429d        Most houses in Portola Valley are large. The 2010 Census reports that 70% of the
             housing units had six or more rooms (“rooms” do not include bathrooms, storage
             areas, or areas separated by less than a floor to ceiling partition). Most new homes
             in Portola Valley are now between 5,500 and 6,000 square feet plus basements. In
             the past six fiscal years (2007 – 2013), Portola Valley has issued 37 new building
             permits for additions, indicating that the existing housing stock is also getting
             larger.
2429e        The U.S. Census defines "overcrowding" as 1.01 or more persons per room in a
             housing unit. Under this definition, Portola Valley had 0 overcrowded units in 2010.
             Given this information, as well as the small number of units affected and the
             generally large size of homes in Portola Valley, overcrowding does not appear to be
             a significant problem in the town.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             15

Housing Condition
2429f       Most homes in Portola Valley are in good condition. The 2007-2011 American
            Community Survey estimates that all units have complete plumbing facilities and
            lists only 148 housing units built before 1940.
2429g       Many houses in town are not visible from public roads, making “windshield”
            surveys of housing conditions difficult. However, building permit records indicate a
            consistently high volume of remodeling and additions. The town issued 303
            permits for remodels between Fiscal Year 2008-09 and Fiscal Year 2012-13. In
            addition, between Fiscal Year 2008-09 and Fiscal Year 2012-13, a total of 27 homes
            were torn down and replaced with new homes.
2429h       The high value of properties in the town leads to a high level of maintenance, and
            over any significant period of time, the private market appears to be effective in
            eliminating substandard conditions. None of the information available to the town
            indicates a significant problem with housing conditions.
Vacancy Rates
2429i       Portola Valley had a 7.9% vacancy rate in 2010, as shown in the table below, Most
            of the vacant units were either for rent, for seasonal or occasional use, or “other,”
            with a few for sale or not occupied.
                                          Occupancy Status of Housing Stock
                   Type                                                       Number     Percent
                   Total Units                                                 1,895      100.0%
                   Occupied Units                                              1,746      92.1%
                   Vacant Units                                                 149        7.9%
                              For Rent                                          39         2.1%
                              Rented, Not Occupied                               5         0.3%
                              For Sale Only                                     14         0.7%
                              Sold, Not Occupied                                 4         0.2%
                              For Seasonal or Occasional Use                    59         3.1%
                              For Migrant Workers                                0         0.0%
                              All Other Vacants                                 28         1.5%
            Source: 2010 U.S. Census SF1
            Portola Valley’s vacancy rate was higher than in the rest of San Mateo County but
            lower than the average rate for California; in 2010, the vacancy rate in San Mateo
            County as a whole was 4.9%, and the vacancy rate in the State of California was
            8.1%. Unlike in many other communities, foreclosures are not a significant problem
            in the town.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            16

Housing Affordability
2430        As shown in the table below, the average sales price of homes in Portola Valley has
            increased significantly over time. In 2010 constant dollars, the average home cost
            was about $1 million in 1986 and over $2 million in 2012.
                           Average Sales Prices in Portola Valley, Selected Years
                    Year          Number of           Average Sales Price              2010
                                     Sales                                       Constant Value
                 2012                  63                  $2,200,000               $2,089,441
                 2006                  39                  $1,872,269               $2,025,097
                 1996                  65                  $1,035,603               $1,439,257
                 1986             Not known                 $511,957                $1,018,570
            Sourcs: Multiple Listing Service (MLS) for areas 261, 262, 263, and 265 and Bureau of Labor Statistics
            CPI Inflation Calculator
2430a       In the November 11, 2013 Almanac, there were seventeen homes mentioned for
            sale. Asking prices ranged from $1.27 million to $5.85 million, with one home with
            an asking price of $13.9 million. Not including the $13.9 million outlier, the average
            home listing price was $3.9 million. This is much higher than the prices from 2009,
            when the February 11, 2009 Almanac listed eleven homes for sale in Portola Valley
            with asking prices between $1.1 million and $3.95 million, and averaging $2.1
            million. The February 7, 2001 Almanac listed six homes for sale in Portola Valley
            with asking prices between $1.8 million and $3.9 million and averaged $2.5 million.
            When comparing the 2013 set of prices with those of 2001, the average asking
            prices have gone up, showing that the housing market has shown recovery since
            the most recent economic recession.
2430b       Home prices in Portola Valley more than quadrupled between 1986 and 2012, and
            more than doubled in 2010 constant dollars. None of the housing for sale in
            November 2013 would be considered affordable by households with moderate
            incomes or less under typical financing terms
2430c       Rental housing in November 2013 included a total of five rental properties listed on
            craigslist and Trulia. Rents ranged from $3,300 for a two-bedroom second unit to
            $9,700 for a 6 bedroom, 3.5 bathroom home. The other three homes listed ranged
            from $4,900 to $6,000 for rent per month. For comparison, there were four rental
            units listed in the February 7, 2001 Almanac, with rents ranging from $1,500 for a
            one bedroom apartment to $5,000 for a three bedroom home. While rents in town
            appear to have increased, they have not increased as much as the cost to purchase
            a home.
2430e       The federal government defines “affordable housing” as housing that costs 30% or
            less of a household’s income. The table below shows average salaries for selected
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                          17

            occupations in San Mateo County, together with the affordable monthly housing
            cost.
                          Average Salaries and Affordable Monthly Housing Costs
                                              in San Mateo County
                                                               Annual Salary       Affordable Monthly
                                                                                      Housing Cost
         Single Wage Earner
               Senior on Social Security                           $15,000                  $375
               Minimum Wage Earner                                 $16,640                  $416
               Plumber                                             $65,200                $1,630
               Paralegal                                           $71,300                $1,783
               Software Engineer                                 $110,000                 $2,750
         Two Wage Earner Households
               Min. Wage Earner & Software Engin’r               $106,640                 $2,666
               Biochemist & Elem’y School Teacher                $156,000                 $3,900
            Source: Employment Development Department Data for San Mateo county, Mean Annual Wage,
            First Quarter 2012
2430f       Housing costs include rent or mortgage payments, utilities, and necessary
            maintenance. Households with above moderate incomes have numerous housing
            choices. The primary concern is for households with moderate, low and very low
            incomes that have few choices in the housing market.
2430g       One measure of the affordability of housing is whether households, especially low
            income households, are overpaying for housing. The table below shows the
            number and percentage of both owners and renters in Portola Valley who are
            overpaying.
                           Households Overpaying* for Housing
            Owner-Occupied                   Number                  Percent
                <$35,000 income                  71                    83%
                $35,000-$74,999                  79                    64%
                $75,000+                       209                     20%
            Renter-Occupied
                <$35,000 income                101                    100%
                $35,000-$74,999                103                    100%
                $75,000+                         38                    18%
           * Overpayment is defined by the US Census Bureau by the percentage of income spent on housing
            costs; owner-occupied households that spend more than 38% or renters who spending more than
            30% of income on housing costs are considered to be overpaying.
           Source: 2011 American Community Survey
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                    18

2430h       This data indicates that there are approximately 601 households in Portola Valley
            who are overpaying for housing, including all renters and most owners who have
            incomes less than $75,000 per year.
Special Housing Needs
2431        In addition to being affordable, suitable housing also must meet households’ other
            needs. Some special housing needs are defined in the following sections.
Elderly
2431a       The proportion of Portola Valley’s population over age 65 continues to increase, as
            shown in the table below. During the last forty years, the percentage of the town’s
            population that is over age 64 has more than quadrupled, from 6.7% to 27%. While
            this is partly due to the natural aging of the population, the percentage change is
            also in part likely due to the high cost of housing, which may prevent younger
            people who have not accumulated as much capital or reached their earnings peak
            from being able to afford to live in Portola Valley.
                   Percentage of People Over Age 64 in 1960, 1969, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010
                    Year           No. of People           Total Population          Percent of Total
                                    over Age 64                                          Population
                    1960                 145                     2,163                       6.7
                    1969                 458                     3,849                      11.9
                    1980                 567                     3,939                      14.4
                    1990                 786                     4,194                      18.7
                    2000                 938                     4,462                      21.0
                    2010                1,173                    4,353                      27.0
            Sources: 1960 U.S. Census as adjusted by William Spangle & Associates and reported in the 1982
            Housing Element; State Department of Finance Special Census for 1969 as reported in the 1982
            Housing Element; U.S. Census for 1980, 1990 and 2000, 2010.
2431b       The table below shows the income distribution for households aged 65 and older.
            There is a significant disparity in incomes for elderly households, with nearly a
            quarter having incomes below $30,000, and almost half having incomes above
            $100,000.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                      19

                         Income Distribution for Households Over Age 65 and Older
                       Income                      Portola Valley          San Mateo County
            Below Poverty Level                          1%                        6%
            <$30,000                                    22%                       28%
            $30,000-$49,999                              7%                       19%
            $50,000-$74,999                             21%                       16%
            $75,000-$99,999                              5%                       11%
            $100,000+                                   45%                       26%
            Total Seniors                               723                      55,093
           Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-2011 American Community Survey
2431c       Most elderly residents in Portola Valley own their homes. Some older residents
            may own houses that are bigger than they want or need. Long-term older residents
            often have paid-up mortgages or low mortgage payments and, under Proposition
            13 provisions, low property taxes. Some literally cannot afford to move. As they
            grow older, some residents will have difficulty maintaining their properties due to
            physical or financial constraints. Despite their long-standing ties to the community,
            these people may be forced to move out of the area by the shortage of suitable
            senior housing in town, in any price range.
                                                Households by Tenure
                                                     Owner Households        Renter Households
              All Ages                                         73%                      27%
              Ages 65-74                                       82%                      18%
              Ages 75-84                                       44%                      56%
              Ages 85+                                         66%                      34%
            Source: 2011 American Community Survey
2431d       The Sequoias, a buy-in retirement community in town operated by Northern
            California Presbyterian Homes and Services, is home to over 300 senior citizens.
            The minimum age to enter is 65, but most people are in their mid- to late 70s when
            they enter. The facility provides common dining and medical care geared to various
            levels of need. In 2013, the cost to enter ranged from $94,500 to $820,900 for
            housing, three daily meals and medical care for life. This cost varies depending on
            the size and type of unit. In addition, monthly costs range from about $3,406 for a
            single up to $8,492 for a two-bedroom unit. The monthly cost includes rent,
            utilities, meals, housekeeping, and access to on-site nursing and physician services.
            Over 300 people are on the waiting list for a place at the Sequoias, indicating a
            strong demand for this type of senior housing.
2431e       While the costs to live at the Sequoias are significant, the Sequoias does have a
            financial assistance program for residents. People whose incomes and assets are
            depleted while living at the Sequoias receive aid so that they can continue to
            receive housing and medical care. Approximately five residents receive this aid per
            year.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                          20
2431f       The Sequoias is an important housing option for seniors in the community. Second
            units and shared housing provide other options for seniors who need affordable
            housing but would prefer a non-institutional setting.
People with Disabilities
2431g       The Census Bureau defines disability as, “A long-lasting physical, mental, or
            emotional condition. This condition can make it difficult for a person to do activities
            such as walking, climbing stairs, dressing, bathing, learning, or remembering. This
            condition can also impede a person from being able to go outside the home alone
            or to work at a job or business.” Not surprisingly, people over 65 are much more
            likely to have a disability.
2431h       The State of California further defines developmentally disabled as a “severe and
            chronic disability that is attributable to a mental or physical impairment. The
            disability must begin before the person’s 18th birthday, be expected to continue
            indefinitely, and present a substantial disability.” Some development disabilities
            cause mental retardation and some do not. Common developmental disabilities
            include Down’s syndrome, autism, epilepsy and cerebral palsy.
2431i       People with disabilities face many challenges when looking for housing may have
            unique housing needs. There is a limited supply of handicap accessible, affordable
            housing generally, and people with disabilities are also often extremely low income
            due to the challenge of securing long-term employment, and to higher medical bills.
2431j       Fair housing laws and subsequent federal and state legislation require all cities and
            counties to further housing opportunities by identifying and removing constraints
            to the development of housing for individuals with disabilities, including local land
            use and zoning barriers, and to also provide reasonable accommodation as one
            method of advancing equal access to housing.
2431k       SB 812, signed into law in 2010, requires Housing Elements to include an analysis of
            the special housing needs of people with developmental disabilities. Additionally,
            SB 812 requires that individuals with disabilities receive public services in the least
            restrictive, most integrated setting appropriate to their needs
2431l       As shown below, all people with developmental disabilities in Portola Valley live
            with a parent or legal guardian, and none lives independently or with supportive
            care, nor in community care facilities.
                                Living Arrangements of People with Disabilities
                                                          Number                    Percent
            Lives with:                         Portola Valley County Portola Valley County
            Parents/Legal Guardian                     11          2,289        100%           66%
            Community Care Facility                     0           605           0%           15%
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             21

             Independent/Supportive Living               0           349            0%            2%
             Intermediate Care Facility                  0           191            0%            10%
             Other                                       0           60             0%            2%
             Total                                      11          3,494         100%           100%
             Source: Golden Gate Regional Center
             Note: Counts are based on zip codes and may include areas outside of jurisdictional
             boundaries
 2431m       People in Portola Valley also have non-developmental disabilities, such as hearing
             disabilities or vision disabilities. Some residents have both developmental and non-
             developmental disabilities. According to the 2008-2012 American Community
             Survey, 422 people living in Portola Valley suffered a disability. Of the total number
             of disabled people in Portola Valley, 326 were over the age of 65, equaling 77% of
             the disabled population.
2431n       In San Mateo County, almost a third of the senior population has some kind of
            disability. Eight percent of the total population in the county has some kind of
            disability. The most common disabilities in the county are ambulatory disabilities
            (four percent of the population) and independent living disabilities (three percent).
            The census does not have numbers specifically for Portola Valley because it is too
            small, but the percentages are likely similar to the countywide averages.
2431o       The town has no data to indicate that housing for disabled persons is a significant
            unmet need in town, although the need for accessible housing can be anticipated to
            grow as the population ages.
 Large Households
 2431p       According to the 2010 Census, Portola Valley had an average household size of
             2.47, which is a slight decrease from 2.58 in 2000. The percentage of households
             with five or more persons also decreased slightly, from 9.4% in 2000 to 8.9% in
             2010.
 2431q       Most of the housing in town is well-suited to large families. According to the 2008-
             2012 American Community Survey, about 67% of the housing units had 6 or more
             rooms. The median number of rooms per unit was 6.8. During the 1990s and since
             2000, new construction added larger houses to the town, with most ranging in size
             from 5,000 to 6,000 square feet.
 Single-Parent Households with Children
 2431r       Households with a single parent and one or more children under the age of 18,
             including female-headed households, often have fewer financial resources and
             greater needs for day care and other services than two-parent households.
 Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                              22
2431s       The 2008-2012 American Community Survey indicates that there are 39 households
            in Portola Valley with children under 18 years and a female householder with no
            husband. In addition, there are 26 households with children under 18 years and a
            male householder with no wife. A total of 146 children live in these households.
2431t       Housing in town is large and often suitable for families with children. Further,
            schools, day care, a library, and recreation facilities are all provided in Portola
            Valley. There is no information available to indicate an unmet need for housing for
            single-parent households with children. However, these households are likely to
            benefit from an increase in affordable housing options, including second units.
Farm workers
2431u       The 2007-2011 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates shows that zero
            Portola Valley residents list their occupation as agriculture, forestry, fishing hunting
            and mining. Webb Ranch, on unincorporated land owned by Stanford University, is
            the major employer of farm workers in the area. Farm worker housing is provided
            on the Ranch. As a result, there is no need for farm worker housing within Portola
            Valley. However, to comply with state requirements, the town revised its zoning
            code in 2010 to be consist with the requirements of the California Health and Safety
            Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6 regarding the regulation of farmworker
            housing.
Extremely Low Income Households
2431v       Households with extremely low incomes are those with incomes at or below 30% of
            the Area Median Income. For San Mateo County, including Portola Valley, that
            means that a family would need to have an income of $33,950 or below to be
            considered extremely low income. Households with extremely low incomes include
            those who receive public assistance, such as disability insurance or social security.
            However, people with full-time jobs can also have extremely low incomes. The
            annual income for a full-time minimum wage job is currently $16,640 in California,
            and a single person household earning $23,750 or less is considered extremely low
            income.
            Existing Needs
2431w       In 2010, there were 125 extremely low income (ELI) households in Portola Valley,
            representing 7% of the total households. About 38% of ELI households have
            housing problems, and nearly 17% are paying more than half of their incomes for
            housing. ELI households are at risk for homelessness if there are unexpected
            expenses, such as medical bills, or with the loss of a job.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             23
                                          Extremely Low Income Households
                                                               Renters          Owners           Total
               Total ELI Households                              75                50             125
               Percent with Housing Problems*                   17%               19%            38%
               Percent with Cost Burden**                        8%                9%            17%
               Percent with Severe Cost Burden***                7%                9%            16%
              * Housing problems include the following: 1) housing unit lacks complete kitchen
              facilities; 2) housing unit lacks complete plumbing facilities; 3) household is overcrowded;
              and 4) household is cost burdened. A household is said to have a housing problem if they
              have any 1 or more of these 4 problems.
            **A cost burden is defined as a household paying more than 30% of its income for housing.
            *** A severe cost burden is defined as a household paying more than 50% of its income for
            housing.
            Sources: CHAS Data Book, accessed at http://socds.huduser.org, data current as of 2010.
2431x       ELI owners are more likely than renters to have a cost burden, although
            approximately the same percentage of both groups have severe cost burdens.
            Because such a high percentage of income goes to housing, ELI homeowners are at
            a very high risk for foreclosure.
            Projected Needs
2431y       To calculate the projected housing needs, the town assumed that 50% of its very
            low income regional housing needs are extremely low income households. This
            results in a projected need for 10 housing units for ELI households over the plan
            period. The main program to provide housing for these households is the town’s
            second unit program. In addition, the shared housing program could provide some
            housing for this income level, and the housing impact fee could eventually provide
            funding for ELI households.
Homeless
2431z       According to the 2013 San Mateo County Homeless Census and Survey, there were
            2 homeless people counted in the town. Because Portola Valley is a rural
            community with little access to transit or services, homeless people may not find
            the town as attractive as more urbanized areas of the mid-Peninsula. In the past,
            homeless people have occasionally visited one of the churches in town for
            assistance, which they offer on an as-needed basis. The town believes that
            homelessness is a regional problem which needs to be addressed on a regional
            basis.
Rehabilitation and Replacement
2432        The needs analysis identifies no need for rehabilitation or replacement of existing
            housing units. As described above, the condition of housing units in town is very
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                   24

            good and maintenance occurs privately, with no known need for government
            involvement.
Affordability for Assisted Housing Developments
2433        The town currently has no housing units subsidized with public funds and therefore
            no need to protect the affordability of such units.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation
2434        For each planning period, the state determines how much housing for each income
            level is needed in the region. The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG)
            then usually allocates shares of the regional housing need to the cities and counties
            in the region. In the current housing element cycle, all of the jurisdictions in San
            Mateo County banded together to form a subregion, which allowed the cities,
            towns and county to allocate the county’s share of housing among themselves. The
            table below shows the total housing required for Portola Valley.
                       Portola Valley’s Regional Housing Need Requirements, 2014-2022
              Income Level                                                Units
              Extremely Low                                                10
              Very Low                                                     11
              Low                                                          15
              Moderate                                                     15
              Above Moderate                                               13
              Total                                                        64
2434a       The table below shows current (February 2008) income limits used to qualify for
            assistance from federal and state housing programs. The income limits vary with
            household size. The table lists the limits for one-, two-, three-, and four-person
            households.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            25

                       2014 Income Limits (a) and Affordable Monthly Housing Costs (b)
             Number in Maximum Income                                Income Categories
            Household         & Housing Cost         Ex Low      Very Low         Low        Moderate
                  1             Income Limit          $23,750 $39,600            $63,350       $86,500
                                Housing Cost              $594         $990       $1,584         $2,163
                  2             Income Limit          $27,150 $45,250            $72,400       $98,900
                                Housing Cost              $679      $1,131        $1,810         $2,473
                  3             Income Limit          $30,550 $50,900            $81,450     $111,250
                                Housing Cost              $764      $1,273        $2,036         $2,781
                  4             Income Limit          $33,950 $56,550            $90,500     $123,600
                                Housing Cost              $849      $1,414        $2,263         $3,090
            (a) From California Department of Housing and Community Development, income limits for San
            Mateo County, February 2014.
            (b) Assumes affordable housing costs no more than 30% of monthly income.
2434b       The amount a household can afford to pay for housing is generally expressed as a
            percentage of the household’s income. The percentage itself varies from source to
            source, however, ranging at least from 25% to 42%. In general, the trend has been
            for the percentage to increase as housing costs have increased. The table above
            uses an estimate of 30% of income as a guide to affordability and shows the
            resulting maximum monthly payment a household in each income category can
            afford for housing. These maximums include all housing costs, such as rent,
            utilities, insurance, and taxes. The policies and programs in this element are
            designed to provide affordable housing within these income limits, which are
            updated annually by the California Department of Housing and Community
            Development (HCD).
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                   26

Constraints on Housing
Governmental Regulations and Constraints
2440        Portola Valley is a rural, low density, town on the fringe of the San Francisco
            Peninsula’s urban area. The physical environment of the town is challenging, with
            many steep slopes, unstable landslides, and the presence of the San Andreas fault.
            Portions of the town lack the infrastructure to support much additional
            development. The town’s development regulations are based on these facts.
            These development regulations are analyzed below to determine if and how they
            constrain the provision of housing. The section also describes the ways in which
            the town is working to mitigate constraints.
Context for Portola Valley’s Development Regulations
2441        The town’s low-density development is consistent with current and past policies of
            the Association of Bay Area Governments that foster a “city-centered” pattern of
            urban development with an emphasis on in-filling. ABAG’s Regional Plan 1980
            contains this statement relevant to the Portola Valley area:
                 Throughout this planning area there are relatively limited opportunities
                 to support added population growth. Most vacant residential land is
                 located in hillside areas which lack urban services and where
                 environmental conditions may preclude all but very low density and high
                 cost units (p. Sub-area 1-2).
            More recently, Plan Bay Area was developed for compliance with SB 375 to reduce
            greenhouse gas emissions in part by adjusting land use policies to promote
            residential development near transit and employment centers. Plan Bay Area
            shows Portola Valley outside of these transit and employment areas, bordering on
            significant conservation areas, and therefore projects limited growth for the town.
2441a       The town’s low density nature is consistent with and was partially based on the San
            Mateo County Master Plan that was in place at the time the town incorporated.
            This plan included the following principles:
            a)   The highest population densities should occur in relatively level areas close to
                 major centers of commerce and industry where coordinated development is
                 possible and where transportation and other necessary public facilities can
                 readily be provided.
            b)   Population density should decrease as the distance from district centers,
                 industrial areas, and employment centers increases.
            c)   Population density should decrease as distance from local service facilities
                 increases.
            d)   Population density should decrease as steepness of terrain increases.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                           27

            e)   The lowest densities and largest lots should occur on steep hillsides or in
                 mountainous areas where it is necessary to limit storm runoff, prevent erosion,
                 preserve existing vegetation, protect watersheds, and maintain the scenic
                 quality of the terrain.
2441b       The town’s geologic setting is another major determinant of its policies. Starting in
            1965, the town has evolved an innovative and systematic approach to regulating
            the development of lands crossed by the San Andreas fault and encumbered with
            extensive areas of steep and unstable slopes. The regulations, which have been
            used as models for ordinances adopted by other jurisdictions in California and in
            other states, control the uses of land and the intensity of development according to
            slope and geologic characteristics. The base regulations include a slope-density
            system, setbacks from the San Andreas fault and land use limitations based on
            landslide hazards. The town has detailed fault and landslide potential maps to
            support the regulations. The maps can be changed as more accurate and detailed
            information from site investigations becomes available.
2441c       As the town reaches buildout, the development potential is increasingly affected by
            geologic regulations. Most of the remaining vacant land is in steep and often
            hazardous terrain. The Upper and Lower Western Hillsides, which contain most of
            the undeveloped land in the town, are very steep: approximately 70% of the land
            has slopes greater than 30% and 25% has slopes greater than 50%. Slope density
            provisions encourage concentration of development on flatter portions of the large
            holdings in these areas. These provisions lead to safer, more easily accessible and
            more efficiently served development than might occur otherwise.
2441d       The town also has an important and growing role in providing open space for the
            region. The Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District now owns over a thousand
            acres of public open space within the town limits. The district lands are available
            for hiking and other low-intensity recreation uses and attract people from all over
            the region. In addition, the land preserved provides a significant conservation
            benefit to the region by providing habitat for wild animals and plants and
            protecting water and air quality. The low density housing pattern and the
            clustering of development in the town serves to protect this important regional
            resource.
2441e       The town’s development policies have evolved over the years in direct response to
            the town’s beautiful and varied natural environment. A major goal of all planning in
            the town is to permit development in a way that preserves the natural
            environment, protects natural drainage, ensures safe development given the
            town’s geology, and maintains the rural character of the town. The resulting low
            density, rural character and the provision of large expanses of open space within
            the town do constrain affordable housing. To mitigate this constraint, the town has
            designed a variety of housing programs that are largely consistent with the rural
            and open space character of the town.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                           28

Zoning and Subdivision Regulations
2442        The policies set forth in the general plan are implemented largely through the
            town’s zoning ordinance. There are three residential zoning districts in town:
            Residential Estate (R-E), Single-Family Residential (R-1), and Mountainous
            Residential (M-R). Mobile and manufactured housing is considered single family
            housing and is permitted accordingly. The table below summarizes the uses
            permitted in each of these districts. Sections 18.12, 18.14, and 18.16 of the town’s
            zoning ordinance contain the full text and detailed information concerning these
            regulations.
                                          Uses in Residential Zoning Districts
                                                 Use                                 R-E R-1 M-R
            Streets, utilities, etc.                                                  P   P   P
            Single-family dwellings, including residential care facilities with 6 or  P   P   P
            fewer residents
            Temporary voting places, festivals, signs, etc.                           P   P   P
            Public buildings located in conformance with the general plan             P
            Public school located in conformance with the general plan                P   P
            Major utilities, signs, wireless communications facilities                C   C   C
            Crop and tree farming and truck gardening                                 C       C
            Nurseries and greenhouses, with no retail sales allowed                   C       C
            Churches, schools, group living accommodations for seniors, and           C
            nursery schools: only when located on an arterial or expressway
            Recreation facilities and boarding stables: only when located on an       C       C
            arterial or expressway
            Residential planned unit developments                                     C   C   C
            Multiple single family homes on parcels of 10 or 100 acres or more        C       C
            Horticulture and grazing of cattle                                        C       C
            Wineries                                                                  C       C
            Publicly owned recreation and open space areas located in conformance     C   C   C
            with the general plan
            Landscaping, growing of plants and similar uses attendant to adjoining        C
            uses in the CC district
            Fences, lights, parking, signs, etc.                                      A   A   A
            Second units on parcels 1 acre or more                                    A   A   A
            Equestrian facilities                                                     A       A
            Renting of rooms to no more than one paying guest                         A   A   A
            Home occupations                                                          A   A   A
            Swimming pools, tennis courts                                             A   A
            Garages, signs, pets                                                      A   A   A
            Sale of agricultural products grown on the premises                       A   A   A
            P = Permitted, C = Conditional, A = Accessory
2442a       Because multifamily housing is not generally permitted in the town, Portola Valley
            has developed a special program to allow multifamily housing on certain sites. To
            that end, the municipal code allows multifamily affordable housing to be
            constructed with a Planned Unit Development (PUD) permit on properties
            designated in the general plan for such uses (Section 18.44.060.I). This is the
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            29

            Affiliated Housing Program, and a detailed description can be found in the program
            section of this element.
2442b       The town amended its zoning ordinance in 2011 to comply with SB 2 and make
            provisions for emergency homeless shelters in town. As a result, emergency
            homeless shelters are now permitted as an accessory use at all religious institutions
            in the town.
2442c       The town’s site development criteria are set forth in the town’s zoning ordinance,
            site development ordinance, and design guidelines. In the zoning ordinance, many
            of the criteria are established within combining districts. These include a Design
            Review (D-R), a Floodplain (F-P), a Historic Resources (H-R), and a Slope Density (S-
            D) combining district, as well as a number of residential density combining districts.
            The requirements established by each of these combining districts are explained
            below.
            Design Review (D-R) combining district.
2443        This district does three things: 1) requires all building permits to be approved by
            the Architectural and Site Control Commission (ASCC); 2) prohibits certain uses
            within 100 feet of Skyline Boulevard in order to protect the scenic nature of that
            corridor; and 3) requires all subdivisions of parcels 10 acres or larger to be treated
            as a planned unit development.
2443a       Seven areas of town are in this district: the Upper Western Hillsides, the Lower
            Western Hillsides, the Stanford Wedge, the Woods property, the Corte Madera
            School facility, an inholding in the Portola Valley Ranch development, and Blue
            Oaks. All of the large, undeveloped properties in town are included in this district.
2443b       These requirements are not a significant constraint on the provision of housing,
            including affordable housing, in Portola Valley. This is demonstrated by Blue Oaks,
            a recently developed subdivision which was built despite these conditions.
            Requirements of this combining district do not preclude the provision of affordable
            housing.
            Floodplain (F-P) combining district.
2444        This district establishes conditions for development in floodplain areas, including
            requiring residential structures to be elevated above the base flood level and
            requiring new construction to be anchored to withstand flooding. Such conditions
            are standard and required by the federal government in communities that
            participate in the National Flood Insurance Program.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             30

2444a       This district includes all land within the floodplain as shown on the federal Flood
            Insurance Rate Maps. This land is generally that which borders the major streams
            in town: Los Trancos Creek, Corte Madera Creek, and Sausal Creek.
2444b       The F-P combining district is not a constraint on the provision of market rate and
            below market rate housing in town. The areas which fall under this district are
            generally expected to develop with market rate housing, which can usually
            accommodate these requirements within the normal price range for market rate
            housing in Portola Valley. The only sites for below market rate housing that are
            covered by this district are a few potential sites for second units.
            Historic Resources (H-R) combining district
2445        This district requires all properties that contain historic resources to conform to the
            principles and standards of the historic element of the general plan. There are 41
            historic resources in town as identified in the general plan. These resources are
            scattered throughout town, as shown on the historic element diagram.
2445a       The H-R combining district does not constrain the provision of housing in Portola
            Valley, including affordable housing. The principles and standards of the historic
            element simply prevent the removal of resources that are designated “to be
            preserved.” No maintenance or restoration is necessary, although if it does occur,
            certain guidelines must be followed. Therefore, this district may affect the design
            of a development but does not necessarily increase the cost of a development.
            Residential density combining districts
2446        The residential density combining districts determine the development standards
            that apply to the particular lot. These standards include required front, rear and
            side yards; height limits; floor area limits; and impervious surface limits. There are
            nine combining districts:
            •   7.5M: 7,500 square feet
            •   15M:      15,000 square feet
            •   20M:      20,000 square feet
            •   1A:       1 acre
            •   2A:       2 acres
            •   2.5A:     2.5 acres
            •   3.5A:     3.5 acres
            •   5A:       5 acres
            •   7.5A:     7.5 acres
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            31

2446a       The exact locations of these combining districts are shown on the town’s zoning
            map. In general, the smaller-lot districts are found in the more densely developed,
            older subdivision areas of town while the larger-lot districts are found in the less
            densely developed, newer areas. This makes sense given the fact that only since
            town incorporation has there been a more complete understanding of the complex
            geological conditions and steep slopes that affect the remaining undeveloped lands
            in town.
2446b       The Upper Western Hillsides are the only part of town in the 7.5 acre combining
            district. There are no lands in the five acre combining district, but the Lower
            Western Hillsides, Blue Oaks, the Woods property, and the Stanford Wedge are in
            the 3.5 acre combining district. Westridge is in the 2.5 acre combining district. The
            other, smaller-lot districts cover the remainder of the town.
2446c       The development standards governed by these combining districts are summarized
            in the table below.
                        Residential Density Combining District Development Standards
              District  Min. Lot      Front     Rear     Side    Height       Max      Max Floor Max Imperv
                                                                       1            2         3            3
                        Area (sf)      Yard     Yard    Yard     Limit       Height      Area      Surface
              7.5M        7,500         20       20        5     15-28         34         3,019      2,231
              15M        15,000         20       20       10     15-28         34         3,623      3,877
              20M        20,000         20       20       10     15-28         34         3,910      5,090
              1A         43,560         50       20       20       28          34         5,260      7,808
              2A         87,120         50       20       20       28          34         7,013     11,358
              2.5A      108,900         50       20       20       28          34         7,514     13,177
              3.5A      152,460         50       25       25       28          34         8,065     15,566
              5A        217,800         50       25       25       28          34         8,766     17,370
              7.5A      326,700         50       25       25       28          34         9,581     19,822
            1
              The height limit restricts the height as measured parallel to the ground surface.
            2
              The maximum height restricts the height as measured from the lowest point of contact between the
            building and the ground to the highest point of the building.
            3
              The maximum floor area and maximum impervious surface are based on the total net lot area after
            geology, flood hazard areas, and steep slopes are taken into consideration. The numbers shown in
            the table indicate the maximum for a lot with the given lot area and no environmental constraints.
2446d       The development standards established through the residential density combining
            districts are appropriate given the town’s rural, single-family residential character.
            The maximum floor area requirements can restrict the size of a residence, which is
            a constraint to the development of housing. However, a parcel’s geology, flood
            hazard areas and steep slopes limit the maximum floor area, and the requirements
            have been established to ensure safer and more environmentally sustainable
            development. The minimum lot area requirements in particular do act as a
            constraint on the provision of housing by keeping the density of development low.
            Many of the programs set forth in this housing element are intended to address this
            constraint while preserving the character of the town. For example, the affiliated
            housing program (formerly called the multifamily affordable housing program)
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                         32

            allows higher density residential development in specified areas of town. The
            second unit program also increases density by allowing an additional housing unit
            to be built on lots that are one acre in size or larger located within zoning districts
            requiring at least one acre per parcel.
            Slope Density (S-D) combining districts
2447        Most of the residential land in town is under an S-D combining district as well.
            These districts modify the minimum lot size to require larger minimum lots in areas
            with steep slopes. As shown in the table below, there are six slope-density
            combining districts. The table also provides selected examples of the required
            minimum parcel areas at given slopes under each of the S-D districts.
                        Slopes and Minimum Parcel Areas in S-D Combining Districts
                                                Required Minimum Parcel Area in Acres
                    Slope              SD-1      SD-1a       SD-2       SD-2a      SD-2.5     SD-3
             1% and under           1.02       --          2.03        --       --          3.05
             15% and under          1.36       1.00        2.60        2.00     2.50        3.99
             25%                    1.79       1.34        3.25        2.56     3.14        5.12
             40%                    3.42       2.72        5.21        4.44     5.10        8.85
             50% and over           8.70       8.73        8.70        8.70     8.73        17.24
2447a       In general, the flatter parts of Portola Valley fall into the SD-1 and SD-1a districts,
            with the remaining districts used in steeper areas. The only part of town in the SD-
            3 district is the Upper Western Hillsides, and the only area in the SD-2.5 district is
            Westridge. Areas in the SD-2 district include the Lower Western Hillsides, Blue
            Oaks, the Stanford Wedge, and the Woods property.
2447b       As with the residential density combining districts, the S-D districts do constrain the
            provision of housing by restricting the density of development. This restriction is
            necessary, however, given the hazards of developing steep slopes. Some of the
            town’s housing programs work to mitigate this constraint while still providing
            adequate protection. For example, the affiliated housing program allows for
            increased density in specified areas. In addition, the second unit program allows a
            second unit to be constructed on lots over one acre, thereby increasing potential
            residential density.
            Open Space and Landscaping Requirements.
2448        The town’s residential density combining district development standards specify
            front, side and rear yard requirements for residential parcels. These requirements
            vary depending on the district, with smaller yard requirements for smaller lots. The
            requirements can be altered based on certain scenarios, such as if a property is
            located in a special setback district or if a property is adjacent to a future right-of-
            way. These open space requirements are applied consistently to all residential
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                               33

            development based on the district they are located in and are not a constraint to
            housing development.
2448a       The Portola Valley zoning ordinance sets forth minimal landscaping requirements
            for residential parcels. For example, the regulations specify that parcels adjacent to
            the Community Commercial and Administrative-Professional districts are required
            to have consistent landscaping with the adjacent non-residential property. There
            are few parcels in Portola Valley with residences adjacent to these districts. The
            landscaping regulations also stipulate that for parcels with frontages along Alpine
            Road and Portola Road, trees and shrubs must be approved by the town’s
            conservation committee within seventy-five feet of the road right-of-way. These
            two provisions are not constraints to the development of housing because they do
            not require significant costs or alterations for new housing developments.
2448b       The town’s zoning ordinance contains minimal regulation for residential
            landscaping, but the town’s Design Guidelines provide more comprehensive
            landscaping policies, including a Native Plant List and Landscaping Guidelines. The
            Guidelines state that “The fundamental approach of the ASCC is to encourage
            architectural solutions that blend with the natural conditions of the site and area,
            and at the same time require only minimum landscaping.” Typical guidelines
            include: “Use native plants,” “Create a simple rather than elaborate landscape
            solution,” and “Consider the future height of trees and shrubs such that major
            views on- and off-site will not become obstructed.” ASCC consideration of
            applications is limited to the issues set forth in the guidelines.
            Parking Requirements
2449        The town’s zoning ordinance includes off-street parking provisions. The minimum
            number of off-street residential spaces for dwelling units is: one space for each
            dwelling having zero or one bedroom, and two spaces for each dwelling with two or
            more bedrooms. In residential districts with a minimum lot size of one acre or
            more, two additional guest parking spaces are required. In addition, convalescent
            homes must have one space for each five beds and retirement homes must have
            one space for each apartment, double room or family unit. As mentioned
            previously, second units require only one uncovered space per bedroom.
2449a       Most residential parking spaces must be located in a carport or garage and all
            spaces have to be located on the same site as the building unless authorized by a
            conditional use permit. Uncovered or tandem parking spaces may be permitted
            with approval from the Architectural and Site Control Commission (ASCC) if there is
            no reasonable location for a second required covered parking space in larger parcel
            districts. Additionally, on parcels of 20,000 square feet or less, an uncovered
            parking space may occupy required yard areas with approval from the ASCC and
            after notification of the affected neighbors.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            34

2449b       The town requires up to four parking spaces at residences in districts requiring one
            acre or more, but allows exceptions if the requirements cannot be met on the
            parcels. In smaller parcel districts, only one to two spaces are required based on
            the number of bedrooms in the dwelling unit, and the location of the parking space
            can be changed if needed. Overall, the off-street parking requirements for larger
            parcels do not constrain the development of housing given the ample amount of
            space typically available on those properties. Additionally, the alternative
            provisions enable smaller parcels with space constraints to meet reduced
            requirements.
            Second Unit Provisions
2450        Portola Valley revised its zoning ordinance provisions for second units in July 2003
            to comply with California law requiring ministerial review of second unit permit
            applications. Government Code Section 65852.2 requires that applications for
            second units be processed without discretionary review or a public hearing. In
            addition, the law enables jurisdictions to designate areas where second units are
            permitted based on reasonable criteria, such as adequate infrastructure.
            Jurisdictions may also establish development standards, such as those for height,
            setback, lot coverage, architectural review and the maximum size of the unit. The
            law requires parking for second units to be no more than one space per unit or
            bedroom and permitted in setback areas as tandem parking.
2450a       The town’s second unit ordinance allows second units on residential parcels one
            acre or more in zoning districts that require a one acre parcel size or more. The
            areas in Portola Valley with those size parcels tend to have sufficient infrastructre
            and traffic capacity for additional units. Parcels with 10 or more acres are allowed
            to have two second units.
2450b       The ordinance complies with the state’s requirements because a second unit, as an
            accessory use, does not have to go through discretionary review to be approved.
            However, if the unit is detached, more than 400 square feet in size, or above the
            ground floor, it is subject to Architectural and Site Control Commission (ASCC)
            review. In addition, all second units on parcels that front onto one of the two
            scenic corridors in Portola Valley are required to obtain approval from the ASCC.
            In 2011, the town amended its zoning ordinance to allow staff-level review of
            second units up to 750 square feet that are created by converting area within an
            existing home to a second unit.
2450c       ASCC review of second unit applications focuses on architectural design and
            compliance with the design standards set forth in Section 18.12.040.B of the
            Municipal Code. These design standards include requiring color, materials and
            architecture to be similar to those of the main structure, limiting color reflectivity,
            and limiting exterior lighting. The ASCC works with property owners to ensure that
            second units meet the deisgn guidelines, and has never denied an application for a
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             35

            second unit. In cases where the second unit is being built at the same time as the
            main dwelling unit, there is a single ASCC review for both structures.
2450d       The zoning ordinance limits the floor area of a second unit to 750 square feet. The
            town also requires the vehicular access and address for the second unit to be the
            same as those for the primary residence. Like single family homes, second units are
            also subject to development standards for height, exterior color, roof reflectivity,
            exterior lighting and landscaping. The parking standards for second units also
            comply with state law because only one space is required per bedroom. Spaces do
            not have to be covered and can be tandem.
2450e       Overall, the zoning ordinance provisions for second units are in compliance with
            state law because standards for second units are clearly set forth and are permitted
            as of right and can be administered ministerially as long as they do not exceed
            certain criteria. Given the costs of land and construction in Portola Valley, the
            requirement for architectural review and the associated cost is unlikely to be a
            significant constraint on the construction of second units. The town continues to
            work to encourage production of second units, and this housing element includes
            additional actions to that end, as described in the programs section of this housing
            element.
            Subdivision Requirements
2451        The subdivision ordinance includes standards for on-site and off-site improvements
            including roads, trails, paths, bike lanes, utilities, drainage facilities, street trees,
            and conservation easements. These standards allow development that is
            consistent with the natural environment of the town. For instance, paved roads are
            narrow in order to reduce grading and impervious surface, but wide enough to
            safely accommodate traffic. Non-motorized movements are accommodated on
            easements off the roads and allow for a variety of ways of moving throughout the
            community. Utility requirements, ie. water, sewer, and electricity are normal for
            residential subdivisions. Street plantings are rarely required because the existing
            vegetation normally provides a natural setting. Conservation easements are
            required when appropriate in order to help preserve natural areas. Minimal
            contributions of land or fees are required to help preserve open space.
2451a       These subdivision requirements have been accepted by developers. Developers
            find the requirements reasonable and that they enhance the quality of their
            projects. In some parts of town, however, connections to required utilities and
            roads cannot be made. For instance, in practically all of the western hillsides, public
            roads and utilities are not available. As noted elsewhere in this housing element,
            the western hillsides are hazardous and comprise steep hillsides and canyons as
            well as large areas of landslides. Since these areas are not suitable for
            development, the lack of infrastructure does not pose a problem.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                 36
            Road Requirements
2451b       The paved surfaces of roads have been set wide enough to allow for traffic but also
            as narrow as safety permits. Paving widths vary from 20 feet to 28 feet depending
            on the type of road. Since most properties include space for off-street parking, the
            roads are generally not designed for on-street parking. Right-of-way widths vary
            from 60 to 100 feet. In planned unit developments, paving and rights-of-way can
            be varied to fit the design of the development.
            Trails, Paths and Bicycle Lanes
2451c       Portola Valley residents value the ability to ride horses, hike and bicycle throughout
            the community. Accordingly, where these planned facilities pass through a
            proposed subdivision, the developer will be required to provide the facility and
            dedicate an easement that is normally 15 feet wide.
            Utilities
2451d       California Water Service Company provides water throughout the town. The
            company has indicated it has sufficient capacity to meet the housing needs
            stipulated in this housing element. Gas and electrical utilities are normally readily
            available.
            Drainage
2451e       Given the low density of development in the town and extensive natural areas,
            most drainage is surface drainage that eventually flows into one of the three major
            creeks in the town. By and large, the only culverts are where drainage passes under
            roads. Drainage improvements, therefore, are a minimal requirement on
            developments. In some instances, a developer will be required to pay a fee to help
            offset downstream impacts from a development.
            Street Plantings
2451f       As noted above, in most instances the native vegetation provides all of the planting
            needed along roads. In some cases, supplemental plantings may be required.
            Conservation Easements
2451g       The town may require conservation easements to protect natural vegetation,
            terrain, watercourses, waters, wildlife and for preventing or limiting erosion and
            drainage problems. Normally, these easements are on lands that are not suited for
            development and therefore do not interfere with well-planned developments.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            37
            Dedication and Land for Park or Recreational Purposes
2451h       In subdivisions of more than 50 lots, the subdivider must dedicate .005 acres of
            land for each anticipated resident of a subdivision. For subdivisions less than 50
            acres, the subdivider must pay a fee based on the above requirement. In the town,
            no subdivisions of 50 lots or more are anticipated, so only small in-lieu payments
            can be expected.
            Impact of Improvement Requirements on Cost and Supply of Housing
2451i       Fundamentally, the cost of land in Portola Valley is high. Subdivisions consequently
            are aimed at rather expensive housing. Given this context, the cost of
            improvements is a small portion of the total cost of housing. There have been no
            instances in recent history where the cost of improvements discouraged or
            prevented planned housing.
            Inclusionary Housing Requirement
2451j       All new single family homes in Portola Valley are custom built, and as a result,
            inclusionary housing is implemented differently in town than in other jurisdictions.
            Since 1991, Portola Valley has required all subdividers in town to provide 15% of
            their lots (for subdivisions with seven or more lots) or an in-lieu fee (for smaller
            subdivisions and fractional lots) to the town for affordable housing. The cost of
            providing this land or fee is offset by a 10% density bonus that the town provides to
            all subdividers who are subject to this requirement. Once the land has been
            provided, the town can then arrange for the construction of the below market rate
            units. This arrangement allows the town to set the levels of affordability for each
            project based on the town’s current needs.
2451k       Because of challenges the town encountered in trying to find a developer to
            construct units on land provided through this program, however, the town intends
            to revise this program to require the developer to construct the units, as is
            described in the programs section of this housing element.
2451l       Some analysts believe that inclusionary housing requirements can sometimes act as
            a constraint on housing by either substantially raising the price of market rate
            housing or making housing too expensive to build. One subdivision has been
            developed under this requirement, indicating that development can occur under
            this requirement. In addition, the town’s inclusionary housing program provides
            developers with a 10% density bonus to offset the costs of providing the land. As
            the program is revised to require that developers build the housing units, local
            architects and builders will be consulted to ensure that the requirements are not
            overly onerous and the incentives are appropriate.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            38

2451m       Because land prices in Portola Valley are high, development of affordable housing
            would be very difficult unless the land could be provided at no cost through a
            program such as the inclusionary housing requirement. Market rate housing in
            Portola Valley is only affordable to households with incomes well above the
            moderate range. Given the high cost of market rate housing in town, the effects of
            the inclusionary housing provisions on affordability are negligible.
            Summary of Analysis of Land Use Controls
2452        Portola Valley’s land use controls were developed to fit the town’s situation on the
            edge of the urban San Francisco Peninsula area, with complex and unstable
            geology, steep terrain, and the San Andreas fault bisecting the town. Within this
            context, the controls the town has adopted allow for flexibility to fit development
            to the land. For instance, development intensity is conditioned by steepness of
            slope, unstable geology, areas subject to flooding and remoteness from major
            roads. The development approval process results in development that is approriate
            to the environment. The town allows and encourages cluster development and
            planned developments whereby designs fit to sites rather than creating “cookie
            cutter” developments.
2452a       These natural constraints, including a location well removed from public
            transportation and significant employment centers, have led to low density
            development. The low densities permitted are appropriate for the environment
            and location, and to ensure the safety of residents.
2452b       Despite these constraints, the town recognizes that higher density, attached
            housing can be appropriate in certain locations. Therefore, the town allows
            multifamily housing in specified locations as set forth in the affiliated housing
            program of this housing element. Seven units have been built due to this program,
            and eleven additional units have been approved and are expected to be built in the
            planning period.
Building Code
2453        Portola Valley adopted the 2013 California Building Code. There have been no
            amendments or additions made to the building code by the town that present a
            constraint to housing development. The building code is enforced by the town’s
            building official.
Permit and Processing Procedures
2454        The town’s processing and permit procedures protect the community interest while
            permitting safe and responsible construction, additions and remodeling on private
            property. A key aspect is the requirement for geologic investigations to ensure safe
            development in areas of the town mapped as potentially hazardous.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                          39

            Subdividing
2455        The town’s subdivision regulations reflect the complicated and unique features of
            the land such as soils, land movement potential and drainage capacity. A
            subdivision proposal includes the following steps:
            1. Review of a preliminary map by town staff and planning commission
            2. Review and approval of the tentative map by the planning commission, and
            3. Review and approval of the final map by the town council.
2455a       It is difficult to estimate the time needed for review and approval of a typical
            subdivision proposal because the factors that impact timing are unique for each
            proposal. The Blue Oaks development, a 30-lot hillside subdivision on a site
            bisected by the San Andreas Fault, took about 10 years to move from the
            conceptual phase to final map review and approval. Approximately five to seven
            years of that time were spent by the applicant challenging the town’s geologic
            information and related regulations and pursuing design proposals that were
            inconsistent with town plans and regulations. Eventually, a reasonable design was
            developed and formal application filed for processing. The project then faced
            delays during CEQA review, and significant measures were needed to mitigate
            potential adverse impacts on the environment. After final approval, three more
            years passed during construction of subdivision improvements.
2455b       Two smaller subdivisions took significantly less time to obtain approval. The Priory,
            a three unit subdivision, took six years for approval and Platt, a two unit
            subdivision, required two and one-half years for approval. These subdivisions
            required more time than may be typical because there were significant design
            difficulties in both cases, including access issues. In addition, the complexity of the
            land on these sites slowed the approval process. Staff estimates that approval of a
            subdivision on any of the remaining larger sites in town, all of which are very
            complex, would take at least two to four years.
            Lot by lot construction
2456        Most residential development occurs on a lot-by-lot basis. All homes, including
            those in approved subdivisions, require individual permits. The process for
            residential development includes:
            1.    Preliminary design review at the staff level.
            2.    Architectural review by the Architectural and Site Control Commission (ASCC).
                  Some projects are also subject to homeowners’ association architectural
                  review. These reviews are usually concurrent with ASCC review.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             40

            3.    Review by the Planning Commission (for proposals with grading exceeding
                  1,000 cubic yards only).
            4.    Site development permit approval.
            5.    Building permit approval.
2456a       The review, including the first four steps listed above, takes from four months to
            one year. Another eight to twelve weeks are then usually needed to process a
            building permit application. Prior to approving a building permit, town staff and
            consultants review the plans, as well as outside agencies.
2456b       The town’s processing and permit procedures may take longer than in typical Bay
            Area communities because of the complexity of the environment and the level of
            scrutiny directed at development proposals. However, many developers,
            architects, and engineers who work in Portola Valley do not find the processing and
            permit procedures a constraint. In fact, they find that building in Portola Valley can
            be easier because the requirements are clearly explained from the start of a
            project. Staff and consultants work closely with developers to explain the process,
            expectations, and requirements necessary for approval. This attention given early
            in the process avoids delays in the long run by ensuring that the most appropriate
            project for the site is presented for approval.
            ASCC Review Process
2457        All new residential structures must be reviewed and approved by the Architectural
            and Site Control Commission (ASCC), whose decisions may be appealed to the
            Planning Commission. The ASCC process begins with a preliminary meeting with
            staff to discuss the applicant’s initial ideas and outline the town standards,
            regulations and design guidelines that would apply. The applicant then has the
            opportunity to revise the design before submitting the application to the ASCC. In
            general, the ASCC considers an application at the meeting closest to two weeks
            after the application was filed. Simple projects, such as second units, are usually
            decided at that meeting. Most projects are acted on in no more than two
            meetings, although occasionally a complex project may take additional time. As a
            result, ASCC review takes no more than one or two months from the time that the
            applicant comes in for the preliminary meeting. Measured from the filing of the
            application, the ASCC review would take even less time.
2457a       All staff reports for the ASCC follow a standard format and address the same topics,
            that are set forth in the zoning ordinance and the design guidelines. Both the
            zoning ordinance and the design guidelines are written documents which applicants
            can consider in putting together their applications. The town uses a standard
            format for the ASCC staff reports in order to give consistency to the review process
            and ensure that each application is considered in the same way as all others.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            41

2457b       While the criteria are the same for each project, the specific physical conditions on
            an individual parcel of land may be unique. Given the prevalence of slope, geology,
            drainage and other physical issues throughout Portola Valley, individual
            consideration of each project is necessary. The ASCC provides this individual
            consideration along with consistent application of standards and guidelines.
2457c       The ASCC review process is fast, is based on written standards and guidelines, and
            uses a standard format to ensure consistency in its decisions. The cost, as
            discussed below in the section on fees, deposits and exactions, is similar to the cost
            in other, similar communities, and is a very small percentage of the cost of a project
            given the high costs of land and construction in the town. For all of these reasons,
            ASCC review does not act as a significant constraint to the provision of housing in
            Portola Valley.
            Site Development Permit
2458        The Site Development Ordinance establishes the framework for the removal of
            vegetation, including significant trees, and excavation and fill (grading) on a site.
            Persons conducting those activities are required to apply for a site development
            permit. Depending on the amount of grading, the application is acted on by either
            the staff, the Architecture and Site Control Commission, or the Planning
            Commission. Applicants can appeal a decision to the Town Council in a public
            hearing. This process is necessary to protect both the environment and the
            applicants, especially in steep and unstable areas. The process is the same for all
            applicants and does not act as a constraint to the development of housing.
            Conditional Use Permit and Planned Unit Development Permit Processes
2459        Most residential development in town is not required to obtain either a conditional
            use permit (CUP) or a planned unit development permit (PUD). Subdividers who
            would like flexibility in the development standards may apply for a PUD, and most
            subdivisions in recent years have used PUDs. Since Portola Valley treats PUDs as a
            type of CUP, the process is similar for both. The ASCC first reviews the application
            as an advisory body, and then the application moves to the Planning Commission
            for a decision. Neither CUPs nor PUDs require action by the Town Council unless
            the Planning Commission action is appealed.
2459a       While multifamily housing is not generally allowed, the town has developed a
            program to allow multifamily housing at existing institutional developments such as
            the Priory and the Sequoias through amendments to the existing CUPs for those
            projects. If, however, a new multifamily housing project were proposed that was
            separate from existing uses, a PUD would be needed.
2459b       For example, at the Woodside Priory School, seven multifamily units were approved
            and built as workforce housing. To build these units, the Priory needed to amend
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             42
            its conditional use permit, a process that took approximately four months. The
            Priory has also received approval for a master plan that includes eleven additional
            housing units which have not yet been constructed.
2459c       The cost for the permits is a very small percentage of the cost for the project as a
            whole, and is not significant given the high costs of land and construction in Portola
            Valley. For these reasons, the CUP/PUD requirements for multifamily housing do
            not appear to be acting as a constraint on the provision of housing in the town—in
            fact, these permits make multifamily housing possible in Portola Valley.
Fees, Deposits and Exactions
2460        The town sets fees to cover the actual costs of processing development
            applications. For the typical house constructed in Portola Valley, the fees are a
            minor part of the applicant’s costs and a very small percentage of the value created
            by approvals.
2460a       In May 2012, the Town Council approved a resolution adopting new Planning,
            Building, and Engineering Department fee schedules. These fees were based upon
            an extensive study of actual costs to the town to administer and process permits.
            The study also included a comparison of the town’s fees with fees charged by
            nearby jurisdictions, including Atherton, Menlo Park, and Woodside. This
            comparison showed that the town’s fees are comparable to the fees in these other
            communities, as is shown in the table below.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            43

                               Comparison of Selected Filing Fees, 2012
Service                                        Portola Valley        Atherton       Menlo Park      Woodside
Pre-Application Meeting                               575            161 per         400 dep +           --
                                                                       hour             hrly
Site Development Permit (101 – 1,000                 2,225            1,282              --          600 dep +
cubic yards)                                                                                           1,125
Variance                                             2,340         2,242 min +      3,000 +hrly      1,775 min
                                                                       hrly
Conditional Use Permit-PUD                           5,940         1,919 min +     10,000 dep +        2,238
                                                                       hrly             hrly
CUP Amendment                                        1,980         1,919 min +     10,000 dep +        1,063
                                                                       hrly             hrly
Architectural Design/Review: New                     1,115            1,282        2,000 dep +         1,125
House                                                                                   hrly
Guesthouse                                            660             1,282        2,000 dep +         1,125
                                                                                        hrly
Additions                                             660             1,282        2,000 dep +         1,125
                                                                                        hrly
General Plan Amendment                               3,300         3,534 min +     8,000 dep +     4,425 dep +
                                                                       hrly             hrly        contractor
                                                                                                    cost + 25%
                                                                                                     overhead
Preliminary Subdivision Map                          3,040               --              --              --
Tentative Map                                        4,640         2,242 min +      6,000 + hrly    10,850 dep
                                                                       hrly                        + contractor
                                                                                                    cost + 25%
                                                                                                     overhead
Lot Line Adjustment & Merger                         1,600         1,596 min +           --        2,850 dep +
                                                                       hrly                         contractor
                                                                                                    cost + 25%
                                                                                                     overhead
Source: NBS “Town of Portola Valley Cost of Service Study for Analyzing User and Regulatory Fees” March 21, 2012
2460b        Deposits are also charged for planning, engineering and geologic review, which
             include those provided by consultants, such as the town engineer, town geologist,
             town planner and town attorney. These deposits cover the cost of reviews and
             services needed for particular applications. As a result, the amount of the deposit
             will be lower for simple projects and higher for complicated projects. Selected
             2013 fees and deposits for services required to evaluate applications are listed in
             the table below.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                         44

                    Standard Housing Development Fees and Deposits in Portola Valley
                                                                         Filing Fees  Deposit for
                                                                                        Services
           Consultation Meeting                                             $ 590        $ 500
           Architectural Review
                New Residence                                               $1,140      $ 2,500
                Second Unit                                                 $ 675       $ 1,500
                Additions                                                   $ 675       $ 1,500
                Amendment                                                   $ 340
           Site Development Permit
                50-100 cubic yards                                         $ 1,070      $ 2,500
                100-1000 cubic yards                                       $ 2,280      $ 4,000
                1000+ cubic yards                                          $ 2,890      $ 4,000
           Conditional Use Permit
                Standard                                                  $ 4,055       $ 7,500
                PUD                                                       $ 6,085       $ 7,500
                Amendment                                                 $ 2,030       $ 3,500
           Variance                                                       $ 2,400       $ 3,500
           Geology Review
                Building Permit                                             $ 255       $ 2,500
                Map Modification                                          $ 1,015       $ 2,500
                Deviation                                                   $ 890       $ 2,500
           Building Permit Review (Planner)                                 $ 140        $ 500
           Building Permit Review (Engineer)                                $ 150       $ 1,000
           Zoning Permit                                                    $ 310       $ 1,000
           Subdivision
                Preliminary map                                            $ 3,115      $ 7,500
                Tentative Map                                              $ 4,750          TBD
                Final Map                                                  $ 1,360          TBD
                Map Time Extension                                            $ 380         TBD
                Tentative Map Amendment                                       $ 760         TBD
                Final Map Revision                                            $ 760         TBD
            Source:      Town of Portola Valley, “Updated Fee Schedule” June 12, 2013
2460c       Like other residential developments, second unit applications are charged fees for a
            building permit and plan check. In addition, detached second units, second units
            with more than 400 square feet, and second units located above the ground floor
            are required to go through architectural review and must pay the associated fee
            and deposit for service. However, second units that are built at the same time as
            the main house on the lot do not have to pay a separate fee for architectural review
            for the second unit. Building permit and plan check fees are essential to ensure
            that a building complies with local and state requirements and are not considered a
            constraint to the development of second units.
2460d       It will be difficult for the town to waive fees and deposits entirely for affordable
            housing projects because of the routine use of outside consultants and the reliance
            on the fees to cover the cost of town services provided. However, the town is
            prepared to use money collected as in-lieu fees for below market rate units to
            mitigate the constraints of fees. Also, the town has amended the town’s fee
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             45

            ordinances to allow all or part of the fees to be waived, at the discretion of the
            Town Council, for projects with at least 50% of units for households with moderate
            incomes or below.
2460e       Exactions are required in the form of drainage fees, easements or in-lieu fees for
            parks and open space, and off-site improvements made necessary by the
            development. The exaction amounts depend upon the specifics of each project.
            Drainage fees are only charged to subdivisions and on a per-acre assessment.
            These fees pay for the cost to construct drainage facilities listed in the town’s
            master drainage plan, which is designed to protect lots and streets from flood
            hazards. The additional cost is a minor fee compared to the costs of the entire
            subdivision. These fees are essential to ensure that the town is protected from
            flood hazards and is developed with adequate drainage infrastructure.
2460f       Portola Valley also charges subdivisions a fee in-lieu of the dedication of land for
            park or recreational purposes, as permitted by state law. On subdivisions of 50 lots
            or less, the subdivider is required to pay a fee determined by multiplying .005 times
            the land value per acre times the projected number of new residents in the
            subdivision. The subdivider may dedicate 5% of the total area for open space
            rather than pay the fee upon approval from the planning commission. Subdivisions
            with 50 lots or more are required to dedicate land of an amount determined by
            multiplying .005 times the number of acres times the projected number of
            residents. An in-lieu fee may be paid instead with approval of the planning
            commission. Residential developments that are not part of a subdivision are not
            required to pay this exaction. Like the drainage exaction, the additional cost is
            minor compared to the overall cost to develop a subdivision.
2460g       Historically, drainage and open space exactions have not been cited as a constraint
            to the development of multifamily housing. The requirements do not hinder the
            provision of below market rate units in the subdivision, and the subdivision
            ordinance promotes the development of below market rate units overall. Based on
            experience, the exactions required for subdivisions are not a constraint to the
            development of below market rate housing in Portola Valley.
2460h       Total fees for a recent house reconstruction, which would be similar to those for a
            new house, were approximately $22,000. The value of the house prior to
            reconstruction was $1.4 million. Therefore, the fees were less than 2% of the value
            of the home. Fees for a guest house are significantly less: approximately $8,000.
            For the most recent multifamily development (the construction of seven attached
            units at the Priory), the fees totaled about $7,000 per unit.
2460i       Overall, fees, deposits and exactions are not anticipated to be significant
            constraints on the construction of housing. If these should be problem for a
            particular development, fees and deposits can be paid using housing in-lieu funds,
            and/or the Town Council can waive all or part of fees. Drainage and open space
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            46

            exactions have not constrained the production of multifamily housing in the past
            and are not expected to during the planning period.
Infrastructure and Public Service Constraints
2461        The infrastructure and level of public services in town is geared to a small dispersed
            population. Many of the roads are narrow and winding with restricted capacity.
            Limited bus service is provided by SamTrans along Portola and Alpine Roads (Bus
            85). Only a portion of the town is served by sanitary sewers. On-site disposal
            systems are used in much of the town, and in many areas, successful disposal
            requires large sites because of adverse soils and drainage conditions. Most local
            public services are provided by special districts or San Mateo County under
            contract. The Woodside Fire Protection District provides fire protection services.
            Police services are provided by the private Woodside Patrol and the County Sheriff.
            The town has limited control over the quality and quantity of these services.
2461a       The town government operates on a minimal budget with a small staff. The town’s
            ability to undertake major programs to provide housing is severely constrained by
            fiscal realities and limited staff time. As a result, housing programs with high
            administrative demands are not practical for the town and have been avoided.
2461b       To mitigate the constraints pertaining to public services, this element provides for
            affordable housing on sites with current access to services or in new subdivisions
            that will provide services. In-lieu fees collected through the inclusionary housing
            program may also be used to help cover costs when no other source is available.
Nongovernmental Constraints
2462        Nongovernmental constraints that can affect a community’s ability to provide
            suitable sites for affordable housing include the price of land, the cost of
            construction, and the availability of financing.
Price of Land
2462a       The extremely high cost of land in Portola Valley is the most significant constraint
            on the development of affordable housing in the town. Land often costs around
            $1-2 million per acre, a price that is probably too high to allow the development of
            affordable housing under market conditions. Land prices for single parcels in the
            similar neighboring communities of Woodside, Palo Alto, and Atherton are
            comparable to Portola Valley prices.
2462b       There were two undeveloped parcels listed for sale in late 2013. One was asking
            $3.6 million for a 4.48-acre parcel, and the other was asking approximately $2.15
            million for a 2.25-acre parcel.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            47

2462c       The challenge from the town’s perspective is to provide affordable housing
            opportunities in the face of extreme market pressure, while at the same time
            preserving the characteristics that make Portola Valley a desirable place in which to
            live. The town’s housing programs attempt to mitigate the effects of these market
            conditions. To offset the high cost of land, the inclusionary housing program
            provides affordable housing, including land. The affiliated multifamily housing
            program allows increased density, reducing costs per unit. The second unit
            program provides the opportunity for construction of second units by the private
            market with essentially no land cost.
Construction Cost
2463        The cost of construction can also constrain housing production, particularly for
            affordable housing. Residential construction in Portola Valley is comparable to the
            neighboring communities of Woodside, Palo Alto, and Atherton. The costs average
            around $350-$450 per square foot. These high costs, however, are often a result of
            homeowners’ choices to use unique designs and expensive materials.
2463a       The inclusionary housing program will provide land for affordable housing on sites
            that have been improved to serve market rate development, thereby reducing the
            cost of subdivision improvements for the affordable units. In addition, developers
            can select relatively simple and straightforward designs as well as less expensive
            construction materials to further reduce the cost of construction.
Availability of Financing
2464        Most homes in Portola Valley are custom-built homes funded by individual
            households. Financing for this type of construction is more difficult to obtain now
            that banks have increased their requirements. However, financing is no more of a
            constraint in Portola Valley than in other communities in the Bay Area. In fact,
            loans for individual homes may currently be easier to obtain than loans for
            speculative housing developments.
Constraints on Housing for People with Disabilities
2465        California housing element law now requires specific analysis of constraints on
            housing for people with disabilities, including developmental disabilities. This
            section reviews both governmental and nongovernmental constraints, and
            identifies actions that can be taken to mitigate the constraints.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                          48

Governmental Constraints
            Zoning Ordinance
2466        The town’s zoning code was amended in 2011 to remove the constraints to housing
            for persons with disabilities that were identified in the 2009 housing element.
            These amendments included:
               •    Updating the definition of household to comply with state law;
               •    Adding a definition of “residential care facility” to the ordinance, allowing
                    these facilities for six or fewer persons by right in residential districts, and
                    allowing these facilities for seven or more persons as a conditional use in the
                    commercial and office districts;
               •    Allowing access ramps and related railings to extend into required yards; and
               •    Adding a reasonable accommodations section to the zoning ordinance
                    (Chapter 18.11).
2466a       Portola Valley permits housing for special needs groups, including for individuals
            with disabilities, without regard to distances between such uses or the number of
            uses in any part of the City. The Land Use Element of the General Plan does not
            restrict the siting of special need housing.
2466b       All dwelling units are subject to the same standards for elements such as building
            heights, setbacks and floor area within the district in which they are located
            (Section 18.48.010). Because these standards may present a constraint to housing
            for disabled people in certain cases, the town adopted a reasonable
            accommodations ordinance as Chapter 18.11 of the zoning code to allow for
            flexibility in the zoning regulations when a reasonable and demonstrated need
            appears for a person with a disability. The reasonable accommodations ordinance
            could also potentially be used to reduce parking requirements for developments
            serving people with disabilities.
2466c       All new residential structures must be reviewed and approved by the Architectural
            and Site Control Commission (ASCC), whose decisions may be appealed to the
            Planning Commission. The ASCC bases its review upon clearly stated standards and
            applies these standards consistently from project to project. This process is an
            essential part of enforcing the zoning code and provisions in the General Plan.
            Because of the standard nature of the review and the ability to appeal a decision,
            the ASCC review process is not a constraint to housing for people with disabilities.
            Site Development Ordinance
2466d       The Site Development Ordinance establishes the framework for the removal of
            vegetation, including significant trees, and excavation and fill on a site. Persons
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                49

            conducting those activities are required to apply for a site development permit.
            Depending on the amount of grading, the application is acted on by either the staff,
            the Architecture and Site Control Commission, or the Planning Commission.
            Applicants can appeal a decision to the town council in a public hearing. This
            process is necessary to protect both the environment and the applicants, especially
            in steep and unstable areas. The process is the same for all applicants and does not
            act as a constraint to the development of housing for people with disabilities.
            Building Code and Building Permit
2466e       Portola Valley adopted the 2013 California Building Code. There have been no
            amendments or additions made to the building code by the town that present a
            constraint to the development of housing for persons with disabilities. The Town
            also follows Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. Title 24 regulations
            govern a building’s access and adaptability for persons with disabilities in
            commercial and multi-family buildings. When there is a discrepancy between the
            zoning ordinance and a Title 24 provision, the Title 24 provision prevails.
2466f       A building permit is required for the construction or alteration of a structure.
            Standard application forms and filing processes are used for all applicants and are
            not considered a constraint to the development of housing for persons with
            disabilities. A building permit is required for access ramps and other special building
            modifications on commercial buildings or residential multi-family buildings. These
            types of buildings are required by law to be accessible to the disabled.
Nongovernmental Constraints
2467        The nongovernmental constraints that could affect housing for people with
            disabilities include the price of land and the cost of construction. In addition, the
            lack of public transportation and support services in town could constrain housing
            for people with certain types of disabilities. There is little the town can do to
            mitigate these types of constraints.
Conclusion
2468        The town has addressed the constraints to housing for people with disabilities that
            were identified in the 2009 Housing Element, and some of these changes, such as
            adding residential care facilities as an allowed use, would also benefit people with
            developmental disabilities. In addition, given that many people with disabilities,
            especially those with developmental disabilities, live with their parents or other
            relatives, second units could be a valuable form of housing for at least a portion of
            the population with disabilities. As a result, the town’s actions to facilitate and
            encourage construction of second units may help this population as well.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             50

Sites Suitable for Housing
2469        State law requires the town to demonstrate that sufficient residential housing sites
            exist in town to accommodate the town’s share of total regional housing need. The
            town’s housing need as assigned through San Mateo County’s subregional housing
            allocation process is shown in the table below.
                        Housing Need for Portola Valley, 2014-2022
                            Income Category                      Units
                 Extremely Low                                    11
                 Very Low                                         10
                 Low                                              15
                 Moderate                                         15
                 Above Moderate                                   13
                 Total                                            64
2469a       The following site inventory goes through three steps to determine how much
            housing could be built in Portola Valley during the current planning period. First,
            areas that are not suitable for development are identified and removed from
            consideration. Second, the vacant land in the remainder of the town is identified,
            and the realistic development capacity for this land is determined. Finally, the
            suitability of the vacant land for development is described, together with the
            likelihood of development during the planning period.
A Process of Elimination
2470        Portola Valley faces different constraints on development than any other
            community on the Peninsula, with the possible exception of Woodside. Much of
            Portola Valley is unsuitable for development for one or more reasons. The major
            constraints on development are the presence of the San Andreas fault, large areas
            of landslides, the steepness of slopes, and the fire hazards due to natural
            conditions.
       Physical Limitations
2470a       The San Andreas Fault runs though the center of the town. The fault separates the
            North American Plate from the Pacific Plate and poses problems of fault offset as
            well as intense ground shaking. The nature of the geology on the two sides of the
            fault is very different. By and large, the area east of the fault possesses largely
            stable land devoid of landslides. The area west of the fault, however, is composed
            of large areas of active and potential landslides. These landslides can be triggered
            by rainfall or grading as well as earthquakes.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                           51

2470b       Portola Valley has been a national leader in planning for land use that recognizes
            geologic instabilities. See for instance, “A Model for Effective Use of Geology in
            Planning, Portola Valley, California” which was included in Landslide Hazards and
            Planning, Planning Advisory Service Report Number 533/534, published by the
            American Planning Association in 2005. Portola Valley has mapped the geology of
            the entire town at a scale of 1” = 500’. The town geologist reviews all proposed
            development in geologically hazardous areas. The town’s geologic map is far too
            detailed to include in the housing element; however, two geologic maps are
            included in the element to describe the hazards in some detail. First, a map of the
            San Andreas fault is shown on Exhibit 1. The map clearly indicates how the central
            part of the town is affected. Second, the state map of seismic hazard zones is
            shown on Exhibit 2. A brief look at the map confirms that the western part of the
            town is almost entirely subject to earthquake induced landslides. A somewhat
            lesser hazard is depicted by substantial areas that are subject liquefaction. In most
            instances, there are geotechnical solutions to liquefaction, provided a project can
            bear the high cost of a solution.
2470c       Another major limitation are the extremely steep slopes in the western part of the
            town. These are shown on Exhibit 3. It is clear that there are large areas of 41% or
            greater in slope and significant areas in the 21% to 40% range. Development is
            extremely difficult in areas with slopes in excess of 41% and very difficult in areas
            with slopes in excess of 21%.
2470d       Fire hazards pose another limitation on development. In 2008, the town
            contracted for a fire study, and the map in reduced form is shown on Exhibit 4. A
            review of the map with the aid of the legend makes it clear that much of the
            western part of the town is exposed to very high fire hazards.
2470e       In sum, the combination of the San Andreas Fault, large areas of landslides, very
            steep slopes and high fire hazards form a major basis for the town’s general plan
            and zoning regulation that permit only a very limited amount of development in the
            western hillsides. Further limitations include a lack of public roads and water
            supply. Together with the hazards listed above, these require that the town protect
            the public interest with strict limitations on development in the western hillsides.
2470f       The eastern part of the town is completely different from the western part. In the
            eastern part of the town, landslides are few, slopes less steep, fire hazard less and
            the area is served by public roads and a public water supply developed to meet fire
            fighting requirements. It is no wonder that the historic development of the town
            started in the eastern part and has continued in this part in the years since the
            town incorporated in 1964.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             52

Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015 5
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015 5
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015 5
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015 5
Sanitary Sewer Limitations
2470g       As a “rural” community Portola Valley was developed with lots served by septic
            tank and drainfield systems. The town does not have a municipal sewer system.
            The sewers that do exist are provided by the West Bay Sanitary District. The district
            does not install sewers, but developers and homeowners are responsible for
            annexing their properties to the district and paying for the cost of extending and
            hooking-up to sewers. Exhibit 5 shows parcels that have been annexed to the
            West Bay Sanitary District and differentiates between those parcels that have
            connected to sewer and those that were annexed to the district but have not
            connected to the sewer.
            Since most of the town has lots in excess of one acre, septic tank systems have in
            general worked well. New subdivisions including Portola Valley Ranch and Blue
            Oaks do have sanitary sewers. Also, in some areas individual property owners or
            groups of owners have banded together to annex to the district. Very few vacant
            properties are served by sewers, and those properties are vacant lots in new
            subdivisions where changes in zoning would not be expected and would likely result
            in incompatible development.
Water Supply
2470h       Water for Portola Valley is supplied by the California Water District. The Water
            District has stated that it can supply the water to serve Portola Valley’s housing
            need throughout the 2014-2022 planning period.
Distribution to Water and Sewer Providers
2470i       As is required by Chapter 727m Statutes of 2004 (SB 1087), when this housing
            element is adopted the town will immediately send a copy of the element to the
            local water and sewer providers.
Inventory of Vacant Parcels
2471        The table that starts on the following page lists 84 vacant or largely vacant parcels
            in the town, shows the zoning and General Plan designations, summarizes
            environmental constraints, and estimates the realistic new unit capacity for each.
            Keys for the abbreviations used in the table are provided at the end of the table.
            Some sites have significant geologic problems and would be particularly difficult to
            develop; these sites are marked with an asterisk(*) and shown with a different
            symbol on the map.
2471a       In addition to the table, a map showing the parcels described in the table and titled
            “Inventory of Land Suitable for Residential Development,” has been prepared
            (Exhibit 6).
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                            57

Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015 5
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015 5
                                    Inventory of Land Suitable for Residential Development in Portola Valley
                                             Allowable
 Site         APN         Zone Density         Density                GP             Acres      Realistic New  Infrastructure Environmental
                                 District     (Dwelling          Designation                  Unit Capacity**     Capacity      Constraints
                                            Units/Acre)
  1*     076-181-070       R-E     1A             1                  Low              0.1              1         No sewer           Md
  2*     076-181-090       R-E     1A             1                  Low              0.4              1         No sewer           Md
  3*     076-182-020       R-E     1A             1                  Low              0.6              1         No sewer           Pd
  4*     076-184-040       R-E     1A             1                  Low              1.0              1         No sewer           Md
  5*     076-192-100       R-E     1A             1                  Low              0.5              1         No sewer           Md
  6*     076-192-120       R-E     1A             1                  Low              1.8              1         No sewer           Md
  7*     076-192-130       R-E     1A             1                  Low              0.2              1         No sewer           Md
  8*     076-192-140       R-E     1A             1                  Low              0.1              1         No sewer           Md
  9      076-212-100       R-1    20M             2             Low-Medium            0.1              1         No sewer           n/a
  10     076-231-070       R-1    20M             2             Low-Medium            0.1              1         No sewer           n/a
  11     076-234-050       R-1    20M             2             Low-Medium            0.1              1         No sewer           n/a
 12*     076-238-030       R-E     1A             1                  Low              0.8              1         No sewer           Pd
 13*     076-244-030       R-E     1A             1                  Low              1.1              1         No sewer           Md
 14*     076-244-070       R-E     1A             1                  Low              0.7              1         No sewer           Md
 15*     076-244-080       R-E     1A             1                  Low              0.3              1         No sewer           Pd
 16*     076-251-090       R-1    20M             2             Low-Medium            2.1              2         No sewer         SA Fault
  17     076-261-120       C-C     PD             5                 Local             1.3     5 (55+yrs) 1 BMR     Sewer          SA Fault
         076-261-130                                          Shopping/Service                    in process
 18*     076-330-030       R-E    3.5A           0.3               Cons Res            14              1         No sewer      SA Fault, Will.
                                                                                                                                    Act
 19*     076-330-070       R-E    3.5A           0.3         Cons Res, Open Res       356             25         No sewer       Md, Pd, Sbr
 20*     076-340-060       R-E    3.5A           0.3         Cons Res, Open Res       229             29         No sewer       Md, Pd, Sbr
 21*     076-350-280      M-R     7.5A          0.13         Cons Res, Open Res        23              1         No sewer      Steep Slopes
 22*     076-380-110       R-E     1A             1                  Low              5.9              1         No sewer           Md
  23     077-040-080       R-E    2.5A           0.4               Cons Res           2.5              1         No sewer           n/a
  24     077-040-090       R-E    2.5A           0.4               Cons Res           2.8              1         No sewer           n/a
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015 Draft                                                              60
                                             Allowable
 Site         APN         Zone Density         Density              GP     Acres  Realistic New  Infrastructure Environmental
                                 District     (Dwelling        Designation       Unit Capacity**    Capacity      Constraints
                                            Units/Acre)
  25     077-040-100       R-E    2.5A           0.4             Cons Res   2.7         1          No sewer           n/a
  26     077-050-190       R-E    2.5A           0.4             Cons Res   2.5         1          No sewer           n/a
  27     077-070-110       R-E    2.5A           0.3             Cons Res    4          1          No sewer           n/a
  28     077-011-050       R-E    2.5A           0.3             Cons Res   2.6         1          No sewer           n/a
  29     077-060-290       R-E    2.5A           0.4             Cons Res   7.4         1          No sewer           n/a
  30     077-070-070       R-E    2.5A           0.4             Cons Res   3.1         1          No sewer           n/a
  31     077-090-140       R-E    2.5A           0.4             Cons Res   2.5         1          No sewer           n/a
  32     077-101-170       R-E     1A             1                Low      2.7         1          No sewer           n/a
  33     077-225-080       R-E     1A             1                Low      1.2         1          No sewer           n/a
  34     077-232-030       R-E     2A            0.5             Cons Res   2.7         1          No sewer           n/a
  35     077-232-040       R-E     2A            0.5             Cons Res   2.8         1          No sewer           n/a
  36     077-232-060       R-E     2A            0.5             Cons Res   2.0         1          No sewer           n/a
 37*     077-242-120       R-E     1A             1                Low      4.7         1          No sewer      Steep slopes;
                                                                                                                  partial OSE
  38     077-242-210       R-E     1A             1                Low      3.6         1          No sewer       Partial OSE
  39     077-261-210       R-E    2.5A           0.4             Cons Res   2.7         1          No sewer           n/a
  40     077-281-020       R-E    3.5A           0.4             Cons Res  75.4         29         No sewer           n/a
  41     077-290-010       R-E     1A             1                Low      1.0         1          No sewer           n/a
  42     077-310-210       R-E     1A             1                Low      1.1         1          No sewer           n/a
  43     077-372-070       R-E     1A             1                Low      1.0         1          No sewer           n/a
  44     079-053-160       R-E     1A             1                Low      3.0         2          No sewer           n/a
  45     079-053-170       R-E     1A             1                Low      3.0         2          No sewer      Steep slopes
  46     079-053-340       R-E     1A             1                Low      1.2         1          No sewer           n/a
  47     079-060-940       R-E     1A             1                Low      1.0         1            Sewer            n/a
  48     079-060-980       R-E     1A             1                Low      1.0         1            Sewer            n/a
  49     079-092-480       R-E     1A             1                Low      1.1         1          No sewer           n/a
  50     079-101-390       R-E     1A             1                Low      2.5         1          No sewer      Steep slopes
 51*     079-140-280       R-E     1A             1                Low      1.1         1          No sewer        SA Fault
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                                      61
                                             Allowable
 Site         APN         Zone Density         Density              GP      Acres  Realistic New  Infrastructure Environmental
                                 District     (Dwelling         Designation       Unit Capacity**    Capacity     Constraints
                                            Units/Acre)
  52     079-151-050       R-E     1A             2            Low-Medium    0.4         1          No sewer      Narrow lot,
                                                                                                                 creek setback,
                                                                                                                   subject to
                                                                                                                    flooding
  53     079-220-010       R-E     1A             1                Low       4.5         1            Sewer            n/a
  54     079-220-020       R-E     1A             1                Low       4.7         1            Sewer        Narrow lot
  55     079-220-030       R-E     1A             1              Open Res    5.8         1            Sewer            n/a
 56*     080-010-020      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   13.6         1          No sewer           OSE
 57*     080-010-030      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   33.4         1          No sewer      Pd, Sbr OSE
 58*     080-010-040      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   44.0         1          No sewer      Pd, Md OSE
 59*     080-020-010      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   18.0         1          No sewer      Md, Sbr, OSE
 60*     080-020-020      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   14.8         1          No sewer           OSE
 61*     080-020-030      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   20.2         1          No sewer           OSE
 62*     080-020-040      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   25.0         1          No sewer       Md, Ps, Sbr
 63*     080-020-050      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   46.0         1          No sewer      Ms, Ps, Sbr,
                                                                                                                       OSE
 64*     080-020-080      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res    4.6         1          No sewer         Md, Ps
 65*     080-020-100      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   20.6         1          No sewer           Pd
 66*     080-020-110      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res    4.4         1          No sewer           Pd
 67*     080-040-010      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res    8.0         1          No sewer           Pd
 68*     080-040-040      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   33.7         1          No sewer           n/a
 69*     080-040-060      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   16.4         1          No sewer      Md, Pd, Sbr
 70*     080-040-110      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   10.7         1          No sewer           Pd
 71*     080-040-120      M-R     7.5A          0.13             Open Res   31.0         1          No sewer         Pd, Sbr
  72     080-241-020       R-E    3.5A           PD              Cons Res    2.2         1            Sewer            n/a
  73     080-241-030       R-E    3.5A           PD              Cons Res    2.3         1            Sewer            n/a
  74     080-241-110       R-E    3.5A           PD              Cons Res    2.1         1            Sewer            n/a
  75     080-241-130       R-E    3.5A           PD              Cons Res    2.0         1            Sewer            n/a
  76     080-241-150       R-E    3.5A           PD              Cons Res    1.4         1            Sewer            n/a
  77     080-241-230       R-E    3.5A           PD              Cons Res    1.1         1            Sewer            n/a
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                                       62
                                                Allowable
 Site         APN          Zone Density          Density                GP              Acres      Realistic New      Infrastructure Environmental
                                   District     (Dwelling           Designation                   Unit Capacity**        Capacity      Constraints
                                               Units/Acre)
         080-241-240
  78     080-241-280        R-E     3.5A            PD               Cons Res            1.7             1                Sewer             n/a
  79     080-471-030        R-E      2A             PD               Cons Res            0.5             1                Sewer             n/a
  80     080-500-030        R-E      2A             PD               Cons Res            0.6             1                Sewer             n/a
* Sites marked with an asterisk have greater than average geologic hazards or other environmental constraints and would be particularly difficult to
develop
** The “Realistic New Unit Capacity” is based on the number of vacant lots and potential new lots that could be created through subdivision
Zones
R-E= Residential Estate, R-1 = Single Family Residential, M-R = Mountainous Residential, C-C= Community Commercial
Density District (Residential Density Combining District) sets the minimum lot size
15M= 15,000 sf, 20M= 20,000sf, 1A= 1 acre, 2A= 2 acres, 2.5A= 2.5 acres, 3.5A= 3.5 acres, 7.5= 7.5 acres, PD = set by Planned Development
Allowable Density
PD = set by Planned Development
GP (General Plan) Designation
Cons Res = Conservation Residential, Open Res = Open Space Residential, Low = Low Intensity Residential, Low-Medium = Low-Medium Intensity
Residential, Local Shopping/Service = Local Shopping and Service Commercial
Environmental Constraints
SA Fault = a trace of the San Andreas Fault passes through the property
Sbr = Stable bedrock, Ps = potential shallow landslide, Pd = potential deep landslide, Md = moving deep landslide
OSE = Open Space Easement
Williamson Act = Land is under Williamson Act contract, which limits development potential
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                                                                            63

Analysis of Suitability for Development
2472        This analysis looks at four different types of potential new residential
            development: single family homes on existing lots; large parcels that could
            accommodate a number of new homes; potential locations for affiliated
            multifamily development; and second units. Each of these types is
            discussed below.
Single Family Homes
2472a       As the inventory shows, an estimated 79 new single family homes could be
            accommodated on existing lots or through small (2 unit) subdivisions. Of
            these, approximately 35 have significant environmental issues and are
            unlikely to develop within the planning period. However, there are still over
            40 existing lots for single family homes remaining in town that could
            reasonably be developed by 2022.
2472b       There have been 32 homes built during the past ten years, for an average of
            3.2 new homes per year. In the eight year planning period, a total of
            approximately 26 new homes would be built if this construction rate
            continues. This estimate appears to be reasonable given that the capacity
            exceeds this estimate. All 26 of these homes would be expected to be
            affordable only to households with above moderate incomes.
Large Parcels
2472c       There are 5 sites or groups of sites listed on the site inventory that could
            accommodate larger amounts of housing. Each of these is discussed briefly
            below.
            Site 17 (Sausal Creek) is a 1.3 acre parcel that has been approved for
            development with five single family homes for residents age 55 and older,
            plus one below market rate unit. This development was on hold for the
            duration of a lawsuit filed by a neighbor, which was resolved in late 2007 in
            favor of the proposed development, and the property is currently on the
            market. The development approvals would expire in 2015.
            Site 19 (El Mirador Ranch) is one of the largest privately owned parcels in
            town, with 356 acres in the western hillsides. Because of steep slopes, deep
            canyons, and landslides on much of the property, as well as the presence of
            the San Andreas Fault, development on this site would likely need to be
            clustered in a 10 acre area located near Portola Road. The property does
            not have sewer access, which also limits potential density. Given all of the
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                    64
            constraints on the land, probably no more than 25 homes could be built on
            this property. However, the current property owners have stated that they
            intend to hold the property as open space. Therefore, no new residential
            development is anticipated for this site by 2022.
            Site 20 (Spring Ridge LLC) is located next to Site 21 and faces many of the
            same challenges: steep slopes, landslides, the San Andreas Fault, and a lack
            of sewer service. New development on this site would likely also need to be
            clustered, and a maximum of 29 units could probably be built here. Much of
            the parcel is now being used to grow grapes for the winery on the property.
            Property owners have indicated that they might be interested in developing
            the land but that they are not in a hurry to do so. No new residential
            development is anticipated on this site by 2022.
            Site 40 (Stanford Wedge) is an 89 acre site owned by Stanford University.
            The land consists of a relatively flat portion along Alpine Road surrounded
            by steep hillsides to the sides and rear of the property. Development on
            this site would need to be clustered in the land by Alpine Road. There is
            approximately 4 acres of usable land on the parcel once all of the steep
            slopes, unstable areas and required setbacks are subtracted. Under the
            town’s regulations, up to 27.6 single family dwelling units would be allowed
            on the parcel overall. Affiliated housing would also be allowed on this
            parcel, as is discussed further below.
            Sites 56–63, 65-66 (Fogarty Winery) are occupied by an award winning
            winery including vineyards, storage and bottling facilities and an event
            center. The remote site is located in the western hillsides and includes
            many steep slopes and landslide hazards. In addition, an open space
            easement covers much of the winery. There is no sewer service or public
            water supply. Although these sites together could theoretically eventually
            accommodate some number of new homes in the future, additional
            development is not anticipated by 2022.
Affiliated Development
2472d       Portola Valley is a rural community with a history of single family
            development on large lots. To accommodate some multifamily
            development, however, the town developed a housing program in the early
            1990s that would allow multifamily housing on institutional sites for
            employees and staff affiliated with the institutions that own the parcels.
            This program allows affiliated affordable multifamily housing on three
            designated sites in town, each with a planned development permit. These
            sites are discussed below and shown on Exhibit 7, Potential Affiliated
            Affordable Housing Sites.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                   65

2472e       The Stanford Wedge is an 89 acre site owned by Stanford University, which
            was discussed above as one of the large parcels of land remaining in town
            that could be developed with housing. The town’s regulations would allow
            27.625 single family dwelling units on the parcel overall, and Section 2106e
            of the General Plan allows this density to increase by a factor of three for
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                    66

            multifamily affordable housing, as long as the overall floor area does not
            exceed the amount allowed for market rate development. Therefore, up to
            82.9 units could potentially be provided on this site, although the number
            would likely be lower.
2472f       This site could potentially be developed with faculty or graduate student
            housing; because of the distance from the university campus,
            undergraduate housing is unlikely. Town officials and staff have discussed
            this possibility with Stanford officials over many years, but the University
            has not indicated any intention to either sell or develop this land.
2472g       The second site for multifamily housing is The Priory School site. In 2001,
            the town approved an application to construct seven multifamily units for
            faculty and staff on the site. These units were approved with the following
            condition:
                  “The Priory shall make every effort reasonably possible, to the
                 satisfaction of the planning commission, to ensure a majority of the
                 units are occupied so as to achieve the below market rate town
                 housing element objectives. These objectives anticipate at at least
                 one unit would be for a very low income household, one unit for a low
                 income household, and three units for moderate income households.
                 Relative to this condition, the Priory shall file a report with the
                 planning commission on the projected unit occupancy prior to initial
                 occupancy and annually thereafter. The report shall advise the
                 commission how occupancy relates to the housing element
                 objectives.”
2472h       The housing element goals set forth in this condition were based on the
            draft housing element that was under discussion at the time the project was
            approved in 2001. The Priory School reports annually to the town on
            whether these income targets are being met. In 2012, one unit was
            occupied by a low income household, two units were occupied by moderate
            income households, three units were occupied by above moderate income
            households, and one unit was vacant. Each unit is being provided at rents at
            or below 30% of the household income. Overall, the School usually does
            meet the requirements, although a unit may be occupied by a higher
            income household for a period of time when household incomes increase.
            The school works to provide the housing to the lowest income staff possible
            when a unit turns over.
2472i       In 2005, the town approved a Master Plan for the school property that
            includes eleven additional housing units to be built in the future. The school
            has been working on implementing other portions of its Master Plan to
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                    67

            date, but those units are still approved. Because the Priory has had
            difficulty maintaining units at the very low income level, this housing
            element anticipates that the 11 new units would be divided among the
            income categories as follows: 3 low income units, 4 moderate income units,
            and 4 above-moderate income units.
2472j       The Sequoias has not added any housing at their facility between 2009 and
            2014. The affiliated housing program would permit employee housing to be
            built on the site. Town staff has talked with representatives of the Sequoias
            about the possibility of employee housing on the site. The Sequoias is
            exploring options for employee housing, although the site is severely
            constrained by geology, including an active trace of the San Andreas fault
            which passes through part of the property
Second Units
2472k       Exhibit 8 shows where second units are allowed in Portola Valley. Between
            July of 2008 and December of 2013, 29 new second units were approved in
            Portola Valley, for an average of 5.3 new units per year. This is an increase
            over the Town’s previous average, which was 4.9 new second units per year
            as reported in the 2009 housing element. The 2009 element included
            actions to encourage additional second unit production, including increased
            publicity and preparation of a second units manual for the town. Second
            unit production does now appear to be increasing in town, and more
            applications are including second units.
2472l       This housing element also includes provisions to encourage increased
            production of second units, including allowing staff-level review of second
            units up to 750 square feet in size, allowing two second units on parcels that
            are over 3.5 acres in size, and allowing larger second units up to 1,000
            square feet on lots that are 2 acres or more.
2472m       These measures are anticipated to increase the number of second units
            built in the town by about one unit per year, from an average of 5.3 units
            annually to approximately 6.5 units annually. The town therefore
            anticipates the construction of 6.5 second units per year for the eight-year
            planning period. Total second unit production is therefore estimated to be
            52 units.
Summary of Site Inventory
2473        As described above, there are four types of housing sites in Portola Valley:
            single family home sites, large parcels, affiliated housing sites, and sites for
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                      68

            second units. The table below shows the number of existing sites that the
            town would expect to develop by 2022 in each category under current town
            policies, as set forth above. The table then compares these results with the
            town’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) numbers.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                  69

2473a         The table below shows that the Town of Portola Valley would provide more
              than enough housing for households with extremely low incomes and with
              above moderate incomes, and sufficient housing for moderate income
              households, but not enough for very low or low income households.
              However, state policies allow the extra housing for extremely low income
              households to be counted towards housing needed for very low and low
              income households. All together, 40 units of extremely low, very low and
              low income housing are planned in this housing element, compared to the
              36 units which are required to meet the Town’s RHNA. As a result, there are
              sufficient sites to accommodate all of the housing need for Portola Valley.
          Expected Sites for New Homes by 2022, Compared with Adjusted Housing Need
                         Ex Low       Very Low        Low       Moderate        Above        Total
                                                                              Moderate
Sites for Housing Expected from 2014-2022
   Single Family            0            0              0           0             26          26
   Large Parcels            0            0              1           0              5           6
   Affiliated               0            0              3           4              4          11
   Second Units             26           0             10           11             5          52
Total Sites                 26           0             14           15            40          95
RHNA                        11           10            15           15            13          64
2473b         In addition, there is a vacant site that could be developed with affiliated
              multifamily affordable housing under the town’s regulations (Site 40, the
              Stanford Wedge). Because the property owner has not expressed any
              interest in developing the site, it has not been included as a site that is
              expected to develop by 2022. However, some development could
              potentially occur on that site during the planning period.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                     70

Goals & Policies
Goal 1
2475 Maintain and enhance the character and quality of Portola Valley’s residential
       neighborhoods and the condition of its housing, and preserve the natural beauty of the
       town’s scenic corridors and open spaces.
       Policy 1A: Accommodate new residential development in a manner compatible with
                  the rural character of existing residential development.
       Policy 1B: Continue to control the location, design and density of new residential
                  development in order to preserve regional open spaces, avoid areas of
                  seismic and geologic hazards, have minimal visual impact, create minimal
                  discernable effect on infrastructure capacity, and ensure the adequate
                  provision of safe and convenient access to public services.
       Policy 1C: Require all housing units in the town to conform to the principles and
                  standards set forth in the general plan and town regulations, including that
                  all housing be subservient to the natural environment.
Goal 2
2476 Endeavor to provide opportunities for a diverse population, including for people of all
       income levels and with special housing needs, particularly elderly residents and those
       employed in Portola Valley, to live in the town.
       Policy 2A: Accept and fulfill responsibility for a reasonable share of the regional need
                  for affordable housing.
       Policy 2B: Encourage the creation of a diversity of housing options to meet the needs
                  of people in different stages of the life cycle and with different income
                  levels.
       Policy 2C: Allow in-lieu funds to be used to reduce town fees for affordable or mixed
                  income housing developments, as well as for the purchase of land and the
                  construction of below market rate units.
       Policy 2D: As possible, waive some fees, or portions of fees, for housing developments
                  with a majority of below market rate units.
       Policy 2E: Continue to encourage affordable housing that can be produced in
                  association with market rate housing and otherwise.
       Policy 2F: Distribute diverse and affordable housing options throughout the
                  community.
       Policy 2G: Use an open and inclusive process when implementing housing policies and
                  programs, by consulting as appropriate with people with differing housing
                  needs and income levels, housing advocates, housing developers, property
                  owners, and the community at large.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                          71

Goal 3
2477 As set forth in the Sustainability Element of this General Plan, encourage energy
       conservation and green building practices, and adopt housing policies to reduce costs of
       living, respect wildlife and plants and protect the environment.
       Policy 3A: Continue to support energy efficient building and subdivision design that
                    protects solar access, and to allow solar installations.
       Policy 3B: Continue to encourage cluster development in order to preserve resources
                    and encourage sustainability.
       Policy 3C: Continue to require native landscaping, which reduces water and power
                    consumption, provides habitat, and helps to strengthen natural ecosystems
                    in town.
       Policy 3D: Allow and encourage green building practices.
       Policy 3E:   Design and locate housing to minimize impacts on wildlife and be
                    subservient to the environment.
Goal 4
2478 Work to address housing issues on a regional basis while preserving local control and
       minimizing fiscal impacts on the town.
       Policy 4A: Continue to participate in regional and county efforts to increase the
                    availability of affordable housing in the region and county, including housing
                    for people with special needs, while working to ensure that factors such as
                    size, geographical and seismic hazards, fire risks, and land dedicated to open
                    space are considered in establishing housing requirements.
       Policy 4B: Support regional efforts to address the need for emergency and transitional
                    shelter.
       Policy 4C: Preserve local control over zoning, diversified housing locations and design.
       Policy 4D: Minimize the fiscal impact of new housing on the town.
       Policy 4E:   Define housing needs in a manner recognizing the special cultural and
                    historic planning conditions for the town, including the agricultural and rural
                    history and a culture of respecting the environment.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                           72
Programs, Quantified Objectives, and Action Plan
Program 1: Inclusionary Housing
2480        To implement a program from the 1990 housing element, the town adopted
            an ordinance requiring developers to provide 15% of new lots to the town
            for below market rate housing as part of every subdivision. The Town
            received title to four lots as part of the Blue Oaks subdivision, but was not
            able to find a developer to build below market rate units on the lots. To
            avoid this problem in the future and strengthen the program, the Town
            intends to revise the inclusionary housing program as described below.
2480a       The intention is to revise the program to require that developers build the
            housing units when one or more units would be required under the
            inclusionary housing program. As part of this revision, the percentage of
            lots required for below market rate housing may need to be reduced. The
            percentage should be based on a nexus study for affordable housing, such
            as the study underway through the 21 Elements process in San Mateo
            County. With the nexus study results, the town could also consider a
            housing impact fee. In developing the revisions to this program, the town
            will consult local developers and builders, and others experienced in the
            provision of affordable housing, to ensure that the requirements are
            realistic and that the program includes appropriate incentives.
2480b       Objective:     The town will amend the inclusionary housing program in
                           2015-16 to make it more effective by having developers of
                           larger subdivisions build the below market rate housing units.
Program 2: Affiliated Housing
2481        As established with the previous housing element, affiliated multifamily
            housing projects are permitted on three sites—The Sequoias, Priory School
            and the Stanford Wedge—shown on Exhibit 7 in the Site Inventory. This
            program has the following features:
            1.    Planned Unit Developments and Conditional Use Permits.
                  Multifamily housing on the Priory School site and the Sequoias have
                  and can be permitted through amendments of the CUPs governing
                  those projects. Development on the Stanford Wedge could be
                  accomplished pursuant to a CUP and/or a PUD . The PUD or CUP for a
                  multifamily housing project shall control the siting and design of
                  projects, the mix of units by income category of eligible occupants,
                  methods of controlling rents and/or resale prices, provisions for
                  ongoing management of the project and other matters deemed
                  appropriate by the town.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                     73

            2.   Inclusion of Market Rate Units. The purpose of this program is
                 primarily to provide affordable (below market rate) housing. The town
                 may permit the inclusion of market rate units in a project if it
                 determines they are necessary to make a project feasible. However,
                 substantially over half of the units in any multifamily affordable
                 housing project must be affordable to moderate, low or very low
                 income households. With the approval of the Planning Commission
                 and Town Council, an exception to this requirement may be made for
                 housing that is ancillary to the primary use of the site.
            3.   Floor Area and Density. The floor area in multifamily housing projects
                 shall not exceed the total floor area which would be permitted for the
                 number of single family houses which would be allowed on the
                 property under existing zoning. The allowable floor area, together
                 with the amount of developable land, determines the density of
                 development on the site. At both the Woodside Priory and the
                 Sequoias, only a portion of the site could be used for residential
                 development. The paragraph below explains the potential floor area
                 and density for the Stanford Wedge site.
                 The Stanford Wedge site (Site 40 in the Site Inventory section) is the
                 only multifamily site that is largely vacant. A small stable is located on
                 the site, which could be removed if the site were developed. A small
                 portion of the site is located on the east side of Alpine Road.
                 Altogether, the Stanford Wedge includes 89 acres of land, most of
                 which is extremely steep with slopes in excess of 30%. The only
                 developable portion that has access is the relatively flat land adjacent
                 to and west of Alpine Road. After accounting for required site
                 setbacks, the developable portion of the site is approximately 3.5
                 acres in size. Under current regulations, up to 28.48 market rate
                 homes could be clustered together on this flat land, and as stated
                 above, more affordable multifamily homes could be built on the site as
                 long as the allowable floor area was the same. The Land Use Element
                 caps the density at no more than three times the number of market
                 rate units, and the number would be further limited by the town’s
                 development standards and the need to address environmental
                 impacts. During the 2014-2022 planning period, the town intends to
                 look more closely at the standards and density for potential
                 development of this parcel to ensure that they are appropriate. The
                 town is not counting any units from development of this parcel
                 towards its RHNA, and any adjustments would therefore not affect the
                 town’s ability to provide its share of the housing need.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                     74

            4.   Development Standards. All multifamily housing projects are
                 expected to meet the general plan, zoning, subdivision and site
                 development requirements that pertain to all residential development
                 in the town, including Resolution No. 2506-2010 as amended. These
                 standards are described earlier in this housing element, and include
                 provisions for road widths and right-of-ways as well as landscaping.
                 Current parking requirements are one parking space for each studio or
                 one-bedroom unit, and two parking spaces with two or more
                 bedrooms. Development standards may be adjusted through a PUD
                 where appropriate.
                 Particular care is expected to ensure the compatibility of the projects
                 with adjacent neighborhoods and the town’s rural environment.
            5.   Occupancy. The town considers this program particularly suited to
                 providing housing for employees and others affiliated with the
                 institution that owns and manages the property. If units are provided
                 for sale, resale controls to preserve affordability will be required.
            6.   Monitoring. Each year, staff will monitor the progress that has been
                 made on this program and report to the Planning Commission on the
                 progress compared with the goals set forth in this program. The
                 program will be revised if necessary to meet the goals.
2481a       Objective:    The town will continue to work with the owners of these three
                          properties to allow and encourage housing to be built on the
                          sites. Eleven additional housing units are approved for the
                          Priory under the current Master Plan, of which seven units
                          would be for households with moderate or low incomes. The
                          Priory has indicated that they intend to construct the units in
                          phases, and expect all of the units to be built by 2022. The
                          town has also started discussions with the Sequoias to
                          encourage employee housing at the site, and they are moving
                          forward internally to consider the options. Stanford
                          University has no plans for their site at this time. During the
                          planning period, however, the town will look more closely at
                          the development standards and density for the Stanford
                          Wedge in particular to ensure that they are appropriate. The
                          town will continue to contact all three owners on a regular
                          basis and assist them with any potential plans for providing
                          housing.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                     75

Program 3: Second Units
2482        Second units provide most of the affordable housing in town, and are the
            only type of affordable housing that can be produced in Portola Valley by
            market forces without a significant subsidy. Town regulations allow second
            units in most areas of the town. Surveys of second unit rental rates show
            that most second units are affordable, both within Portola Valley and in San
            Mateo County as a whole. Second units are particularly appropriate for
            Portola Valley because of their compatibility with the rural nature of the
            town and their ability to directly serve the need for affordable housing.
2482a       To strengthen the second unit program, Portola Valley is proposing three
            amendments to its zoning ordinance in addition to the changes made to
            implement previous housing element programs. These amendments were
            identified as a priority by the Town Council in September 2014, and the
            Town anticipates developing and adopting the ordinance amendments in
            2015.
2482b       First, the town will amend its program to allow larger second units (up to
            1,000 square feet rather than the current limit of 750 square feet) on lots
            with two or more acres. This change is meant to address a concern stated
            by some residents that the 750 square feet is too small to comfortably
            house either themselves as they grow older, or their children’s families. The
            town hopes that this amendment will begin to address this concern and
            encourage more residents to build second units.
2482c       Second, the town will amend its ordinance to allow two second units to be
            located on lots with 3.5 acres or more. Both second units will need to meet
            the second unit requirements, including parking. In order to minimize
            grading and site disturbance, and to preserve the general character of the
            residential areas, one of the second units will need to be attached to the
            main house. The other second unit could be detached. This change will
            allow owners of larger properties to accommodate more housing,
            particularly for family members and employees such as groundskeepers.
2482d       Third, the town will also amend its zoning code to allow staff level approval
            of second units up to 750 square feet, rather than the current limit of 400
            square feet, when no other permit is needed for the project. Projects that
            would require a site development permit from the ASCC or Planning
            Commission for grading or tree removal would need Commission approval,
            for example. As part of implementing this item, the town will examine the
            current performance standards for second units as set forth in the zoning
            ordinance and amend them as necessary to provide further guidance for
            staff in reviewing second unit applications.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                   76

2482e       Finally, the town will monitor the number of second units being permitted
            annually. If the number of second units being permitted is lower than the
            number expected, the town will take action to increase second unit
            production. This could include one or more of the following actions:
            increasing publicity about the program, providing a floor area bonus for
            larger second units on larger lots, holding a workshop on second units, or
            reducing fees for second units.
2482f       Objective:     Over the previous planning period, an average of 5.3 second
                           units were constructed in Portola Valley each year, with an
                           increase through the planning period. Through the actions
                           described above, this rate is expected to increase to 6.5 units
                           per year. As a result, a total of 52 new second units are
                           expected to be built during the eight-year planning period.
                           These are likely to provide housing for the same income
                           categories as shown in the San Mateo County study
                           completed in December 2013. Based on a conservative
                           interpretation of that study, the 52 new second units will
                           result in 26 units for extremely low income households, 0 for
                           very low income, 10 for low income, 11 for moderate, and 5
                           for above moderate income households.
                           The town will monitor this program annually and take
                           additional steps to increase second unit production if
                           necessary.
Program 4: Shared Housing
2484        As discussed in the section on housing characteristics, homes in Portola
            Valley tend to be large. For older residents who want to remain in their
            homes, maintaining a large home while living on their own may be difficult.
            One option would be to convert a portion of a home to a second unit.
            Another option would be to simply find someone else to share the house.
2484a       The Human Investment Project for Housing (HIP Housing) is a nonprofit
            organization that conducts a program in San Mateo County to match
            housing “providers” with housing “seekers.” Rents are established on a case
            by case basis and can sometimes be partly defrayed by services. Although
            Portola Valley is currently in the area served by HIP Housing, there is no
            formal arrangement with the organization. Portola Valley will continue to
            work with the organization to increase publicity about its service in the
            town. This could include providing additional information on the Town’s
            website, distributing flyers and other printed information more broadly, or
            holding information sessions for residents. The Town Council has identified
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                    77

            this as a priority for the Town, and town staff will begin work on this early in
            2015.
2484b       Objective:      Work with HIP Housing to improve publicity of its home-
                            sharing program to residents and employees, with the aim of
                            increasing the number of placements in town.
Program 5: Fair Housing
2487        Project Sentinel handles complaints of discrimination in the sale or rental of
            housing and in the mediation of tenant/landlord disputes in Portola Valley
            under the terms of a contract with San Mateo County. Information on this
            program will be posted or otherwise made available at Town Hall and the
            library, and on the town’s website.
2487a       Objective:      No housing units are expected to result from this program.
                            The town’s objective is to provide brochures or post
                            information sheets at Town Hall, the library and on the town’s
                            website to publicize this program.
Program 6: Energy Conservation and Sustainability
2488        Portola Valley has had a number of regulations that encourage energy
            conservation for years. These include permitting solar installations, utilizing
            subdivision regulations that protect solar access, and supporting energy
            efficient design. In addition, most new development is clustered, which
            reduces impacts on the land. The town also requires native landscaping,
            which reduces the need for both water and energy. All of these policies and
            regulations will continue.
2488a       Since 2008, the town has employed a Sustainability Manager, and in January
            2009 adopted a Sustainability Element as part of its General Plan. In 2010,
            the town adopted a Green Building Ordinance using the “Build It Green
            Green Point Rated” system for all new homes, major remodeling projecs,
            and additions. Also in 2010, the town adopted BAWSCA’s model Indoor
            Water conservation Ordinance and Water Conservation in Landscaping
            Ordinance (with reduced turf allowances).
            In addition to the green building regulations and the water conservation
            ordinances, the town has been encouraging energy and water efficiency in
            existing homes through the state’s Energy Upgrade California program,
            California Water Service’s rebate programs, and other voluntary measures
            and tools developed by the town’s Sustainability Committee. In 2014, the
            town will adopt a climate Action Plan, which builds on the Sustainability
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                     78

            Element and includes measures that target energy and water conservation
            in the residential sector.
2488b       Objective:     To continue existing green and energy conservation measures,
                           revise them when necessary, and and implement new
                           programs in accordance with the Sustainability Element and
                           the town’s future Climate Action Plan.
Program 7: Explore Future Housing Needs and Potential Housing Programs
2489        During the housing element update process, the town identified a need for
            a longer-range “vision” for housing in Portola Valley. This program
            therefore calls for the town to examine its likely housing needs beyond
            2022, with the results potentially serving as a foundation for the next
            housing element update.
2489a       The town would conduct a more detailed analysis of housing trends and
            needs, with the intent of determining the best ways to address the town’s
            needs moving forward. Various housing “best practices” as identified by the
            State and advocacy groups could be considered to determine whether they
            would be appropriate in town.
2489b       To date, two items have specifically been identified for further exploration.
            Both of these are topics the town would like to consider but did not think
            could be finalized in time to provide housing by 2022:
                1. The possibility of expanding the affiliated housing program to
                    commercial sites, so that employers could provide employee housing
                    on commercial properties in town; and
                2. Potential uses of the money in the Town’s in-lieu housing fund,
                    including the money from the sale of the Blue Oaks BMR lots, to
                    meet identified local affordable housing needs and provide
                    affordable housing to serve, at a minimum, eight moderate income
                    households.
2489c       Objective:     To analyze the town’s housing needs and trends, explore a
                           commercial affiliated employee housing program, identify
                           potential uses of money in the town’s in-lieu housing fund,
                           and examine other potential programs as appropriate to meet
                           the town’s future needs. The results of this program will help
                           to create a foundation for the 2022 housing element update.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                   79

Program 8: Transitional and Supportive Housing Ordinance Amendment
2490        Due to clarifications of California law relative to transitional and supportive
            housing, the Town’s municipal code needs to be amended so that it is fully
            compliant. In order to comply, sections 18.12.010, 18.14.020, and
            18.16.020 which list the permitted uses in the residential zoning districts
            (the R-E, R-1, and M-R districts), need to be amended so that they no longer
            restrict the number of persons in transitional and supportive housing when
            those types of housing are located in single family homes.
2490a       Objective:     To amend the Town’s zoning ordinance to fully comply with
                           state law relative to transitional and supportive housing early
                           in 2015.
Quantified Objectives
2491        Based on the programs and housing trends discussed earlier in this housing
            element, the Town of Portola Valley has established the following
            quantified objectives. The objectives focus on new construction rather than
            rehabilitation or conservation, because the need in Portola Valley is clearly
            greatest for new construction. By meeting the quanitfied objectives shown
            below, the town will provide for its share of the Regional Housing Needs
            Allocation.
                               Quantified Objectives for Portola Valley
                                  New Construction        Rehabilitation      Conservation
            Extremely Low                  26                    0                 0
            Very Low                       0                     0                 0
            Low                            14                    0                 0
            Moderate                       15                    0                 0
            Above Moderate                 40                    0                 0
            Total                          95                    0                 0
2491a       The quanitfied objectives shown in above chart are based on the
            information provided in the Site Inventory. More details can be found that
            section of the housing element, including the summary table at the end of
            that section.
2491b       The new units will be provided through the towns’ second units program,
            the affiliated/multifamily housing program, and market rate housing for
            households with above moderate incomes.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                      80

Action Plan
2493        The actions shown below will be taken to achieve the quantified objectives
            and implement the programs described above.
                        Portola Valley 2014 Housing Element Action Plan
 Action     Program                              Action                       Responsible    Timing
                                                                                 Party
 1.      Inclusionary    Develop and adopt amendments to the Town’s          Planning staff 2015-16
         Housing         inclusionary housing program to require
                         developers of larger subdivisions to build housing.
                         The Town could consider a housing impact fee
                         instead of or in addition to the inclusionary
                         housing program. Consult with local developers
                         and builders in carrying out this program.
 2.      Affiliated Hsg  Continue to allow 11 additional affiliated          Planning staff Ongoing
                         multifamily units to be constructed at the Priory
                         School, and expedite processing of applications to
                         built the units as possible
 3.      Affiliated Hsg  Continue discussions and work with the Sequoias       Town staff   Ongoing
                         to encourage construction of employee housing
 4.      Affiliated Hsg  Amend Section 18.44.060.I of the Zoning             Planning staff   2015
                         Ordinance to reflect the current name and section
                         number for this program
 5.      Affiliated Hsg  Review the development standards and density        Planning staff 2016-17
                         for the Stanford Wedge to ensure they are
                         appropriate.
 6.      Affiliated Hsg  Continue discussions with Stanford University       Planning staff Ongoing
                         concerning potential residential development of
                         the Wedge property.
 7.      Second Units    Amend the zoning ordinance to allow: a) second      Planning staff   2015
                         units up to 1,000 sf on lots with 2+ acres; b) two
                         second units on lots with 3.5+ acres, one of which
                         must be attached; and c) staff level review and
                         approval of second units up to 750 square feet
                         when no other permit is needed. As part of this
                         action, amend the performance standards for
                         second units to provide further guidance for staff-
                         level approvals.
 8.      Second Units    Monitor the number of second units being            Planning staff Ongoing
                         permitted annually and take action to increase
                         second unit production if fewer units are
                         permitted than is anticipated. The monitoring will
                         be done in conjunction with the annual housing
                         element report and will be reported to the
                         Planning Commission and Town Council in the
                         spring of each year.
 9.      Shared          Continue to support HIP Housing, and work with      Planning staff   2015
         Housing         their staff to improve publicity in order to                          and
                         increase placements in town.                                       ongoing
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                             81

 10.     Fair Housing  Continue to participate in the County-wide fair    Planning staff Ongoing
                       housing program and address concerns as
                       necessary.
 11.     Energy        Continue green and energy conservation              Town staff    Ongoing
         Conservation  measures, revise as needed, and implement new
                       programs in accordance with the Sustainability
                       Element and the future Climate Action Plan.
 12.     Future        Explore future housing needs beyond 2022 and        Town staff    Ongoing
         Programs      potential ways to address those needs. Two
                       possibilities to examine are 1) the possibility of
                       expanding the affiliated housing program to
                       commercial sites for employee housing; and 2)
                       potential uses of the money in the Town’s in-lieu
                       housing fund.
 13.     Transitional  Amend the Town’s zoning ordinance to fully          Town staff     2015
         & Supportive  comply with current state law regarding
                       transitional and supportive housing.
Portola Valley General Plan Housing Element, Adopted January 14, 2015                        82

Town of Portola Valley General Plan
  Recreation Element
      Last amended May 25, 2011
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
   Definitions ................................................................................................................................... 1
Objectives........................................................................................................................................ 2
Principles ......................................................................................................................................... 2
Standards ........................................................................................................................................ 3
Description ...................................................................................................................................... 3
   Neighborhood Parks ................................................................................................................... 4
   Community Parks ........................................................................................................................ 4
   Regional Parks and Private Regional Facilities ............................................................................ 4
   Institutions .................................................................................................................................. 5
   Local Shopping and Service Centers ........................................................................................... 5
   Trails and Paths ........................................................................................................................... 5
General Plan Diagram ..................................................................................................................... 5
                                  Recreation Element
Introduction
2300      The recreation element provides guidelines for meeting the recreational needs of
          the town. In the most comprehensive sense, recreation starts within the home and
          extends through community facilities and on to wider areas. This recreation
          element is concerned with lands within the town that can provide recreation
          opportunities for use and enjoyment by town residents.
2301      Recreation areas include parks, athletic fields and the town center. Scenic
          corridors, greenways and open space preserves provide for limited recreation and
          are addressed in the Open Space Element. Schools and the town library are
          referenced here because of their importance as recreational facilities, although
          they are already mentioned for their primary uses in the land use element of the
          general plan.
2302      Trails and paths are major recreation facilities and are described in detail in the
          trails and paths element.
2303      Those portions of the recreation element that can be represented graphically are
          shown on the comprehensive plan diagram, Part 5. The recreation proposals shown
          on the diagram are general and are not meant to portray precise locations. They
          are intended, however, to provide a guide for future specific actions in carrying out
          the plan.
Definitions
2304      Neighborhood Parks are local parks developed to meet the recreation needs of the
          local neighborhood.
          Community Parks provide space for specialized activities which attract residents
          from the entire town. The size of the park depends upon the activities to be
          accommodated and the desired character of the park. Small sites are appropriate
                                         Recreation
                                              1
       in intensively developed areas, particularly where the park functions as a part of a
       larger complex of community serving recreation facilities. Appropriate facilities
       include such items as community buildings, tennis courts, tot lots and athletic
       fields.
.      Regional Parks and Private Regional Facilities are scenic areas of sufficient size to
       serve at least the Midpeninsula Area and are served by major circulation facilities.
       They are also on or near the boundaries of the planning area and thus can be
       reached without the necessity of traveling through the town of Portola Valley,
       although, where necessary, additional access points in the town are appropriate
       under suitable conditions. These areas are important regional resources because of
       their intrinsic natural qualities.
       Institutions include public and private schools that provide fields and other
       recreation facilities.
Objectives
2305   1.      To provide appropriate park, recreation and open space areas serving major
               parts of the planning area, and neighborhoods and designed so as to
               minimize the impact of excessive use upon the valley.
       2.      To allow for regional use of scenic resources that are unique in the
               Midpeninsula and so located as to not conflict with the primary residential
               function of the town.
Principles
2306   1.      Parks should be designed and located to enhance the quality of living for
       local residents.
       2.      Public school recreation facilities should be available for neighborhood use.
               For those areas not conveniently served by a neighborhood school, a
               neighborhood park, or neighborhood open space preserve should be
               provided.
       3.      Community recreation needs should be met in park and recreation areas
               specifically adapted to local needs and interests.
       4.      (For principles relating to building scale, size and landscaping see the general
               principles section for the land use element.)
                                         Recreation
                                              2
       5.     If automobile access is necessary to a park, recreation area or open space
              preserve, the location and design of the parking area should minimize the
              impact of traffic and parking on nearby residences.
       6.     Link recreation areas by trails whenever feasible.
Standards
2307   1.     All residential areas should be served by a public park within a
              distance of 1/4 to 1/2 mile.
       2.     The requirement of 1. above may be met by a park, open space preserve, a
              portion of a greenway or scenic corridor, a public school with playground, or
              a combination of these. In established areas where this requirement cannot
              be met, efforts should be made to provide public trails leading to at least one
              of these areas.
       3.     Where possible, the acreage in parks, open space preserves and portions of
              greenways or scenic corridors serving residential areas should be not less
              than five percent of the total acreage of the residential areas served. For
              example, a 400 acre residential development should be served by no less
              than 20 acres of public park of the classes enumerated above.
Description
2308   Extensive parks and open space preserves are proposed. Each proposal is based
       upon the natural resources of the planning area and related to the needs of
       residents. Specific recommendations are made for community parks, community
       open space preserves, neighborhood parks, neighborhood open space preserves,
       the Alpine Scenic Corridor, greenways, the Skyline Scenic Corridor, regional parks
       and private regional facilities. Also, institutions, local shopping and service centers,
       the town center, trails and paths and residential open space preserves are
       referenced because of their role in meeting recreation needs of the town. (For
       more information regarding open space preserves and scenic corridors see the
       open space element. For more information on trails and paths see the trails and
       paths element.)
2309   Major parks and recreation areas for the planning area are shown on the
       comprehensive plan diagram.
2310   Each park or recreation area is located so that its normal use will not interfere with
       adjoining uses or disturb the tranquillity of neighboring areas. Recreation areas
                                        Recreation
                                             3
          within the town are served by access routes designed to minimize infringement of
          privacy of town residents.
Neighborhood Parks
2311      Two neighborhood parks are shown, one is in Ladera and the other is on Sand Hill
          Road.
Community Parks
2312      The town center is shown as including a community park (see “Other Institutional
          Uses” in the land use element). A variety of outdoor recreation uses exist and
          should continue, including but not limited to tennis, playing fields, and the little
          people’s park. The location and size of the site makes it appropriate for community
          use.
2313      The Triangle Green Park at the intersection of Alpine and Portola Roads serves the
          community as a gathering spot, a place to stop and rest and as a visual entrance
          feature to the valley.
2314      Ford Park, across from Westridge Drive and within the Alpine Scenic Corridor,
          includes a little league baseball diamond, parking, trails and paths, and extensive
          natural areas for non-intensive recreation. The natural quality of much of this park
          is important in providing a natural setting when entering Portola Valley from the
          north.
2315      Rossotti Field, south of Arastradero Road and within the Alpine Scenic Corridor, is
          developed for soccer with ancillary parking. Planting and development should
          enhance the natural environment between Alpine Road and Los Trancos Creek.
Regional Parks and Private Regional Facilities
2316      Existing facilities serving largely the Midpeninsula Area include the Stanford Golf
          Course.
2317      The Palo Alto Foothill Park is presently reserved by the City of Palo Alto for the use
          of residents of the city only. For the Portola Valley area, however, the park
          provides an important open space. The town should work with Palo Alto to
          facilitate expanded public access.
2318      The existing Family Farm private club provides a regional resource for a relatively
          few people and infrequent use, but is an important open space.
2319      The Windy Hill Open Space Preserve, owned by the Midpeninsula Regional Open
          Space District, provides an extensive open space and trail system with opportunities
                                            Recreation
                                                 4

           for nature study as well as cycling, equestrians, hikers and scenic enjoyment. (See
           also Section 2212 of the open space element.)
2320       The Alpine Tennis and Swim Club and local equestrian centers provide recreation
           for many town residents, residents in the town’s sphere of influence as well as
           some living at a greater distance.
Institutions
2321       The elementary and intermediate schools in the town have important recreation
           facilities and should be fully utilized in recreation programs. Similarly, the athletic
           facilities of the Priory school are of great importance to the town and should be
           scheduled for use by town groups without creating adverse impact on the
           surrounding residential areas. If additional elementary or intermediate schools are
           needed to serve the town, they should be developed to serve community
           recreation needs and might include some features that could be jointly financed by
           the town and the school district.
2322       The existing three churches and any additional churches that might locate in the
           town should be encouraged to make facilities available to community groups for
           meetings. It is assumed, however, that the major activities at the churches will
           continue to be for the members of the church.
2323       The library provides for recreational reading and includes space for small meetings
           and displays.
Local Shopping and Service Centers
2324       The commercial centers provide some recreation potential. The uses in the centers
           and the designs should consider the possibility of providing acceptable recreation
           for youths. Shopping centers, if properly designed, can be attractive places for
           walking about and for special events of various sorts.
Trails and Paths
2325       The trails and paths are in themselves important recreation facilities. A very
           extensive system is proposed which provides access from residential areas to
           recreation facilities at schools, parks, etc., and between residential areas. The
           system provides pleasant routes for recreational travel through particularly scenic
           portions of the town. (See the trails and paths element.)
General Plan Diagram
2326       Delete from the legend “OTHER COMMUNITY.”
                                             Recreation
                                                  5

Recreation Element Appendix 1:
Implementation of the Recreation Element
Actions to date:
1.     The subdivision ordinance has been amended to require dedication of land for park and
       recreation purposes consistent with provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act.
2.     The town has acquired the town center, Ford Field and the soccer field on Alpine Road.
       The latter two are community parks while the town center includes community park
       facilities.
3.     The town has acquired two neighborhood preserves, both of which are in the Portola
       Valley Ranch development.
4.     The Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District has acquired extensive open spaces as a
       part of the Windy Hill Open Space Preserve. This preserve provides for major hiking and
       nature study opportunities.
Future actions:
1.     The town should continue to apply its subdivision requirements with respect to the
       dedication of park and recreation areas.
2.     The town should continue to use the planned community and planned unit
       development provisions of the zoning ordinance to encourage the provision of
       additional park and recreation areas.
3.     The town should cooperate with owners of private recreation facilities to encourage the
       retention of such uses. If retention of such uses is not possible, the town should
       consider means to preserve the uses as long as they are important to the town.
4.     The town should consider an acquisition program for park, recreation and open spaces
       that may not be achieved through the approval of developments. Such a program
       should be included as a part of the open space program. (See Open Space Element
       Appendix 2: Implementation of the Open Space Element.)
                                      Recreation: Appendix
                                                 6
Town of Portola Valley General Plan
     Safety Element
      Last amended July 28, 2010
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
   Purpose ....................................................................................................................................... 1
   Scope ........................................................................................................................................... 1
   Definitions ................................................................................................................................... 1
Goals ............................................................................................................................................... 3
Objectives........................................................................................................................................ 3
Principles ......................................................................................................................................... 4
Acceptable Risk (In Relation to Structures and Occupancies) ........................................................ 5
   Acceptable Risk ........................................................................................................................... 5
   Classification of Structures and Occupancies ............................................................................. 5
Potential Hazards in the Planning Area .......................................................................................... 5
   Faulting ....................................................................................................................................... 6
   Ground Shaking ........................................................................................................................... 8
   Landsliding ................................................................................................................................ 11
   Ground Settlement ................................................................................................................... 12
   Soil Liquefaction ........................................................................................................................ 12
   Flooding..................................................................................................................................... 12
   Erosion and Sedimentation....................................................................................................... 13
   Expansive Soils and Soil Creep .................................................................................................. 14
   Fire Hazards............................................................................................................................... 15
Policies .......................................................................................................................................... 17
   Policies Concerning Fault Displacement Hazards ..................................................................... 17
   Policies Concerning Ground Shaking Hazards .......................................................................... 18
   Policies Concerning Landslide Hazards ..................................................................................... 19
   Policy Concerning Ground Settlement ..................................................................................... 20
   Policies Concerning Soil Liquefaction ....................................................................................... 20
   Policies Concerning Flood Hazards ........................................................................................... 20
   Policies Concerning Erosion and Sedimentation ...................................................................... 21
   Policy Concerning Expansive Soils and Soil Creep .................................................................... 22
   Policies Concerning Fire Hazards .............................................................................................. 22
Emergency Preparedness ............................................................................................................. 23
   Policies Concerning Emergency Preparedness ......................................................................... 25
General Policies for Implementation ............................................................................................ 28
                                                  Safety Element
Introduction
Purpose
4100      The safety element provides a policy framework for measures the town should take
          to protect persons, property and the economic and social well-being of the
          community from earthquakes, fires and floods as well as other natural hazards.
Scope
4101      The element deals with the potential geologic, fire and flooding hazards to persons
          and property in the planning area. Accordingly, geologic, fire and flooding hazards
          are addressed while hazards such as wind storm, lightning, falling trees, unsafe
          structures, motor vehicle accidents and crime are not included. These other
          hazards are dealt with to some degree in other elements of the general plan. In
          addition, town regulations and state laws provide public policy and regulate
          conduct in relation to a wide range of hazards.
Definitions
4102      The following definitions of technical terms are used in this element of the general
          plan:
          1.     Hazard: a source of danger, peril or jeopardy.
          2.     Risk: the chance of injury, damage or loss.
          3.     High Risk: high probability of property loss and/or personal injury.
          4.     Seismic: pertaining to or caused by an earthquake.
                                            Safety
                                               1
           5.     Fault: a plane or surface in earth materials along which shear failure has
                  occurred and materials on opposite sides have moved relative to one
                  another in response to the accumulation of stress in the rocks.
           6.     Active Fault: a fault that has moved in recent geologic time (last 10,000
                  years) and is likely to move again in the relatively near future.
           7.     Inactive Fault: a fault that shows no evidence of movement in recent
                  geologic time and is inferred to have little potential for movement in the
                  relatively near future.
           8.     Fault Zone: a zone of related faults that commonly are braided and sub-
                  parallel, but which may be branching and divergent. Its width ranges from a
                  few feet to several miles.
           9.     Fault Trace: the intersection between a fault plane and the ground surface.
                  It is graphically portrayed as a line plotted on geologic maps, or in the case of
                  an en echelon surface rupture as a series of short lines at an angle to the
                  general alignment of the trace.
           10.    “Maximum Probable” Earthquake: the greatest magnitude earthquake that
                  can reasonably be expected to occur in a particular area.
           11.    Ground Failures: includes landslide, soil liquefaction, lurch cracking,* surface
                  faulting, ground settlement, lateral spreading,* soil creep and soil expansion.
           12.    Soil Liquefaction: change of water-saturated cohesionless soil to fluid-like
                  state usually from intense ground shaking that causes soil to lose strength
                  and flow as a liquid.
           13.    Landslide: the downslope movement of masses of earth material along a slip
                  surface.
           14.    Active Landslide: a landslide that is moving or shows signs of recent
                  movement.
            15.   Landslide Deposit: earth materials that have been deposited through the
                  process of landsliding.
           16.    Richter Scale (Est. 1935) – A logarithmic scale intended to express the total
                  amount of energy released by an earthquake. The value is calculated from
* Not considered to be a significant hazard in Portola Valley, but if new information reveals
problems of public concern, the element should be expanded to address the hazard.
                                              Safety
                                                 2

              the amplitude of peaks recorded on a specific type of seismograph plus a
              distance conversion factor.
       17.    Moment Magnitude Scale – A more recent logarithmic earthquake
              magnitude scale intended to more accurately reflect the energy released by
              fault displacement. The calculated value considers the surface area of fault
              displacement, slip distance and rock rigidity. Determination of this value
              requires a greater period of time to calculate than the Richter Scale value
              which is based on a seismogram.
4103   Not used.
Goals
4104   The basic goals of the Town of Portola Valley in adopting this element of the
       general plan are to prevent loss of life, to reduce injuries and property damage and
       to minimize economic and social dislocation that may result from earthquakes,
       other geologic hazards, fires and flooding.
Objectives
4105   The objectives of the Town of Portola Valley in adopting this element of the general
       plan are:
       1.     To define the relative degree of risk in various parts of the planning area so
              that this information can be used as a guide for minimizing or avoiding risk
              for new construction and for risk abatement for existing development.
       2.     To minimize the risk to human life from structures located in hazardous
              areas.
       3.     To provide a basis for designating land uses that are appropriate to the
              geologic, fire and flooding risks in the planning area.
       4.     To ensure that facilities whose continued functioning is essential to society,
              and facilities needed in the event of emergency, are so located and designed
              that they will continue to function in the event of fire or natural disaster.
       5.     To facilitate post-disaster relief and recovery operations.
       6.     To increase public awareness of geologic, fire and flooding hazards, and of
              available ways to avoid or mitigate the effects of these hazards.
                                           Safety
                                              3

Principles
4106   The following principles are intended to guide the town and private parties in
       future actions.
       1.    Land uses should be controlled to avoid exposure to risk in excess of the level
             generally acceptable to the community (defined in this element as
             “Acceptable Risk”).
       2.    Locate development, to the maximum extent feasible, so that it will avoid
             areas which present high risk exposure.
       3.    Development in hazardous areas should be limited to structures and
             improvements that would not threaten human life or cause substantial
             financial loss if damaged, or the development or site should be engineered to
             mitigate the hazard if possible without unduly disturbing the natural
             environment.
       4.    Where utility lines and roads are located in or cross high hazard areas, all
             reasonable measures should be taken to insure continuity or quick
             restoration of service and prevention of secondary hazards such as fire or
             flood.
       5.    High hazard areas should not be subdivided unless and until adequate
             mitigating measures are assured.
       6.    Critical facilities, such as major transportation links, communications and
             utility lines and emergency shelter facilities, should be located, designed and
             operated in a manner that maximizes their ability to remain functional after a
             disaster.
       7.    New structures should be designed and constructed to withstand, within
             levels of acceptable risk, the hazards known to exist at their locations.
       8.    Additions to or modifications of existing structures should increase rather
             than decrease the ability of the original structure to withstand any
             earthquake or other geologic hazards.
       9.    The public should be made aware of hazards and measures that can be taken
             to protect their lives and property.
       10.   Reports of geologic and/or soil investigations should be required in all
             instances when a permit is sought and available information indicates a
             potential substantial threat to life or property from a geological hazard.
                                           Safety
                                             4

            11.     The location and extent of areas covered by soil and geologic investigations
                    received by the town should be recorded by the town geologist on the
                    town’s Geologic Map and Ground Movement Potential Map, and the reports
                    thereon should be considered to be public records. Where appropriate, the
                    results of such detailed investigations will be utilized to supplement and
                    supersede more general information.
Acceptable Risk (In Relation to Structures and Occupancies)
4107        This section: (a) defines the term “acceptable risk”, and (b) assigns various
            structures, occupancies and land uses to risk classes.
Acceptable Risk
4108        The term “acceptable risk” is used to describe the level of risk that the majority of
            citizens accept without expecting governmental action to provide protection. To
            illustrate this point, consider a site that is subject to occasional flooding. If the
            chances are one in a thousand that the site will be flooded in any given year, local
            citizens will probably accept that risk without asking for special protection. If the
            chances of flooding are one in ten, however, either governmental regulations
            would be enacted to keep people from building on the site (in order to protect life
            and property), or property owners would ask the government to build protection
            devices to control the flood waters.
Classification of Structures and Occupancies
4109        Five major classes of structures and occupancies are established in Table 1 for the
            purpose of risk rating. The first two classes include critical facilities and
            occupancies – those structures and occupancies that are especially important for
            the preservation of life, the protection of property or for the continuing functioning
            of society. Less critical structures and occupancies are included in Classes 3, 4 and
            5. The table includes structures and occupancies not presently or likely to ever be
            in the Portola Valley planning area. They are included, however, to provide a
            context for the particular structures and occupancies relevant to the planning area.
            The fourth column of Table 1 describes the maximum amount of damage deemed
            acceptable in the event of hazardous events such as a great earthquake similar to
            the one in 1906, a major fire or a significant flood. The last column classifies
            acceptable damage in terms of acceptable risk.
Potential Hazards in the Planning Area
4110        Each of the following potential hazards is briefly described in the following pages as
            it relates to the Portola Valley planning area:
                                                 Safety
                                                   5

         1.     Faulting
         2.     Ground Shaking
         3.     Landsliding
         4.     Ground Settlement
         5.     Soil Liquefaction
         6.     Flooding
         7.     Erosion and Sedimentation
         8.     Expansive Soils and Soil Creep
         9.     Fire Hazards
4111     Documents upon which these descriptions are largely based and that provide
         additional pertinent information are listed in Safety Element Appendix 1. Also, the
         most pertinent references for each type of hazard are listed by numbers in
         parentheses within and following each hazard summary.
4112     The descriptions of the hazards contained herein and in the sources cited in
         Appendix 1 provide the general basis for applying the policies set forth in the
         element. As new information becomes available that supplements or modifies
         these descriptions of hazards, such new information, when officially accepted by
         the town, may be used in applying or interpreting town policy.
Faulting
4113     Portola Valley is bisected by the San Andreas Fault Zone which is made up of a
         number of individual fault traces along which movement has occurred at some time
         in the past. Some of the traces of the San Andreas Fault Zone are considered to be
         active; some are of undefined activity; some are deemed to be inactive; and others
         are poorly defined or are as yet unrecognized and the possibility of their activity is
         questionable. Experience in California and in other parts of the world where active
         faulting is taking place indicates that future fault movements are most likely to
         occur along the traces of recent displacements. Ground rupturing, with horizontal
         displacements of 8 to 10 feet, took place along several fault traces through Portola
         Valley in the 1906 earthquake. Measurable earth strain and other geologic
         considerations suggest that similar or greater amounts of displacement may be
         anticipated in the Portola Valley area in the years ahead. Recurrence intervals for
         major movements along the Portola Valley segment of the San Andreas Fault are
         calculated to be approximately 240 years (47).
                                             Safety
                                               6
  4114           Although future fault movement is generally anticipated along only those faults
                 judged to be active, there is always the possibility that movement may occur along
                   Table 1: Risk Classification of Structures, Occupancies and Land Uses
Class       General Category           General Examples                Acceptable Damage to Facility            Level of
                                                                                                              Acceptable
                                                                                                                  Risk
 1-A  Facilities whose failure      Nuclear reactors, large     None which would result in exposing            Near zero
      might be catastrophic         dams                        affected population to death or injury
 1-B  Facilities whose continuing   Power plants, power         None which would impair safety of facility    Extremely
      function is critical          intertie systems            or disrupt function                               low
 2-A  Facilities critically needed  Hospitals, fire stations,   None which would impair safety of facility    Extremely
      for services after disaster   telephone exchanges         or disrupt function                               low
 2-B  Critical transportation links Regional highways,          Minor non-structural; facility should             Low
                                    bridges, rail lines,        remain operational and safe, or be
                                    overpasses, tunnels         susceptible to quick restoration of service
 2-C  Major local utility lines and Power substations, gas      Minor non-structural; facility should             Low
      facilities                    and water mains             remain operational and safe, or be
                                                                susceptible to quick restoration of service
 2-D  Small dams                    Small dams                  None which would expose “downstream”          Extremely
                                                                population to injury                              low
 3-A  High occupancy structures     High-rise apartmenets       No structural damage; minor non-                  Low
                                    and offices, schools        structural damage, but structures should
                                                                remain safe and usable
 3-B  Facilities highly desirable   Schools, churches, civic    No structural damage; minor non-                  Low
      for shelter after disaster    buildings                   structural damage, but structures should
                                                                remain safe and usable
 3-C  Local roads, utilities and    Local roads, local utility  Damage should be susceptible to               Moderate
      communication facilities      lines                       reasonable rapid repair (or utility shut-off)
 4-A  Medium occupancy              Most commercial and         Structural integrity must be retained; non-       Low
      structures                    industrial buildings,       structural damage should not unduly
                                    apartments                  endanger safety of occupants
 4-B  Low occupancy structures      Singe family homes          Structural integrity must be retained; non-       Low
                                                                structural damage should not unduly
                                                                endanger safety of occupants
 5-A  Open space, with              Recreation areas,           Structural integrity must be retained; non-   Moderate
      developed sites               orchards, vineyards         structural damage should not unduly
                                                                endanger safety of occupants
 5-B  Open space, with              Grazing lands, forests      Not applicable                                Moderate
      undeveloped sites
                 traces that are of undefined activity, deemed inactive, poorly defined, or as yet
                 unrecognized, or newly formed. The most detailed information regarding the
                 description and location of the most readily recognizable active fault traces in the
                 Portola Valley area are contained in the following reports: W.R. Dickinson,
                 “Commentary and Reconnaissance Photogeologic Map of San Andreas Rift Belt,
                                                         Safety
                                                            7

             Portola Valley, California” (1)*(2) (26) and accompanying map; William Letts &
             Associates, Inc., ”Seismic Hazard Evaluation, Proposed Portola Valley Town Center”
             (36) and “Supplemental Surface-Fault Rupture Hazard Evaluation, Proposed Potola
             Valley Town Cetner” (37).
4115         The traces of the San Andreas Fault Zone judged to be active and with significant
             potential for future displacement are shown with distinctive heavy lines on the
             Geologic Map of the Town of Portola Valley (Scale 1" = 500') (34). Fault traces from
             this source are also shown on the Special Studies Zones Maps of the Mindego Hill
             and Palo Alto Quadrangles (Scale 1" = 2000') (2) (43), issued by the California
             Geological Survey in compliance with requirements of the Earthquake Fault Zoning
             Act.
4116         The hazard associated with active fault traces is clear. Any structure built across
             such a trace and subsequently offset by faulting would be in danger of collapse and
             constitute a threat to life. Studies of the San Andreas Fault in California and other
             similar faults elsewhere in the world show that dislocations associated with faulting
             tend to be concentrated along relatively narrow traces. In Portola Valley, however,
             a pattern of en echelon ground breakage has occurred along some of the San
             Andreas trace. In these locations ground breakage consists of short ruptures on the
             order of 40 feet oriented obliquely to the general fault trend. Also, a belt of
             disturbed ground several hundred feet wide or more, characterized by secondary
             fractures and cracks, ground lurching and warping may develop along traces of
             dislocation. Although deformation of this zone may result in serious structural
             damage to buildings within it, the risk of structural collapse due solely to
             permanent ground deformation is considerably less than for sites across or
             immediately adjacent to the principal trace of movement. For further information,
             see also references (4a) (4b) (4c) (4d) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) and (11) (36) (37) (41)
             (42) (43).
Ground Shaking
4117         Although sparsely populated, the Portola Valley area experienced considerable
             damage from ground shaking in the 1906 earthquake, which is estimated to have
             been of a Richter magnitude* 8.3, (or Moment Magnitude of 7.9) with local
             intensities ranging from VIII to X, on the Modified Mercalli scale** (1956 edition).
* All references referred to by number are listed in complete citation form in Appendix 1.
* Richter Magnitude is an instrumentally determined measurement of the energy released by
an earthquake at its source. The magnitude scale is logarithmic, hence an increase in one unit
of magnitude (e.g. 6 to 7) represents a ten-fold increase in seismic wave amplitude but an
approximately 32 times increase in energy released at the source.
** See Safety Element Appendix 2 for explanation of the Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale.
                                                Safety
                                                   8

     Moment Magnitude, a new term describing earthquakes, takes into consideration
     more than the ground shaking at a location and includes such considerations as the
     surface area of a rupture. See Section 4102 for the definitions of Richter
     Magnitude and Moment Magnitude.
     Recently published intensity maps by the Association of Bay Area Governments for
     a 7.9 Richter Magnitude earthquake (based on a model of the 1906 San Francisco
     Earthquake with a calculated Richter Magnitude of 7.9) on the San Andreas Fault
     shows Modified Mercalli Intensities ranging from X (Very Violent) on the floor of
     Portola Valley with bands on either side calculated as IX (Violent) and VIII (Very
     Strong). ABAG cautions that these intensities may be incorrect by one unit higher
     or lower. Nonetheless, it is clear that the town could be subject to very intense
     shaking forces. (28)
     For comparison purposes, one can consider the shaking intensity felt in Portola
     Valley from the 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake that had a Richter Magnitude of 6.9
     but was at a great distance from Portola Valley. For this earthquake, ABAG’s maps
     show the most violent shaking in the floor of the valley is estimated to be VII
     (Strong) with much of the rest of the town classified as VI (Moderate). (29) This
     earthquake did not result in significant damage in Portola Valley. It was, however, a
     much smaller earthquake than what might occur in the not-too-distant future.
     Considerable study has been given to the probability of future earthquakes. ABAG,
     in collaboration with the U.S. Geological Survey, has published maps showing
     earthquake probabilities. The most recently published work gives a 62% probability
     of at least one earthquake of 6.7 or greater magnitude before 2032 somewhere in
     the San Francisco Bay Area. For the San Andreas Fault, the probability drops to
     21%. (33)
     Another way of looking at earthquake forces has been to estimate the size of the
     maximum credible earthquake. This does not, however, provide the probability of
     occurrence of such an event. More recently, the practice has been to stipulate the
     probability of exceedence of stated accelerations in terms of gravity. For the floor
     of Portola Valley there is an estimated 10% probability that ground motion will
     exceed 0.7 pga (peak ground acceleraton) in the next 50 years (32). Of course, for
     lesser earthquakes the probability increases.
4118 Not Used
4119 Not Used
                                        Safety
                                          9

4120          The ground effects from seismic shaking in Portola Valley would vary with different
              underlying rock formations, soil conditions, and the amount of underground water
              present. Those areas underlain by relatively thick, unconsolidated, water-soaked
              surficial sediments (such as some recent alluvial deposits) have a greater potential
              for damaging effects due to ground shaking than do areas of firm bedrock. Table 2,
              below, defines three "geologic categories" in the Portola Valley planning area in
              which the geologic materials are grouped on the basis of their anticipated response
              to seismic shaking. Surficial Materials are considered likely to respond more
              actively to an earthquake than Near-Bedrock Materials, which in turn, would
              respond more actively than Bedrock Materials.
                        Surficial Materials – generally young, often saturated, unconsolidated
                        alluvial deposits of gravel, sand, silt and clay commonly confined to valley
                        floors; slope wash; landslide debris and artificial fill.
                        Near-Bedrock Materials – semi-consolidated to consolidated older alluvial
                        deposits of gravel, sand, silt and clay (Santa Clara Formation).
                        Bedrock Materials – hard, stratified to massive, deposits of sandstone,
                        shale, conglomerate, chert, mafic, igneous rocks and serpentine
                        (generally shown as Stable Bedrock-Sbr-on Movement Potential Map of
                        Portola Valley).
        Table 2. Relative Ground Shaking Potential in the Portola Valley Planning Area*
For further information, see references (3)(5)(6)( 7) (8) (9)(10)( 11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (32) (33)
(34) (35) (36) (37)(41) (42)(43)
              It is clear that portions of Portola Valley are subject to surface fault rupture and
              that the entire community is subject to violent to less violent shaking. The amount
              of ground shaking at any location is based on the seismic energy released through
              the ground. It is prudent to analyze new developments and provide a reasonable
              level of protection to these two hazards. To that end, the town should adopt and
              apply the best available information on potential ground shaking. Land uses should
              be located where the level of risk from seismic forces is deemed acceptable to the
              community.
* See Geologic and Movement Potential Maps of Town of Portola Valley for the location of
areas underlain by materials described above, references (105) and (106).
                                                   Safety
                                                      10

          At any location, new structures have to comply with the California Building Code
          (38). Portola Valley and much of California are within the highest seismic risk
          category in the building code. The code provides differing levels of safety based on
          building occupancies. In addition, provisions in the code provide detailed
          requirements for calculating earthquake forces and requiring that buildings be
          appropriately designed. In Portola Valley, the Building Official is tasked with
          administering the provisions of the code.
Landsliding
4121      Landsliding is the mass-movement of soil and rock downslope along one or more
          recognizable slip surfaces; the movement may be rapid (as in rock-falls) or very
          slow (as in earth flows). In the California coast ranges, landsliding is a natural and
          widespread phenomenon occurring on many slopes underlain by relatively unstable
          rocks and soils. Initiation of movement of a new landslide or reactivation of an
          existing one may be caused by either natural processes or human activities.
          Strength of hillslope materials may be reduced by weathering and decay of rocks
          and soils, saturation and strong vibrations. The balance of forces acting on
          hillslopes, ordinarily in equilibrium, may be upset by addition of weight, removal of
          lateral support and seismic accelerations. Excavation, construction, irrigation and
          disposal of waste water in septic drainfields contribute to these processes. Strong
          ground motion during earthquakes may initiate new landslides and reactivate
          existing ones. Studies following larger earthquakes in California demonstrate that
          landsliding is commonly the most widespread type of earthquake related ground
          failure.
4122      The Geologic Map of Portola Valley shows the location of numerous landslides.
          Most notably, it indicates that more than half of the hillsides in the western portion
          of the Portola Valley planning area have been subject to landslide activity. Some of
          these landslides are ancient and naturally stabilized; some of them are recent and
          potentially hazardous; and some are actively moving. The hazard to public and
          private property as well as to public safety from landslides is clear. Roads and
          utility lines crossing an active landslide may be blocked or severed. Structures may
          be damaged or destroyed if encroached on or carried downslope by an actively
          moving landslide. The Ground Movement Potential Map (35) of the town classifies
          landslides with respect to the potential for future movement and town regulations
          require that these maps be consulted when new development is proposed. In
          addition, the California Geological Survey issued Seismic Hazard Zone maps (30)
          (31) show areas of potential landsliding and require that prior to development in
          these areas the possibility of landsliding be investigated. For further information,
          see references (3) (7) (15) (18) (19) (34).
                                              Safety
                                                11
Ground Settlement
4123       Ground settlement is the sinking of the surface of the land and is most commonly
           due to the compaction of unconsolidated granular sediments and soils.
           Compaction and settlement of such materials is a natural process that ordinarily
           takes place slowly and imperceptibly. However, the process can be accelerated by
           loading imperfectly compacted soils with embankments or buildings, by excessive
           withdrawal of ground water, or by ground shaking resulting from earthquakes.
           Seismically induced ground settlement or “shakedown” may occur very rapidly.
           Settlement, particularly when aggravated by human or seismic processes, may be
           unequally distributed over a small area (differential settlement) with damaging
           effects to foundations of structures resting directly on the settled ground. Ground
           settlement during earthquakes has been a major source of property damage in
           many earthquake-prone regions of the world.
4124       Areas within Portola Valley with the highest potential for ground settlement are
           those shown on the Geologic Map of the town as alluvium, slope wash, and
           landslide deposits. However, some areas underlain by other geologic units may
           also be subject to ground settlement. Detailed site investigations are required to
           determine local settlement potential. For further information, see references (3)
           (5) (15) (39) (40).
Soil Liquefaction
4125       Soil liquefaction is the phenomenon in which certain water-saturated soils
           temporarily lose their strength when subjected to intense shaking and flow as a
           fluid. Soils most susceptible to liquefaction are saturated, well-sorted, poorly-
           compacted, fine sands and silts. Substantial damage in California and other areas
           of the world has been caused by soil liquefaction brought about by earthquakes.
4126       Although sufficiently detailed geologic and engineering information to predict
           accurately sites of soil liquefaction in Portola Valley is not currently available, the
           possibility of liquefaction in localized areas along the valley floor, underlain by
           unconsolidated alluvium and a seasonally high water table, is considered to be
           relatively high. In addition, the California Geological Survey issued Seismic Hazard
           Zone maps show areas of potential liquefaction and require that prior to
           development in these areas the possibility of liquefaction be investigated (30) (31).
Flooding
4127       In the past, Portola Valley has experienced minor flooding in areas adjacent to
           streams. These areas include portions of the natural floodplains of Corte Madera,
           Sausal and Los Trancos creeks, and locations where inadequate or obstructed
           drainage facilities have been unable to contain peak flows. Hydrologic principles
                                               Safety
                                                 12

          suggest that similar minor flooding will recur sporadically and that somewhat more
          extensive flooding may take place during widely spaced intervals. The Flood
          Insurance Study for Portola Valley (45) prepared by the Federal Emergency
          Management Agency in 2008 focuses attention on Corte Madera, Sausal and Los
          Trancos Creeks. The maps show floodways that include stream channels and any
          adjoining floodplains where there is a 1% chance of flooding in any year. These
          floodways are to be kept clear of encroachments so that the 1% annual chance
          flood can be carried without any substantial increases in flood heights. Inundation
          by the 100 year flood is indicated for significant portions of Corte Madera Creek.
          The Master Storm Drainage Report for Portola Valley (1970) (21) cites a number of
          drainage facilities that were judged to be inadequate to pass 10 to 25 year flood
          flows or which were subject to obstruction by debris and which could contribute to
          local flooding conditions in their vicinity during periods of high runoff. The results
          of this study are to be reevaluated by the town.
4128      In addition to the periodic recurrence of minor flooding due to intense rainfall,
          portions of Portola Valley are exposed to the hazard of flooding that may result
          from seismically induced failure of small dams. Boronda Lake in Palo Alto Foothills
          Park in the Los Trancos Creek drainage and the small reservoir behind The Sequoias
          and the Morshead Lake in the Sausal Creek drainage are retained by earthen
          embankments. Should either of these dams fail during an earthquake, some
          downstream flooding may be expected, although no data are available to assess
          accurately either the seismic stability of the dams or the potential flood hazard. For
          further information, see references (7) (22).
Erosion and Sedimentation
4129      Erosion and sedimentation are on-going natural processes in Portola Valley as they
          are elsewhere in the world. Factors influencing the rate of erosion at any particular
          location include climate, weather, rock and soil characteristics, slope and
          vegetation. Erosion occurs chiefly on steeper slopes in the upper reaches of
          drainage basins where runoff velocities are high. Sedimentation, on the other
          hand, takes place mainly in the lower reaches of drainages where stream gradients
          and velocities are reduced. No stream gauging or sediment load data are available
          for the streams in Portola Valley, but it is apparent that the highest erosion
          potential is found on the steep slopes descending from Skyline Boulevard to the
          valley floor. Moderately high erosion potential also exists along some short, steep
          drainages in the eastern part of the town.
4130      Soil maps prepared by Natural Resources Conservation Service dated 1991 and
          2008 (39 and 40) provide a generalized view of the distribution of principal soil
          associations in the Portola Valley area and the relative erodibility of the soil groups.
          These maps assign a high erosion hazard to the soils on the steep slopes west of the
          valley floor and a moderate hazard to the foothill areas to the east.
                                             Safety
                                               13
4131       Although no detailed studies of erodibility of the various geologic units (and their
           associated soils) shown on the Geologic Map of the town have been made, some
           generalizations are possible. Other factors being equal, surficial deposits of
           alluvium and slope wash as well as landslide deposits can be expected to be most
           susceptible to erosion; the beds of the Santa Clara Formation of intermediate
           erodibility; and the older bedrock units of least, but variable erodablility.
4132       Throughout much of Portola Valley and the surrounding area, the combination of
           natural slopes, soil structure and native vegetation contribute to a relatively slow
           natural erosion rate. On the other hand, where natural conditions are disturbed by
           grading and site development or poorly controlled animal keeping, erosion can be
           greatly accelerated and cause damage both to the site where it occurs and
           downstream where sedimentation of the eroded material takes place.
4133       With the exception of the flood plain of Corte Madera Creek along the Portola
           Valley-Woodside boundary, few persistent areas of natural sedimentation exist in
           Portola Valley. Most of the sediment produced by erosion is exported by stream
           flow beyond the boundaries of the town. Local sedimentation does occur along the
           main creeks and tributary drainages chiefly where human activities have altered
           stream flow characteristics. Here, sediment accumulations have partially
           obstructed a number of culverts and drainage ditches, increasing the hazard of local
           flooding at these points.
           For further information, see references (7) and (24).
Expansive Soils and Soil Creep
4134       Some soils and bedrock materials in the Portola Valley area swell when they
           become wet and shrink when they dry as a result of water absorption by certain
           contained expansible clay minerals. Building foundations bearing on such materials
           may suffer destructive distortions if not properly engineered.
4135       Expansive soils may be encountered anywhere within the Portola Valley area, but
           they occur most frequently in areas shown on the town's Ground Movement
           Potential Map as expansive soils and bedrock. Individual site investigations and
           laboratory testing are required to identify expansive soil conditions.
4136       Repeated expansion and contraction of soils on slopes results in slow creep of the
           soil layer in a downslope direction. The expansion and contraction may be caused
           merely by bulk absorption and loss of water or freezing and thawing, but soils
           containing truly expansible clays are subject to pronounced soil creep. Soil creep
           may exert large enough lateral forces on building foundations to produce significant
           distortions of the structure or damage to the foundation if unanticipated in the
           foundation design. For further information, see references (3), (7), and (23).
                                             Safety
                                               14
Fire Hazards
4137      The Portola Valley planning area is served by the Woodside Fire Protection District,
          the California State Division of Forestry, and Stanford University. Northern and
          eastern portions of the planning area are also served by the Menlo Park Fire
          Protection District and the Palo Alto Fire Department. All of these fire protection
          services fight both structural and non-structural fires, although the equipment
          operated by the California State Division of Forestry is designed to be most
          effective against grass, brush and forest fires, rather than structural fires.
4138      A Fire Hazards Map (44), which designates areas subject to significant fire hazards,
          has been prepared for the town by Moritz Arboricultural Consulting.The map shows
          eleven vegetation associations and assigns a rating of potential fire behavior to
          each association. The ratings and general descriptions of associations are as
          follows:
          “highest” (h+) includes a shrub type (chaparral) and three forest types (fire-prone
          oak woodland, mixed evergreen forest, and fire-prone urban forest)
          “high” (h) includes two forest types (fire-prone urban forest and redwood forest)
          and one scrub type (coastal scrub)
          “moderate” (m) includes urban savanna and grassland
          “low” (l) includes mowed grass and vineyard
          The Moritz map and accompaning report provide guidance for reducing the fire
          threat from vegetation throughout the town. These informative references should
          be consulted by property owners and public agencies. Several large areas are
          discussed below that are of major concern, but the report and map should be
          consulted since they provide a comprehensive inventory and map of vegetation
          types as well as prescriptions for reducing fire hazard from vegetation.
          Most of the developed parts of the town, that is the area east of the valley floor, is
          classified as an urban forest and therefore classified as “high” risk. In this area
          mitigation actions include careful thinning of vegetation, removal of dead materials,
          and raising of tree limbs. Many actions can be taken by property owners to greatly
          reduce the risks in these areas.
          Several steep wooded canyons and steep slopes in this area are classified as fire-
          prone oak woodland and therefore classified as the “highest” risk. These canyons
          are generally the steep back portions of lots where homes, often with wood roofs,
          are located higher on the properties. Fires in these somewhat remote areas pose a
          major threat and warrant coordinated actions by property owners bordering the
          canyons.
                                             Safety
                                               15

     Large undeveloped portions of the western hillsides are classified as “highest” risk
     and “high” risk. It is impractical to undertake extensive removal and trimming of
     vegetation in these extensive areas. The boundaries of these areas are of greatest
     concern where they adjoin developed parts of the town.
     Also, some developed portions of the western hillsides are classified as fire-prone
     urban forest and therefore classified as “highest” risk. In these areas, the town and
     fire district should encourage homeowners to reduce the threat posed by
     vegetationthrough coordinated efforts.
4139 The Moritz map and report address the fire hazard presented by different
     vegetation types. The comprehensive fire hazard, however, is further complicated
     by other factors:
     1.      Water Supply. The current basic criterion for judging the adequacy of water
             supply for fire fighting purposes is the 2007 California Fire Code which
             requires 1,000 gallons per minute for a period of 2 hours, with a residual
             pressure of 20-lbs/sq. in. for structures under 3,600 sq. ft.
     2.      Accessibility. The factor of "accessibility" is measured in terms of travel time
             from a fire station to a potential fire location. It is a measure of the time and
             degree of roadway access including driveways, in which the responding fire
             apparatus can navigate to arrive at the incident and and start extinguishment
             or other operations.
     3.      Land Slope. Land slope influences fire safety in two ways. First, fire spreads
             up steep slopes far faster than it does on level land. Secondly, the slope of
             the land determines how easy it is to move firefighters and equipment to the
             scene of the fire or other emergencies.
     4.      Flammability of Structures. The ignition of fires in buildings is conditioned by
             the building materials that have been used. Concern is not only with respect
             to a particular building but also to the strong likelihood that fire brands can
             travel between buildings and thereby contribute to the spread of a fire.
4140 The following portions of the planning area are not shown on the Moritz Fire
     Hazards Map: the open lands of Stanford University in the northerly part of the
     planning area including Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve, SLAC, Webb Ranch and the
     Academic Reserve; the unincorporated area southeast of the town; and the
     sparsely developed portions of Santa Clara County including the Palo Alto Foothill
     Park that occupy the easterly fringe of the planning area. An analysis employing the
     basic fire hazard factors previously described likely would reveal portions of these
     areas subject to significant fire hazards. When data is available from the
     responsible fire protection agencies, such data should be referenced herein.
                                         Safety
                                           16

4140a      Cal Fire has issued state-wide maps showing Fire Hazard Severity Zones. The maps
           rate areas in State Responsibility Areas (SRA’s) and Local Responsibility Areas
           (LRA’s). The vast area west of Skyline Blvd. that borders Portola Valley is
           designated as SRA. Within LRA areas, cities are required to adopt Chapter 7A of the
           Uniform Building Code for areas the state has mapped as very high fire severity.
           While Portola Valley has not adopted the state maps, it has exceeded the state
           requirement by adopting Chapter 7A to apply to all new construction throughout
           town limits. Chapter 7A dictates the use of fire resistant exterior materials and
           adherence to various design details.
4141       Conclusions drawn from the analysis of fire hazards in Portola Valley are:
           1.     While the eastern portion of Portola Valley has been developed with
                  adequate roads and has good water supply systems, there are significant fire
                  hazards in canyon areas as well as in heavily vegetated areas. More
                  aggressive programs are needed to addresss these concerns. Fortunately,
                  these areas can be reached quickly by fire fighting equipment, and
                  firefighters are normally able to subdue fires in these areas quite rapidly.
           2.     The western hillsides of Portola Valley, which are steep, have few roads, lack
                  an adequate water supply and have dense vegetation are relatively
                  hazardous when judged from a fire safety point of view. These areas cannot
                  be reached quickly by fire fighters, and when reached, fire fighters may have
                  substantial difficulty in fighting the fire because of an inadequate road
                  system, dependence on hand carried equipment, and lack of water. These
                  lands are clearly the most hazardous in the planning area. For further
                  information, see reference (25) (44).
           3.     The large number of homes built in the town with wood siding and wood
                  shingle roofs pose a fire threat because of their relatively easy ignition.
                  Residents should consider replacing these materials with fire resistant
                  construction.
Policies
4142       The following policies are intended to guide the town and private parties in future
            actions.
Policies Concerning Fault Displacement Hazards
4143       1.     Consider all faults shown on the map "Fault Lines Mapped by W.R.
                  Dickenson, November 1971" (2), "Special Studies Zones Maps" (4), the
                  town’s Geologic Map and maps prepared by Lettis and Associates (36, 37) as
                                                Safety
                                                  17

                each may be amended, as active faults, unless and until evidence to the
                contrary is developed through field investigations.
           2.   Show active and potentially active faults on the town Geologic Map and
                Ground Movement Potential Map. On the Ground Movement Potential Map
                show required setbacks for buildings for human occupancy and add
                corresponding provisions to the zoning ordinance.
           3.   Subdivisions, structures or other developments within the special studies
                zones shown on the maps Earthquake Fault Zoning maps (41) should at a
                minimum comply with pertinent state regulations.
           4.   Design and construct new roads, bridges and utility lines (either public or
                private) that cross active fault traces in a manner which recognizes the
                hazard of fault movement. Such designs should consider that there is a
                possibility of up to a 20-foot right-lateral displacement on the Woodside and
                Trancos traces of the San Andreas Fault. Equip water, gas, and electric lines
                that cross active fault traces with shut-off devices which utilize the best
                available technology for quick shut-off consistent with providing reliable
                service.
           5.   Examine all existing utility lines that cross active fault traces to determine
                their ability to survive fault movement (in the amount described in paragraph
                d. above). Utility companies should institute orderly programs of installing
                shut-off devices on these lines, starting with the lines that cross the
                Woodside and Trancos traces and those which serve the most people.
                Consider above-ground crossing of fault traces where continued service and
                safety cannot be assured for subsurface lines. Establish and maintain
                adequate emergency water supplies in areas served by water lines that cross
                active fault traces.
           6.   Consider fault traces identified as “Fault other than the San Andreas” in the
                review of applications for the construction of buildings for human occupancy,
                site development, land divisions and subdivisions. Appropriate geological
                investigations should be made and reviewed to determine the fault location
                and characteristics prior to the approval of any such applications.
Policies Concerning Ground Shaking Hazards
4144       1.   Design and construct essential services buildings to withstand the “Maximum
                Considered Earthquake” that has a 2% probability of exceedance in 50 years
                and remain in service (2007 California Building Code and California
                Geological Survey). (See Section 4154a for the definition of essential services
                buildings.)
                                             Safety
                                                18

           2.   Review the structural integrity of all essential services buildings in the town,
                and strengthen, remove or replace those that are found to be unable to
                meet policy a. above.
           3.   Design and construct residences to retain their structural integrity when
                subjected to the maximum earthquake that has a 10% probability of
                exceedance in 50 years (2007 California Building Code and California
                Geological Survey). Place emphasis on seismic design and seismic bracing
                systems. Where deemed appropriate by the town, designs should be
                reviewed by a structural engineer.
           4.   The Town of Portola Valley endorses the continuing review and updating of
                the California Building Code (109), which the town has adopted by reference,
                with the objective of adding to it revisions that reflect information gained
                from recent earthquakes.
Policies Concerning Landslide Hazards
4145       1.   Review all proposed developments with respect to the “Geologic Map” and
                ”Ground Movement Potential Map” of the town. Require geologic and soil
                reports, when deemed necessary by the town geologist, for developments in
                all areas shown with landslides. Reports should be responsive to the
                information indicated on these maps.
           2.   Locate structures for human habitation and most public utilities so as
                minimize disturbances from potential landslides. Give due consideration to
                mitigating measures, based on geologic and other reports acceptable to the
                town, that can be taken to reduce the risk from seismic and non-seismic
                hazards to an acceptable level (as defined in Table 1 and related text).
           3.   Where roads or utility lines are proposed to cross landslide areas for reasons
                of convenience or necessity, they should be permitted only if special design
                and construction techniques can be employed to assure that acceptable risk
                levels will be met.
           4.   Adopt implementing policies and regulations that correlate the various land
                uses permitted by the zoning ordinance with the several categories of
                landslides shown on the Ground Movement Potential Map which will help
                assure that any failures of ground due to landslides will not endanger public
                or private property beyond levels of acceptable risk defined in this element.
           5.   When considering development in areas that contain unstable ground, it is
                preferable to develop on those areas of natural stable terrain and thereby
                                            Safety
                                              19

                avoid the potential negative environmental impacts from engineered
                solutions.
Policy Concerning Ground Settlement
4146       1.   Consider those areas shown on the “Geologic Map” as alluvium, slope wash
                or landslide deposits to be areas of potential ground settlement and require
                detailed site investigation of this potential. Address potential for settlement
                in other locations in routine site investigations.
Policies Concerning Soil Liquefaction
4147       1.   Consider the possibility of soil liquefaction in site investigations in connection
                with applications for development, especially in areas along the valley floor
                underlain by unconsolidated alluvium and a seasonally high water table.
           2.   Review new development proposals against the California Geologic Survey
                Seismic Hazard Zone Maps as a guide to investigations.
Policies Concerning Flood Hazards
4148       1.   Review all applications for subdivisions, building permits and other similar
                applications in the vicinity of major drainage channels with respect to
                potential flooding.
           2.   Do not erect structures in areas determined to be subject to “100 year
                floods” unless appropriate measures will mitigate potential adverse effects
                on the structures and nearby properties and will not adversely affect natural
                riparian zones. Minor structures where there is no threat to life and little
                threat to property may be allowed.
           3.   Rely upon Federally issued Flood Insurance Rate maps to define the “100
                year flood” area along the relevant portions of Corte Madera Creek, Sausal
                Creek and Los Trancos Creek unless professionally prepared hydrological
                reports indicate that the subject site is not within an area that is subjected to
                “100 year floods.”
           4.   Adopt flood plain regulations in the zoning ordinance to require new
                construction to minimize potential damage from mapped flood hazards.
           5.   Replace or improve existing drainage structures such as culverts and pipes
                deemed to be inadequate to meet acceptable standards. Where possible
                restore natural systems to convey water.
                                             Safety
                                               20

           6.   Do not erect structures which will impede the flow of flood waters in a flood
                channel.
           7.   Encourage owners of buildings that are in flood-prone areas to take
                appropriate measures to reduce the likelihood of flood damage to their
                property. Control any such measures so as to not increase the flood or
                erosion hazards to other properties or have adverse impacts on the natural
                riparian zone.
           8.   Maintain appropriate vegetation on the terrain in the Portola Valley planning
                area to minimize runoff of rainfall consistent with other safety practices.
           9.   The town intends to continue to participate in the National Flood Insurance
                Program and encourages the Federal Insurance Administration to continually
                update maps as appropriate that indicate the areas in Portola Valley subject
                to “100 year floods.”
           10.  When the state required flood inundation map for Searsville Dam is
                available, it should be used in reviewing land uses proposed in the general
                plan for affected downstream areas.
           11.  The town should administer creek setback requirements to keep
                development set back from natural creek channels in order to not impede
                the flow of water and to limit the extent of development that could be
                affected by creekbank failure.
Policies Concerning Erosion and Sedimentation
4149       1.   Maintain natural slopes and preserve existing vegetation, especially in
                hillside areas. When change in natural grade or removal of existing
                vegetation is required, employ remedial measures to provide appropriate
                vegetative cover to control storm water runoff. Give special attention to
                minimizing erosion problems resulting from the keeping of animals. In
                specific applications, these policies will be tempered by the need for fire
                safety.
           2.   The town currently administers the provisions of the subdivision ordinance
                concerning landscaping and erosion control and the provisions of the site
                development ordinance concerning grading, giving special attention to the
                protective measures that are appropriate prior to the advent of seasonal
                rains.
                                            Safety
                                              21

Policy Concerning Expansive Soils and Soil Creep
4150       1.   In areas where information available to town officials indicates the
                probability of expansive soils or soil creep, soils reports should be submitted
                in connection with all applications for development. In those instances
                where expansive or creep soils are reported, measures as are necessary to
                mitigate the probable effects of this hazard should be required.
Policies Concerning Fire Hazards
4151       1.   Do not construct buildings for human occupancy, critical facilities and high
                value structures in areas classified as having the highest fire risk unless it is
                demonstrated that mitigation measures will be taken to reduce the fire risk
                to an acceptable level.
           2.   Prior to the approval of any subdivision of lands in an area of high fire risk,
                the planning commission should review the results of a study that includes at
                least the following topics:
                a.    A description of the risk and the factors contributing to the risk.
                b.    Actions that should be taken to reduce the risk to an acceptable level.
                c.    The costs and means of providing fire protection to the subdivision.
                d.    An indication of who pays for the costs involved, and who receives the
                      benefits.
           3.   Homeowners should provide adequate clearance around structures to
                prevent spread of fire by direct exposure and to assure adequate access in
                times of emergency and for the suppression of fire.
           4.   Adopt a town program to reduce fire hazards along the town’s public roads.
           5.   Establish a public information program regarding fire hazards and how
                property owners can reduce such hazards. Utilize the Moritz report in this
                effort.
           6.   In locations identified as presenting high fire hazard, require special
                protective measures to control spread of fire and provide safety to
                occupants, including but not limited to types of construction and use of
                appropriate materials.
           7.   When reasonable and needed, make privately owned sources of water, such
                as swimming pools, in or adjacent to high fire risk areas, accessible to fire
                trucks for use for on-site fire protection.
                                             Safety
                                               22

      8.      Establish street naming and numbering systems to avoid potential confusion
              for emergency response vehicles.
      9.      Design and maintain all private roads to permit unrestricted access for all
              Woodside Fire Protection District equipment.
      10.     Apply Chapter 7A of the California Building Code to the entire town to
              increase the resistance of buildings to fire ignition, and when reviewing
              developments under Chapter 7A, attempt to choose those materials and
              colors that are consistent with the visual aspects of the town.
      11.     When undertaking actions to reduce fire risk by removing or thinning
              vegetation, homeowners should try to remove the most hazardous material
              while leaving some native vegetaton to reduce risks of erosion, habitat loss
              and introduction of potentially dangerous invasive weeds.
Emergency Preparedness
4152  While the nature of hazardous events can be predicted, each event will be different
      and require different responses. For instance, while the general nature of forest
      fires is known at this time, the time of day or night and location will not be known
      until the fire occurs. Nonetheless, it is possible to anticipate the range of possible
      forest fires and have in place a generic set of actions from which specific actions
      needed for the particular forest fire can be selected and implemented. An
      emergency response plan should provide this type of information for the full range
      of anticipated hazardous events.
      The preferable approach, of course, is for the town to take actions that will prevent
      or minimize the impacts of potential hazardous events. For instance, the town has
      adopted detailed geologic maps that are administered to prevent new homes from
      being built across active earthquake fault traces or in landslide prone areas. All
      impacts of earthquakes, however, are not so easily focused on a few discrete
      locations since ground shaking will be town-wide. To minimize the impacts of
      ground shaking, the building code is designed to minimize potential structural
      damage. For fire hazards, new building code provisions require the use of fire
      retardant building materials. Also, employment of defensive zones around houses
      where vegetation is managed to minimize the threat of fire spreading is another
      example of actions that can be taken before a hazard might occur. In sum the
      adage “an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure” holds true for preventing
      or minimizing hazardous events. Given that, however, an effective preparedness
      program is essential for the protection of the town.
                                         Safety
                                           23

4152a Effective response to emergencies requires that, in advance of need, emergency
      services be organized and necessary physical facilities be provided. Areas of
      concern include:
      1.     Fire fighting and rescue
      2.     Law enforcement
      3.     Medical services
             a.     trained personnel: first aid, nurses, doctors
             b.     ambulance service
             c.     availability of hospitals
             d.     stockpiling of medical supplies
      4.     Availability of emergency shelter
      5.     Provision of emergency food supplies
      6.     Communications networks
             a.     emergency services
             b.     citizen information
      7.     Public utilities
      8.     Transportation facilities
      9.     Evacuation routes to undamaged areas
      10.    Command and responsibility structure incorporating town officials, town
             emergency workers, and other emergency resources.
4153  The town program for emergency preparedness and disaster response should
      continue to give specific consideration to both the general nature of hazard
      exposure in the planning area and specific steps that can be taken in advance of
      natural disaster to facilitate emergency response.
4154  Emergency response measures for the Town of Portola Valley are set forth in the
      town’s Emergency Plan.
4154a Essential services buildings shall be capable of providing essential services to the
      public after a disaster, be designed and constructed to minimize fire hazards and to
                                           Safety
                                             24

           resist, insofar as practical, the forces generated by earthquakes, and winds.
           Essential services buildings include all public buildings supporting emergency
           operations and those services interruption of which would pose a safety hazard or
           impede emergency response including but not limited to: fire stations, police
           stations, emergency operations and communication dispatch centers. (Reference
           Health and Safety Code Chapter 2, 16000 et seq)
4155       Emergency preparedness planning for the Portola Valley area is based on the
           premise that local emergencies will be dealt with quickly and effectively by local
           forces, such as local fire protection services, the County Sheriff, and local health
           services. The assumption is also made that any major disaster or emergency will
           require outside assistance, from nearby cities, the county, the state, or from federal
           sources.
4156       Portola Valley is aware that if an emergency situation affects a wide geographical
           area (as an earthquake might), that the densely populated areas will probably
           receive aid first, and that rural areas such as Portola Valley will receive lower
           priority attention. For this reason, residents of the Portola Valley area need to keep
           an adequate supply of food, water and medical supplies available, sufficient to
           sustain them for considerable time after a disaster. Residents also require
           information and training in self-sufficiency; nieghborhoods require locally-placed
           resources and an organizational structure supporting local response; and the town
           needs to organize capabilities for basic rsponses such as shelter and medical care.
Policies Concerning Emergency Preparedness
4157       1.       Emergency Preparedness Committee
                    a.      The Emergency Preparedness Committee of the town should
                            prepare and maintain the Town of Portola Valley Emergency Plan.
                    b.      The Emergency Plan should provide for the protection of persons
                            and property in the town in the event of an emergency and provide
                            for the coordination of emergency services of the town and with
                            other public agencies, private persons, cooperation and
                            organizations.
                    c.      The Emergency Plan should address: household preparedness and
                            response, neighborhood preparedness and response, the emergency
                            operations center (EOC), and town resources.
           2.       Coordination
                    a.      The establishment and maintenance of an emergency operations
                            center is a high priority of the town.
                                                Safety
                                                  25
    b.     The town should cooperate in the activities of the Citizens
           Emergency Response and Preparedness Program (CERPP) as the
           town’s primary resource for household and neighborhood
           preparedness and for neighborhood communication and response in
           an emergency.
    c.     The town should continue to support measures to increase the
           ability of local fire, police and health forces to deal with emergencies
           as they arise, within affordable economic cost.
    d.     The town should continue its cooperation with county, state and
           federal agencies in emergency preparedness measures and in
           mutual assistance programs.
3.  Roads
    a.     Interstate 280 and the arterial roads identified in the circulation
           element of this general plan are designated as "evacuation routes"
           that will be utilized in the event of an emergency.
    b.     The town recognizes the need to have roads of adequate capacity for
           use in times of emergency. The town has adopted specific standards
           for road design, including standards for road width, grade and
           alignment that it finds to be appropriate for the movement of
           emergency equipment.
    c.     The town recognizes the necessity of having emergency evacuation
           routes unimpeded by structures near the traveled way, by narrow
           bridges, by low overhead signs or by trees that would block the
           passage of vehicles in time of emergencies. It is therefore town
           policy to maintain emergency “evacuation routes” in usable
           condition. The town has adopted zoning regulations that set forth
           minimum setbacks for buildings from roads.
    d.     The town recognizes that in spite of precautions some primary
           emergency evacuation routes may become unusable in an
           emergency. Therefore, the town catalogs available secondary
           routes, such as fire and maintenance roads, and verifies operability
           of any gates and locks protectinng these routes.
4. Exercises
    a.     Routine emergency exercises should be conducted periodically to
           continually test the Emergency Plan and make improvements in the
           system.
                                Safety
                                   26

      b.     Major town-wide emergency exercises should be conducted based
             on carefully prepared scenarios of the major events likely to face the
             town, most notably wildland fires and earthquakes. The results of
             these tests should be used to improve emergency response
             capabilities and also provide information for mitigation measures the
             town can take to reduce risk prior to a disaster.
5. Other Risk Reduction Measures
   a.     The town supports a program to identify existing hazards and reduce
          the risks they pose. Risk reduction includes measures to improve
          water supplies, provide emergency “escape routes” in areas of high
          risk, provide legible road signs and other appropriate measures.
   b.     The town recommends that residents of the Portola Valley planning
          area keep on hand supplies of food, water, and medical supplies that
          will be sufficient for their needs for several days in the event of a
          disaster.
   c.     Subdivisions and other developments in the Portola Valley planning
          area should be constructed in such a manner that levels of “acceptable
          risk” are not exceeded and that built-in “mitigating measures” are
          taken. This includes the provision of adequate water supplies, roads
          that are suitable for the safe passage of emergency vehicles and
          adequate street-name signs.
   d.     The town recognizes the necessity of having an adequate water supply
          for fire fighting purposes. It is town policy that lands within the
          Portola Valley planning area be provided with an adequate water
          supply as they are developed. More specific standards for water flow,
          water pressure and water availability for fire fighting are set forth in
          town regulations.
   e.     The town endorses, and will continue to participate in, public
          information programs that will assist local residents in coping with
          local emergencies that arise from time to time (such as the need for
          fire protection, or emergency health services), as well as being
          prepared for possible major disasters.
   f.     The town has in place and will administer a system to put placards on
          buildings after a disaster to indicate whether it is safe to occupy a
          building.
                                Safety
                                  27

General Policies for Implementation
4158  The preceding pages contain recommendations for avoiding or mitigating hazards
      that have been identified. Many of the measures that might be taken to mitigate
      hazards cited in this element could produce results in conflict with other elements
      of the general plan. Just because natural hazards can be mitigated does not mean
      that in all cases they should be, especially if such mitigation would produce results
      that are in conflict with the conservation element, the land use element, the open
      space element, or other sections of the general plan.
4159  For example, take a tract of land in the hillside areas of Portola Valley that is
      afflicted with several small landslides and is in an area with very poor fire
      protection. Merely because the hazards of landslide and fire can be reduced to an
      acceptably low level of risk does not mean that the town should approve the
      building of a subdivision there. Before any decision is made on the matter, the
      town should consider environmental impacts of the mitigation as well as the costs
      and the benefits of such hillside development, both immediate and long range, and
      then judge whether or not the public interest would be best served by the approval
      of the proposed land development.
4160  In translating the policies of this element into specific regulations, particular care
      should be taken to:
      1.      Define the scope of “mitigating measures” that should be taken for each
              hazard and each land use.
      2.      Provide for a means by which the data from which the policies in this
              element were derived can be updated or superseded as more accurate or
              more precise data become available.
                                          Safety
                                            28

Safety Element, Appendix 1:
Safety Element References
(1)   William R. Dickinson, “Commentary and Reconnaissance Photogeologic Map, San
      Andreas Rift Belt, Portola Valley, California,” July 1970.
(2)   William R. Dickinson, “Fault Lines Mapped by W.R. Dickinson, November 1971,” (a map
      prepared to accompany reference #1 above).
(3)   A.M. Johnson, W.R. Dickinson, S. Ellen and A. Lobo-Guerrero, 1970; C. Price, 1970; J.
      Rodine, 1974, “Geologic Map” and “Land Movement Potential of Undisturbed Ground
      Map” of Town of Portola Valley, California; Unpublished Maps, Town Hall, Town of
      Portola Valley, California.
(4)   California Division of Mines and Geology, “Special Studies Zones maps,” maps at scale 1”
      = 2000' for USGS Mindego Hill and Palo Alto quadrangles, Sacramento, California, 1974.
(4a)  Woodward-Clyde Consultants, “Results of Fault Study Conducted for the Town of
      Portola Valley, Portola Valley Elementary School Site,” August 9, 1976.
(4b)  Woodward-Clyde Consultants, “Results of Phase II Fault Study-Town of Portola Valley,
      Portola Valley Elementary School Site,” September 29, 1976.
(4c)  H.J. Degenkolb & Associates, “Structural Evaluation of the Portola Valley School Site,”
      June 28, 1972.
(4d)  H.J. Degenkolb & Associates, letter to Town Council, Town of Portola Valley regarding
      Portola Valley School Site, November 11, 1976.
(5)   R.D. Borcherdt, editor, Studies for Seismic Zonation of The San Francisco Bay Region,
      Geological Survey Professional Paper 941-A, 1975.
(6)   Joint Committee on Seismic Safety, Meeting the Earthquake Challenge, Sacramento,
      State of California, January, 1974.
(7)   California Division of Mines and Geology, Urban Geology Master Plan for California,
      Sacramento, State of California, 1973.
(8)   A.C. Lawson, et al., Report of the State Earthquake Investigation Commission,
      Washington, D.C., The Carnegie Institution, 1908, reprinted 1969.
                                       Safety: Appendices
                                                29

(9)  Robert D. Brown, Jr., Active Faults, Probable Active Faults, and Associated Fracture
     Zones, San Mateo County, California (Miscellaneous Field Studies Map MF-355), Basic
     Data Contribution No. 44, San Francisco Bay Region Environment and Resources Study,
     U.S. Dept. of the Interior (USGS) and the U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development,
     Menlo Park, California, 1972.
(10) R.E. Wallace, “Earthquake Recurrence Intervals on the San Andreas Fault,” Geological
     Society of America Bulletin, V.81, p.2875-2890, 1970.
(11) J.C. Cummings, “Earthquake Magnitudes, Recurrence Intervals, and Seismic Safety
     Planning, San Andreas Fault System, California: Geological Society (London)”,
     Miscellaneous Paper 3, p.3 - 22, 1974.
(12) Robert F. Wallace, Goals, Strategy, and Tasks of the Earthquake Hazard Reduction
     Program, U.S. Geological Survey Circular 701, Reston, Va., 1974.
(13) P.B. Schnabel and H.B. Seed, “Acceleration in Rock for Earthquakes in the Western
     United States,” Earthquake Engineering Research Center Report, University of
     California, Berkeley, June, 1972.
(14) H.B. Seed, et al., “Characteristics of Rock Motions During Earthquakes,” Journal of Soil
     Mechanics and Foundations, Div. ASCE, Vol. 95, pp. 1199-1218, Sept. 1969.
(15) D.R. Nichols and J.M. Buchanan-Banks, Seismic Hazards and Land-Use Planning, U.S.
     Geological Survey Circular 690, Reston, Va., 1974.
(16) National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Environmental Research
     Laboratories, A Study of Earthquake Losses in the San Francisco Bay Area, (Washington,
     D.C.), U.S. Dept. of Commerce, 1972.
(17) Earl B. Brabb and E.H. Pampeyan, Preliminary Geologic Map of San Mateo County,
     California, Basic Data Contribution No. 41, in the series “San Francisco Bay Region
     Environment and Resources Planning Study,” U.S. Dept. of the Interior (USGS), and U.S.
     Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, 1972.
(18) Earl. Brabb, Earl Pampeyan, and Manuel G. Bonilla, Landslide Susceptibility in San Mateo
     County, California, Basic Data Contribution No. 43, in the series “San Francisco Bay
     Region Environment and Resources Planning Study,” U.S. Dept. of the Interior (USGS)
     and U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, 1972.
(19) Earl Brabb and Earl Pampeyan, Preliminary Map of Landslide Deposits in San Mateo
     County, California, Basic Data Contribution No. 42, in the series “San Francisco Bay
                                      Safety: Appendices
                                               30

     Region Environment and Resources Planning Study,” U.S. Dept. of the Interior (USGS)
     and U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, 1972.
(20) U.S. Soil Conservation Service, “Type 15 Flood Insurance Study,” Portola Valley,
     California, 1971.
(21) Jones-Tillson & Associates, “Master Storm Drainage Report for the Town of Portola
     Valley,” unpublished report, Town Hall, Town of Portola Valley, Portola Valley,
     California, 1970.
(22) S.T. Limerinos, K.W. Lee, and P.E. Lugo, Flood Prone Areas in the San Francisco Bay
     Region, California, Interpretive Report No. 4, in the series “San Francisco Bay Region
     Environment and Resources Planning Study,” U.S. Dept. of the Interior (USGS) and U.S.
     Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, Menlo Park, California, 1973.
(23) Wesley C. Lindsey, Report and General Soil Map, San Mateo County, California, U.S.
     Dept. of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (Half Moon Bay), revised March 1970.
(24) W.M. Brown, III, and L.E. Jackson, Jr., Erosional and Depositional Provinces and
     Sediment Transport in the South and Central Part of the San Francisco Bay Region,
     California, Interpretive Report No. 3 in the series, “San Francisco Bay Region
     Environment and Resources Planning Study,” U.S. Dept. of the Interior (USGS) and U.S.
     Dept. of Housing and Urban Development, 1973.
(25) Division of Forestry, Resources Agency, Dept. of Conservation, State of California, A Fire
     Hazard Severity Classification System for California's Wildlands, April 1, 1973.
(26) William R. Dickinson, Reconnaissance of Active Traces of the San Andreas Fault in
     Woodside, 1973.
(27) “Town of Portola Valley Emergency Plan,” February 1975. (Adopted April 9, 1975, by
     ordinance 1975-136.)
(28) Association of Bay Area Governments, “Earthquake Hazard Map for Portola Valley,
     Scenario: Entire San Andreas Fault System,” 10/20/03. (Downloaded from the ABAG site
     on the internet on 7/15/09.)
(29) Association of Bay Area Governments, “Modeled Shaking Intensity Map for Portola
     Valley, Scenario: Loma Prieta Earthquake, 10/20/03.
(30) California Geological Survey, Seismic Hazard Zone Report for the Mindego Hill 7.5 –
     Minute Quadrangle, Santa Clara and San Mateo Counties, California, 2005, Seismic
     Hazard and Zone Report 109, and Seismic Hazard Zones, Mindego Hill Quadrangle,
     Official Map, August 11, 2005.
                                     Safety: Appendices
                                               31

(31) California Geological Survey, Seismic Hazard Zones, Palo Alto Quadrangle, Official Map,
     October 18, 2006.
(32) California Geological Survey, “Seismic Shaking Hazards in California,” “Probablistic
     Seismic Hazards Mapping Ground Motion Page.” (Downloaded from the CGS site on the
     internet on 7/15/09.)
(33) Association of Bay Area Governments, “Frequently Asked Questions About ABAG’s
     Shaking Hazard Maps.” (Downloaded from the ABAG site on the internet on 7/15/09)
(34) Cotton, Shires and Associates, Inc., “Geologic Map, Town of Portola Valley, San Mateo
     County, California, December 2008,” scale 1” = 500’.
(35) Cotton, Shires and Associates, Inc., “Ground Movement Potential Map, Town of Portola
     Valley, San Mateo County, California, December 2008,” scale 1” = 500’.
(36) William Lettis & Associates, Inc., Seismic Hazard Evaluation, Proposed Portola Valley
     Town Center, 765 Portola Road, Portola Valley, CA 94028, February 28, 2003.
(37) William Lettis & Associates, Inc., Supplemental Surface-Fault Rupture Hazard Evaluation,
     Proposed Portola Valley Town Center, 765 Portola Road, Portola Valley, CA 94028,
     January 29, 2004.
(38) California Building Code, 2007 Edition.
(39) NRCS, Soil Survey of San Mateo County, Eastern Part, and San Francisco County,
     California, 1991. (USDA Soil Conservation Service now NRCS).
(40) NRCS, Custom Soil Resource Report for San Mateo Area, California; San Mateo County,
     Eastern Part, and San Francisco County, California; and Santa Clara Area, California,
     2008.
(41) Division of Mines and Geology (now California Geological Survey), Fault-Rupture Hazard
     Zones in California, Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act with Index to Earthquake
     Fault Zone’s Maps (name changed from Special Studies Zones January 1, 1994), Special
     Publication 42, Revised 1997, Supplements 1 and 2 added in 1999.
(42) State of California, Special Studies Zones, Palo Alto Quadrangle, Official Map, Effective
     July 1, 1974, scale 1:24,000.
(43) State of California, Special Studies Zones, Mindego Hill Quadrangle, Official Map,
     Effective July 1, 1974, scale 1:24,000.
                                      Safety: Appendices
                                              32

(44) Moritz Arboricultural Consulting, Fuel Hazard Assessment Study for the Town of Portola
     Valley, October 2008. Includes an electronic version of a Fuel Hazard Map and a hard
     copy at a scale of 1” = 600’.
(45) Federal Emergency Management Agency, Preliminary Flood Insurance Study, San Mateo
     County, California and Unincorporated Areas, Volumes 1 and 2, (under cover of letter
     dated April 18, 2008) and Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Portola Valley (scale 1” = 500’).
(46) California Geological Survey, California Geological Survey – Note 48, Checklist for the
     Review of Engineering Geology and Seismology Reports for California Public Schools,
     Hospitals and Essential Services Building, October 2007.
(47) U.S. Geological Survey, The Uniform California Earthquake Rupture Forecast, Version 2,
     by 2007 Working Group on California Earthquake Probabilities, USGS Open File Report
     2007-1437, CGS Special Report 2003, SCEC Contribution #1138, Version 1.0, 2008.
(48) Blake, T.F., Chair of Implementing Committee, “Recommended Procedures for
     Implementation of DMG Special Publication 117, Guidelines for Analyzing and Mitigating
     Landslide Hazards in California,” Southern California Earthquake Center, June 2002.
(49) Martin, G.R. and M. Lew, “Recommended Procedures for Implementation of DMG
     Special Publication 117, Guidelines for Analyzing and Mitigating Liquefaction Hazards in
     California, March 1999, Southern California Earthquake Center.
                                     Safety: Appendices
                                              33

Safety Element Appendix 2:
Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale
(1956 Version, by Richter, as Reported in U.S. Geological Survey Circular 690)
I.      Not felt.
II.     Felt by persons at rest, on upper floors or favorably placed.
III.    Felt indoors. Hanging objects swing. Vibration like passing of light trucks. Duration
        estimated. May not be recognized as an earthquake.
IV.     Hanging objects swing. Vibration like passing of heavy trucks, or sensation of a jolt like a
        heavy ball striking the walls. Standing automobiles rock. Windows, dishes, doors rattle.
        Wooden walls and frame may creak.
V.      Felt outdoors; direction estimated. Sleepers awakened. Liquids disturbed, some spilled.
        Small unstable objects displaced or upset. Doors swing. Shutters, pictures move.
        Pendulum clocks stop, start, change rate.
VI.     Felt by all. Many frightened and run outdoors. Persons walk unsteadily. Windows,
        dishes, glassware broken. Knickknacks, books, etc., off shelves. Pictures off walls.
        Furniture moved or overturned. Weak plaster and masonry D* cracked.
VII.    Difficult to stand. Noticed by drivers of automobiles. Hanging objects quiver. Furniture
        broken. Weak chimneys broken at roof line. Damage to masonry D*, including cracks,
        fall of plaster, loose bricks, stones, tiles and unbraced parapets. Small slides and caving
        in along sand or gravel banks. Large bells ring.
VIII.   Steering of automobile affected. Damage to masonry C*; partial collapse. Some
        damage to masonry B*; none to masonry A*. Fall of stucco and some masonry walls.
        Twisting, fall of chimneys, factory stacks, monuments, towers, elevated tanks. Frame
        houses moved on foundations if not bolted down; loose panel walls thrown out.
        Decayed piling broken off. Branches broken from trees. Changes in flow or
        temperature of springs and wells. Cracks in wet ground and on steep slopes.
IX.     General panic. Masonry D* destroyed; masonry C* heavily damaged, sometimes with
        complete collapse; masonry B* seriously damaged. General damage to foundations.
*    Masonry A: Good workmanship and mortar, reinforced and designed to resist lateral forces.
     Masonry B: Good workmanship and mortar, reinforced.
     Masonry C: Good workmanship and mortar, unreinforced.
     Masonry D:  Poor workmanship and mortar, weak materials like adobe.
                                          Safety: Appendices
                                                    34
     Frame structures, if not bolted, shifted off foundations. Frames racked. Serious damage
     to reservoirs. Underground pipes broken. Conspicuous cracks in ground and
     liquefaction.
X.   Most masonry and frame structures destroyed with their foundations. Some well-built
     wooden structures and bridges destroyed. Serious damage to dams, dikes,
     embankments. Large landslides. Water thrown on banks of canals, rivers, lakes, etc.
     Sand and mud shifted horizontally on beaches and flat land. Rails bent slightly.
XI.  Rails bent greatly. Underground pipelines completely out of service.
XII. Damage nearly total. Large rock masses displaced. Lines of sight and level distorted.
     Objects thrown in the air.
                                     Safety: Appendices
                                              35
Safety Element Appendix 3:
Implementation of the Safety Element, Actions to Date
1.    Special building setbacks have been established along the San Andreas Fault traces in
      the town.
2.    Geology has been mapped at a scale of 1”=500' and a map titled “Ground Movement
      Potential Map” has been prepared at the same scale.
3.    Zoning regulations have been amended to reduce the amount of development possible
      on unstable lands to 10% of what might otherwise be permitted. Development must
      also be located on stable ground.
4.    A resolution has been adopted that guides the application and revisions of the geology
      and ground movement potential maps.
5.    Zoning, subdivision and site development regulations all require geologic reports in
      areas where unstable land has been identified.
6.    The town engages a town geologist to advise the town on a regular basis with respect to
      all development where geologic conditions are of a concern.
7.    The town has adopted a floodplain combining district in the zoning regulations to
      regulate development in areas of potential flooding. The town has also adopted the
      federal flood insurance rate maps.
8.    The town has had a fire hazard map prepared based on type of vegetation.
                                     Safety: Appendices
                                             36

Town of Portola Valley General Plan
 Sustainability Element
       Adopted January 28, 2009
Table of Contents
Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 1
   Existing Provisions of the General Plan that Support Sustainability .............................. 2
Goals and Objectives........................................................................................................... 5
   Overarching Goals ........................................................................................................... 5
   Specific Goals and Objectives ......................................................................................... 6
               Sustainability Element
Introduction
4400   Sustainability in the broadest sense involves managing all aspects of our
       relationship with the environment so that survival of life on the planet as we
       know it will be sustained. This involves assessment of the current status of
       the environment, analysis of trends, and management of our future to
       ensure survivability.
4401   The environment consists of air, water, land, plants and animals, each of
       which needs to be addressed when considering the sustainability of the
       earth. Gradually, countries around the world are starting to take actions to
       protect this environment. As a part of this undertaking, Portola Valley can
       influence much of its own environment and in so doing be a part of the
       much larger global effort to promote sustainability.
4402   Fortunately, the concept of protecting the natural environment is addressed
       throughout the fourteen elements of the general plan and has been a
       fundamental objective of the town since incorporation. These plan
       provisions provide a strong foundation for the sustainability element. A
       good example of the town’s philosophy is found in the first Major
       Community Goal in the general plan, which is:
4403   To preserve and enhance the natural features and open space of the
       planning area because they are unusual and valuable assets for the planning
       area, the Peninsula and the entire Bay Area.
4404   While many provisions of the general plan support sustainability of the
       town’s environment, more specific provisions are needed to address
                                  Sustainability
                                        1

            particular aspects of sustainability. The many relevant provisions in the plan
            are summarized below to provide a context for the sustainability element.
Existing Provisions of the General Plan that Support Sustainability
4405        General Policy Section (Section 1010 et seq)
            This section addresses natural features, open space, development within
            natural physical constraints, a quiet environment, public trails and paths,
            protection from natural and human-created hazards, conservation of water
            and energy, use of renewable resources, protection of native vegetation and
            natural habitats, provision of civic and recreation facilities, provision for
            locally needed goods and services, protection of the heritage of the town
            and control of development so as to be subservient to the natural
            environment.
4406        Land Use Element (Section 2000 et seq)
            The land use element provides for the grouping of community and
            commercial activities in central locations and along major routes of travel.
            This design in turn results in convenience for residents and can result in
            reducing trip generation, air pollution and consumption of energy.
4407        Open Space Element (Section 2200 et seq)
            The open space element calls for the preservation of major parts of the
            town in a natural state. This contributes to a reduction in air pollution
            through the carbon absorption of plants, and to a healthy environment for
            residents by providing natural views, recreational opportunities, a sense of
            quiet, and clear night skies. Further, protection of open space preserves the
            habitat of animals and plant species.
4408        Recreation Element (Section 2300 et seq)
            The recreation element provides ample opportunities for active and passive
            recreation in the town thus reducing the need to travel out-of-town for
            these resources with a consequent reduction of trips by cars, reduction of
            air pollution and conservation of energy. These recreation resources also
            contribute to the physical and mental health of residents.
4409        Housing Element (Section 2400 et seq)
                                       Sustainability
                                              2
     The housing element seeks to provide affordable housing. To the extent
     that this housing is for persons employed locally, related policies lead to a
     reduction of traffic and consequent air pollution.
4410 Historic Element (Section 2500 et seq)
     The historic element is intended to help preserve the rich history of the
     town. This can lead to a population that appreciates the local history. A
     population that appreciates its historical environment is more likely to
     support measures that lead to protection of the environment including its
     sustainability.
4411 Circulation Element (Section 3100 et seq)
     The street system is designed to provide efficient access to the most
     frequently visited locations in the town. It also provides for a wide range of
     types of transportation: motor vehicles, bikes, horses and pedestrians. The
     design of the circulation system and provision for multiple forms of
     transportation results in savings in energy consumption and reduction of
     local air pollution.
4412 Trails and Paths Element (Section 3200 et seq)
     The trails and paths element provides a comprehensive system of hiking
     trails, equestrian/hiking trails, pedestrian paths, bicycle paths, multiple use
     corridors, bicycle routes and bicycle lanes. The system provides facilities
     that access major destinations including schools, and civic and commercial
     areas. The multi-modal system helps reduce reliance on motor vehicles. The
     system provides for recreation and accordingly for the pleasure and health
     of residents.
4413 Scenic Roads and Highways Element (Section 3300 et seq)
     The scenic roads and highways element is intended to help retain the
     natural qualities of the nearby roadsides. The element addresses Skyline
     Blvd, Highway 280, Portola Road and Alpine Road. These roads and
     roadsides are a feature that residents value and to some extent contribute
     to residents spending more time in the town.
4414 Safety Element (Section 4100 et seq)
     The safety element addresses the major threats to the environment from
     geologic hazards, fire and flooding. The element therefore leads to a
                                 Sustainability
                                        3
     decrease in these hazards with the resultant retention of natural features
     that contribute to sustainability.
4415 Conservation Element (Section 4200 et seq)
     The conservation element provides for the conservation of the natural
     resources of the town including: water in the form of creeks, ponds, ground
     water and imported water; native vegetation; soils and geology; and
     wildlife. Accordingly, this element provides for the most comprehensive
     review, of all general plan elements, of development in the town with
     respect to the natural environment. The element stipulates that new
     development will be carried out in a manner that will help ensure
     conservation goals are met. The element provides a programmatic
     approach for the conservation, restoration, development and utilization of
     natural resources.
4416 Noise Element (Section 4300 et seq)
     The noise element provides for maintaining an acoustical environment that
     is consistent with a rural and largely natural setting. Control of noise
     contributes to health, well-being and the desire of residents to stay in the
     town because of the quietude rather than seeking this quality in trips to
     distant places.
4417 Nathhorst Triangle Plan (Section 6100 et seq)
     The Nathhorst Triangle plan provides for the grouping of the major
     commercial and business establishments in the town in central locations
     readily accessible to residents. The grouping of businesses reduces trips by
     residents when they combine shopping with other business activities.
4418 Alpine Scenic Corridor Plan (Section 6200 et seq)
     The Alpine Scenic Corridor plan has as its objective the protection of the rich
     natural environment along Alpine Road, and Los Trancos and Corte Madera
     creeks. Attractive paths are a part of the plan. The plan emphasizes the
     town’s priority of ensuring structures are subservient to the native
     environment.
4419 Town Center Area Plan (Section 6300 et seq)
     The town center area plan seeks to combine civic functions along with
     commercial and office uses and several churches. The grouping of these
                                 Sustainability
                                       4

          facilities contributes to residents being able to accomplish several missions
          on a single trip and thereby reduce automobile traffic. A full range of trail
          and path facilities also serves this area. The town center helps instill a sense
          of pride in the community and its values which in turn can help lead to
          community consensus on sustainability programs.
Goals and Objectives
4420      A major goal of the community is to ensure the sustainability of our
          environment. The provisions of this element, in addition to the above-
          referenced provisions in other parts of the general plan, are intended to
          help the community realize this goal. The element includes broad goals and
          objectives. In addition, Sustainability Element Appendix 1 lists “Illustrative
          Policies and Practices” that the town could consider in furthering the goals
          and objectives of the element.
4421      Following are the goals and objectives. The goals address: reduction of
          greenhouse gas emissions in the air, green building for new and existing
          structures, protection of water resources, protection of the natural
          environment, and community education and involvement. Each of the
          categories involves activities that can increase sustainability. The major
          goals are not mutually exclusive since sustainability is affected by many
          activities that occur in the town.
Overarching Goals
          1.      To encourage and provide community education about sustainable
                  principles and applications.
          2.      To encourage the use of renewable resources and minimize the use
                  of nonrenewable resources.
          3.      To strive for an optimum balance among the activities of residents,
                  the built environment and the natural environment so as to maintain
                  and improve the condition of life for future generations.
          4.      To encourage and provide for enhanced resource efficiency and the
                  use of sustainable materials in all building projects.
          5.      To employ the principles of “green” building.
          6.      To reduce carbon emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2020 and to
                  80% below 1990 levels by the year 2050.
                                      Sustainability
                                            5

            7.     To consider impacts on sustainability in all town decision-making.
Specific Goals and Objectives
4422        Goal: Community Education and Involvement - Encourage broad community
            participation in programs to promote sustainability and provide the
            information people need to live in a sustainable way.
            Objectives
            1.     To inform the community about sustainability and measures they can
                   take to make sustainable choices and further sustainable goals.
            2.     To encourage education about sustainability in local schools.
            3.     To provide models of sustainability in town buildings and practices for
                   purposes of education and demonstration.
            4.     To link interested residents with sustainable products and practices
                   such as energy efficient products, water conservation measures, and
                   waste reduction practices such as composting so that people have the
                   tools they need to implement sustainable lifestyles.
            5.     To involve the community in shaping sustainability policies and in
                   determining which measures are essential, which are desirable, and
                   which are possible to further sustainability within our town.
4423        Goal: Existing Building Stock – Encourage the use of energy efficient features
            and practices and the use of “green” building design standards in
            remodeling projects.
            Objectives
            1.     To encourage residents to undertake energy audits of their homes.
            2.     To encourage an increase in energy efficiency of existing homes when
                   they are remodeled.
            3.     To encourage reuse and recycling of materials when buildings are
                   deconstructed or torn down.
            4.     To encourage property owners to make existing buildings more
                   energy efficient.
                                       Sustainability
                                             6

4424 Goal: New Buildings - Encourage, and where feasible, require new buildings
     to adhere to “green” building design standards.
     Objectives
     1.     To require all new buildings to achieve a minimum level of
            sustainability based on an accepted “green” rating system.
            The above objective addresses many topics including: use of passive
            and active solar energy as well as geothermal energy in the siting,
            design and construction of buildings; conservation of water through
            the use of drought-tolerant plant materials and recycling; reduced
            use of non-renewable resources in design and construction of
            buildings.
     2.     To balance in development projects the objectives of sustainability
            and conservation of resources with the objectives of the applicant in
            terms of the extent and design of site improvements.
4425 Goal: Transportation – Provide for transportation needs by methods that
     reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
     Objectives
     1.     To cluster community-serving land uses in centralized locations well
            served by transportation facilities in order to help minimize the
            number and length of vehicular trips.
      2.    To encourage means of transportation that do not rely on non-
            renewable sources of energy (for example, biking and walking) and to
            reduce the amount of vehicular traffic in town that relies on non-
            renewable sources of energy.
     3.     To reduce motor vehicle trips in the town.
     4.     To encourage and enable use of energy efficient low or zero emission
            vehicles and /or those powered by non-petroleum based alternative
            fuels.
4426 Goal: Water Resources - Protect and conserve water resources in the town
     including imported water.
                                Sustainability
                                      7

     Objectives
     1.     To protect the watershed from pollution, debris, excess sediment and
            invasive plants.
     2.     To reduce consumption of water through conservation and more
            efficient appliances and fixtures.
     3.     To use drought resistant native plants in developments.
     4.     To maximize the collection and recycling of natural-sourced and
            public water.
     5.     To protect and preserve ground water resources and aquifer recharge
            areas.
4427 Goal: Living Environment - Protect the natural environments for plants,
     animals and humans.
     Objectives
     1.     To protect the interdependent plants and animals that together
            comprise a balanced ecosystem in our forests, grasslands, chaparral
            areas, and creek systems.
     2.     To protect extensive areas of native vegetation that support wildlife.
     3.     To protect forests and forms of vegetation that help contribute to air
            quality by absorbing carbon dioxide.
     4.     To protect the creek systems in the town.
     5.     To promote rehabilitation of ecosystems.
     6.     To control, reduce and eliminate invasive species.
                                Sustainability
                                      8
Sustainability Element Appendix 1:
Sample Policies and Practices
This appendix contains a list of policies and practices that represent possible ways to
achieve the Goals and Objectives in the sustainability element. Prior to implementation,
each would need to be discussed by the town. The list is not meant to be all-inclusive,
for additional policies and procedures may be suggested.
Goal: Community Education and Involvement
Illustrative Policies and Practices
             Town Staff:
             1.     Coordinate the sustainability program of the town and develop an
                    information source for use by all residents and public and private
                    institutions in the town.
             2.     Develop a procedure to ensure all projects that come before the town
                    are reviewed with respect to sustainability and make
                    recommendations to help achieve sustainability objectives.
             3.     Develop ways that in the normal performance of duties staff can help
                    ensure sustainability.
             4.     Provide technical assistance regarding sustainability.
             5.     Prepare an annual report on the status of the sustainability programs
                    in the town and provide it to residents and elected officials.
             6.     Continue to research and to inform residents about new sustainability
                    ideas applicable to the town.
             Incorporated Town:
             1.     Maintain a sustainability and resource efficiency coordinator.
             2.     Maintain a policy that encourages sustainability of all town buildings
                    and facilities.
             3.     Maintain a procurement policy that encourages sustainability.
             4.     Participate in appropriate waste conversion programs.
                                    Sustainability: Appendix
                                                9
5.   Support climate-friendly products and services.
6.   Develop information for assistance to residents for energy audits and
     in determining the cost/benefit of capital outlays for sustainable
     practices.
7.   Be alert to technical changes such as fuel cells and new solar panel
     designs and consider ways to take advantage of these changes.
8.   Limit wood burning fireplaces, outdoor fire rings and burning of
     agricultural waste.
9.   Add a section addressing sustainability to regularly distributed town
     publications such as the Newsletter as well as the town web site.
10.  Encourage residents and businesses to go off the electric power grid
     when feasible.
11.  Consider the relative advantages and disadvantages of harnessing
     wind power.
Town Outreach:
1.   Use the new town center, including the library, as a display source for
     information on sustainability.
2.   Use the town web site as a place for residents to convey information
     on sustainability to the town and other residents.
3.   Assist in organizing group purchasing of sustainable products or
     energy efficient home improvements.
4.   Establish cooperative networks in the town for energy conservation.
5.   Encourage and work with residents to develop alternate forms of
     energy.
6.   Announce and coordinate “green home” tours of houses in Portola
     Valley for residents.
7.   Organize and implement community events focused on sustainability.
                    Sustainability: Appendix
                               10

Resident Actions:
1.    Encourage the use of energy efficient appliances.
2.    Encourage adoption of energy saving measures including but not
      limited to the use of energy efficient lighting, solar panels and energy
      efficient vehicles.
3.    Encourage the community to turn off unused electrical devices and
      when replacing such devices to acquire those that are energy efficient
      and, for example, do not consume energy when in a “standby” mode.
4.    Encourage residents to institute energy use accounts and provide
      instructions on how to do this.
5.    Encourage waste reduction through composting, recycling and when
      shopping to bring your own bag and choose products with reduced
      packaging.
6.    Encourage community members to develop individual sustainability
      action plans.
7.    Encourage the considerate and discreet drying of clothes out-of-
      doors.
8.    Encourage residents to operate their cars efficiently (keep tires
      inflated, keep engine tuned, minimize idling of engines).
9.    Consider colors for aesthetics vs. colors and materials for energy
      conservation.
10.   Encourage water conservation through drought resistant native
      plants, efficient irrigation systems and rainwater collection.
11.   Encourage residents to retrofit homes with low-flow toilets and
      showerheads.
Resident Group Actions:
1.    In residential developments, where homes have great similarities,
      consider a coordinated effort to develop green building ideas that can
      apply to multiple residences.
                     Sustainability: Appendix
                                 11

             2.    Encourage local production of food in “kitchen gardens” and
                   community gardens.
Goal: Existing Building Stock
Illustrative Policies and Practices
             1.    Establish a display at town center that provides information on
                   products, materials and services that can be used in retrofitting
                   existing homes.
             2.    Encourage persons to consider making their homes more energy
                   efficient and to employ cost-benefit analyses to assist in making
                   decisions.
             3.    Encourage residents who have remodeled their homes to make them
                   more energy efficient to make their homes available at times for the
                   education of other residents, or to provide data on their homes that
                   can be posted on or linked by the town web site.
             4.    Encourage residents to consider remodeling instead of tearing down
                   a home in order to replace it with a new building. A cost-benefit
                   analysis may be helpful in deciding between a complete teardown
                   and a remodel.
             5.    Encourage persons considering tearing down their homes for
                   replacement to reutilize building materials in the house.
             6.    Work with local utilities to take advantage of programs that assist in
                   conserving water and/or energy.
Goal: New Buildings
Illustrative Policies and Practices
             1.    Establish baseline data on greenhouse gas emissions and energy use
                   related to buildings and periodically update with feedback into the
                   green building program.
             2.    Study recent home construction trends to show the correlation
                   between the extent of site improvements, greenhouse gas emissions
                   and the consumption of non-renewable resources.
                                  Sustainability: Appendix
                                              12

             3.    Evaluate aspects of construction projects other than buildings such as
                   grading, landscaping and other outside improvements to help
                   implement the conservation of non-renewable resources including
                   but not limited to water and asphalt.
             4.    Encourage those building new homes to analyze how much time they
                   will likely spend in each room and potential multiple uses of rooms in
                   deciding how much house they really need to build.
             5.    Work with local utilities to take advantage of programs that assist in
                   conserving water and/or energy.
Goal: Transportation
Illustrative Policies and Practices
             1.    Establish baseline data on greenhouse gas emissions and energy use
                   related to motor vehicles and periodically update with feedback to
                   monitor reduction of energy usage.
             2.    Analyze the feasibility of establishing a school-busing program or
                   other local transportation program in order to significantly reduce the
                   amount of in-town vehicular traffic and resulting greenhouse gas
                   emissions. Involve the school district and parents in this program.
                   Consider joining with other jurisdictions in such a program.
             3.    Consider possible linkages between existing bus services, such as the
                   services of The Sequoias, the Priory, Stanford’s Marguerite service
                   and others.
             4.    Encourage and facilitate the use of the Internet for telecommuting to
                   help reduce the need to travel.
             5.    Undertake a study of the trails, paths and bike lanes in town with the
                   objective of increasing use by providing all-weather routes for
                   children going to school as well as for the convenience and pleasure
                   of other residents.
             6.    Consider ways to develop a ride-sharing program and shuttle system
                   for residents for a variety of types of trips, particularly for older
                   residents.
                                  Sustainability: Appendix
                                              13

             7.    Consider encouraging or requiring contractors to consolidate trips by
                   employees, trips for the delivery of materials, and trips for the
                   removal of waste and recycling.
             8     Be alert to innovation in electric vehicles and other alternative fuel
                   vehicles and consider a program to encourage their use. As a part of
                   this consider any needed changes with respect to road design and
                   safety such as speed limits and signage.
             9.    When appropriate, consider establishing an electrical charging station
                   for vehicles at town center and encouraging stations in homes as
                   electric vehicles become increasingly available.
             10.   Provide for the conversion of town operated vehicles and equipment
                   to vehicles relying on renewable energy.
             11.   Consider whether it would be advisable to encourage the
                   establishment of sources of alternative fuels and electric stations for
                   charging cars in town.
             12.   Consider cooperative programs with SamTrans, Caltrans and the
                   Transportation Committee of Silicon Valley to improve bus service
                   and/or create shuttle service.
Goal: Water Resources
Illustrative Policies and Practices
             1.    Consider measures to prevent the pollution of all sources of water.
             2.    Encourage the collection of rainwater for reuse.
             3.    Encourage the recycling of water when feasible.
             4.    Limit the scope of new impervious surfaces and encourage reduction
                   of existing impervious surfaces for all new developments in order to
                   reduce runoff.
             5.    Study the relative merits of on-site and off-site sewage disposal
                   systems including consideration of soils and density of development.
                   Determine which systems on balance better assist in sustainability in
                   different environments.
                                  Sustainability: Appendix
                                             14
             6.    In order to protect the aquifer, survey, in concert with San Mateo
                   County, current well use in the town and provide for continuing
                   monitoring.
Goal: Living Environment
Illustrative Policies and Practices
             1.    Support local programs to encourage the protection of the natural
                   environment by purchasing open space and conservation easements.
             2.    Enforce creek setback regulations.
             3.    Adopt provisions to discourage the pollution of creeks.
             4.    Administer regulations so as to limit the potential for erosion and
                   sedimentation.
             5.    Establish a fire safety mapping and fuel reduction program that will
                   help sustain a healthy and safe natural environment.
             6.    Investigate policies concerning preservation of trees vs. solar access.
             7.    To conserve water, replace lawns with draught tolerant plants,
                   update irrigation systems and hydro-zone planting areas.
                                  Sustainability: Appendix
                                             15
Town of Portola Valley General Plan
Trails and Paths Element
     Last amended January 8, 2003
Table of Contents
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
   Definitions ................................................................................................................................... 3
Objectives ....................................................................................................................................... 4
Principles ......................................................................................................................................... 5
Standards ........................................................................................................................................ 9
Description ...................................................................................................................................... 9
   Hiking Trails ............................................................................................................................... 10
   Equestrian/Hiking Trails ............................................................................................................ 10
   Multiuse Corridors .................................................................................................................... 10
   Pedestrian Paths, Bicycle Paths, Bicycle Routes and Bicycle Lanes.......................................... 11
Plan Diagrams ............................................................................................................................... 11
               Trails and Paths Element
Introduction
3200   Many activities may be provided for by a network of trails and paths in the planning
       area. Children reach schools, shops and after-school play areas by bicycle and on
       foot, and they walk to bus stops. Strollers take short neighborhood walks,
       especially when the way is safe and pleasant. Horseback riders, hikers and runners
       take longer recreational trips and seek out the more remote areas. An occasional
       organized group sets off for out-of-town destinations. The hiker escapes to the
       most undeveloped and rugged places as do children. A nearby coach sends a track
       team to Skyline for training. Bicycle enthusiasts and runners from nearby and
       within the town travel along flat shoulders and paths for health and sport. Some
       Portola Valley residents bicycle to work. Increasingly, riders of mountain bikes seek
       dirt trails for travel to local destinations as well as for strenuous exercise in steep
       terrain. A school class walks to a select site for a nature lesson. A rider or a hiker
       stops at a scenic spot, a destination that has spurred the person on, to rest. People
       who pass one another at a leisurely pace, stop and chat. And those who use and
       appreciate the open spaces of the town should take on a protective attitude and
       seek to protect these areas against all manner of destructionfrom fire to
       inappropriate development or use.
3200a  The trails and paths element serves as a general guide for the development of a
       comprehensive system of trails and paths for the town. Standards for the
       construction fo trails and paths are found in the “Trail and Path Construction &
       Maintenance Standards” adopted by the Town Council. Limitations on the use of
       trails and paths are found in the “Portola Valley Trail Usage” matrix adopted by the
       Town Council.
3201   The trails and paths element includes objectives, principles, and standards; a
       description; and plan diagrams. The trails and paths element provides a guide to
                                        Trails and Paths
                                                1

       establishing a free and unimpeded network that will allow and promote trail and
       path use.
3202   The gradual development of the trail and path system will be accomplished through
       the subdivision process, through the application of regulations included in the
       town's subdivision ordinance at the time land is subdivided, through public
       programs of acquisition and development, and through cooperative private efforts.
3203   The trails and paths shown on the trails and paths plan diagrams (located in a
       pocket at the end of this general plan) include those presently developed and those
       proposed on public rights-of-way or easements, together with new trails in
       locations where no right-of-way or easement exists at present. Some trail and path
       routes are indicated as being on or adjacent to public streets or easements or
       following property lines, and such locations are intended to be controlling. Where
       proposed trails or paths traverse unsubdivided lands, routes are intended to
       indicate general location and could be secured even with considerable variation in
       location and alignment.
3204   Upon adoption of this plan, no trail or path shall be opened or developed on an
       existing trail or path easement, except in the normal subdivision process or
       conditional use permit process, without first: 1) determining if the proposal is in
       conformity with the general plan, and 2) holding a public hearing after giving notice
       to the owners of land abutting on such proposed trail, or path, or easement. Town
       council action on such matters will be taken only after giving due consideration to
       the facts and opinions presented at the public hearing.
3204 a Trail and path easements shall not be established on developed properties without
       the property owners' consent except in association with an application for a
       conditional use permit or a subdivision.
3204 b Development of trails and paths should be in accordance with the construction
       standards and inspection procedures previously adopted by the town. The town
       should give consideration to formulating maintenance standards and rules for trail
       and path users to provide additional guidance to the maintenance and use of the
       trails and paths system. Plantings in the public right of way shall not interfere with
       existing or planned public rails, paths or streets and shall be selected from the
       Town’s Native Plant List.
3204 c It is recognized that from time to time trails and paths not shown on the trails and
       paths element diagram will be appropriate as a part of a subdivision or conditional
       use permit approval process in order to meet the needs of persons traveling by
       foot, horse or bike within the town in locations that are safe. These trails will
       normally be expected to provide connections to the trail system shown on the trails
                                     Trails and Paths
                                             2

          and paths element plan diagram. Any such trail or path shall be in keeping with the
          objectives, goals and principles of this element.
3204 d    In the event the town desires to develop a trail within an existing public road right
          of way, the town council shall, after having received a recommendation from the
          trails committee, hold a public hearing before designating the trail for
          development.
3205      The trails and paths element proposes a comprehensive system of trails and paths.
          This system provides for horseback riding, hiking for pleasure, walking to schools
          and other community facilities, and bicycling for pleasure as well as to and from
          local destinations. The more major trails and paths also provide for travel through
          the planning area, and for residents to travel from the town to nearby destinations.
          The character and quality of the trail and path system is intended to have high
          scenic value throughout because of the low density rural character of the
          community and the town's dedication to furthering the concept of Portola Valley as
          an open space preserve in the Midpeninsula.
3206      A portion of the trail system lies within the boundaries of land owned by the
          Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District. The trails are designed, built and
          maintained by the district. Nontheless, the district consults with the town as it
          develops its trail system. The plan diagram shows some trails the town has added
          as suggestions to the district.
3207      An extensive trail system is shown on the Stanford lands in the town’s sphere of
          influence but within Santa Clara County. The diagram shows the major components
          of a suggested trail system, most of which is in existence. Should this area be
          further developed, appropriate modifications and additions to the system should
          be made. For instance, a recreational trail would be desirable around Felt Lake. It
          is recognized, however, that the land is privately owned and controlled and public
          use is dependent on the permission of Stanford University.
Definitions
3208      1.      Hiking Trail – A way suitable for hiking not generally used by horses.
                  Generally unsurfaced.
          2.      Equestrian/Hiking Trail – A way suitable for horseback riding also used by
                  hikers. Generally unsurfaced. Equestrian/hiking trails or segments may be
                  used for off-road bicycles upon determination of the town council.
          3.      Pedestrian Path – A way suitable for pedestrians and minor bicycling. Has an
                  all-weather surface. Not open to horses.
                                        Trails and Paths
                                                3

       4.  Bicycle Path – A way suitable for bicycling and for pedestrians. Has an all-
           weather surface. Not open to horses.
       5.  Multiuse Corridor – A major link within the trails and paths system within
           which is located a facility(ies) suitable for horseback riding, hiking, bicycling,
           pedestrians and similar users. At a minimum, the corridor shall include an
           all-weather surface suitable for bicycling, pedestrians and similar users.
       6.  Bicycle Route – A street where special attention is given to providing safety
           for bicyclists.
       7.  Bicycle Lane – A paved border of a road separated by a stripe or other means
           from the motor vehicle lanes. For use by bicycles with auto parking
           prohibited except for emergencies.
       8.  Through Trail or Path – A facility passing through Portola Valley, but which
           can also be used by residents for shorter trips within the town.
       9.  Local Trail or Path – A facility for trips within Portola Valley or affording
           connections to through trails or paths.
       10. Trailside Preserves – Small areas generally near or on trails or paths
           accessible to users where unique, attractive, or valuable views, groves, or
           other natural features may be enjoyed or conserved.
Objectives
3209   1.  To provide a system of trails, paths and bicycle routes and lanes to:
           a.    provide recreation, particularly scenic, quiet, leisurely neighborhood
                 walks and rides;
           b.    furnish easy access to trails from individual properties;
           c.    permit safe, pleasant travel between parts of the community;
           d.    connect local areas within the town to through trails and paths within
                 and adjoining the town;
           e.    create opportunities for nature and conservation education;
           f.    provide for solitary activities such as meditation and contemplation;
                                  Trails and Paths
                                           4

           g.    recognize the wide range of users including hikers, equestrians, road
                 and mountain bikers, in-line skaters, those in wheelchairs and those
                 using other suitable non-motorized vehicles;
           h.    provide safe and convenient facilities for use by children in reaching
                 local schools, the library and playing fields; and
           i.    ensure that such facilities are designed and used so as to avoid habitat
                 degradation.
       2.  To create a tradition of access to and use of open space so that citizens will
           not willingly relinquish these rights under the pressure of urbanization.
           Access to and use of open space should be circumscribed to the extent
           necessary to prevent undue interference with use and enjoyment of private
           property.
Principles
3210   1.  General
           a.    Whenever possible, trails and paths should be separated from auto
                 parking areas and roads, particularly those carrying heavy traffic.
           b.    Plantings in public trail easements or public road rights of way shall be
                 of native plants and trees and shall not interfere with the use of the
                 easements for public purposes such as equestrians, hikers, pedestrians,
                 bicyclists and runners.
           c.    When the town determines that an existing public trail easement or a
                 public road right of way is to be used for public purposes such as
                 equestrians, hikers, pedestrians, bicyclists and runners, such use(s) shall
                 take precedence over private plantings and improvements in said
                 easement or right of way.
           d.    Whenever possible, trails and paths should follow creeks and canyons,
                 scenic ridges, and other routes of natural beauty and avoid developed
                 properties.
           e.    The system should provide a variety of local recreational loop trips
                 convenient to residents.
            f.   High usage may require separate alignment of facilities, but where use
                 is moderate and other conditions allow, facilities may be combined.
                                  Trails and Paths
                                           5
g. Routing, construction and use of trails and paths should be done with
   great care so that they:
   1)      are designed to adapt to the existing conditions to the extent
           possible while still adhering to the intent, if not the detail, of
           engineering standards;
   2)      disturb the natural conditions of terrain and vegetation as little as
           possible;
   3)      provide a variety of experiences for users;
   4)      provide convenient, safe passage;
   5)      minimize intrusion on privacy in residential areas;
   6)      encourage use without incurring excessive maintenance costs.
h. The number of road crossings, particularly along thoroughfares, should
   be at a minimum, and where necessary, crossings should be located,
   designed and marked to provide maximum safety.
i. The junctions of trails and paths with roads should be limited in number
   and designed and located to minimize over use by people arriving in
   motor vehicles.
j. Through trails, paths and bicycle routes should connect to those in
   adjoining jurisdictions, and within the town special care should be
   taken to minimize intrusion into residential areas.
k. Through routes should be marked so that they can be easily followed
   and so that deviation onto local trails will be minimal. Markers should
   be unobtrusive.
l. Fences, warning signs and gates to discourage wandering off trails and
   paths onto nearby properties should be used only where absolutely
   necessary. The emphasis should be put instead on routing trails and
   paths to avoid such problems with reliance on vegetation barriers and
   well-built, well-maintained and well-marked facilities to keep users on
   trails.
m. The trails and paths of the town are not to be used by motor vehicles.
   Design should discourage or prevent such use where feasible even if it
   creates some inconvenience to legitimate users.
                     Trails and Paths
                              6
   n.   Stopping places should be provided at scenic spots (trailside preserves)
        that can easily be reached on foot.
   o.   Trails and paths should skirt rather than traverse grasslands to avoid
        scarring and creating erosion problems.
   p.   Trails shall be designed and constructed so as to minimize changes in
        the natural flow of water across the land.
   q.   Residents are encouraged to assist in maintaining trails
   r.   In locating and designing trail heads, attention should be given to
        minimizing the need for automobile access. Where such access is
        necessary, the location and design should minimize the impact of traffic
        and parking on nearby residences.
   s.   Dogs, when permitted by town council policy on public trails, shall be
        on leashes.
   t.   In general, the trail and path system has been designed and should be
        developed so as to minimize the use of non-permeable surfaces.
   u.   Controls on the use of trails that may be established by town council
        policy should seek to prevent undue interference with use and
        enjoyment by users of the trails.
   v.   Where culs-de-sac are served by trails or paths, the ends of the culs-de-
        sac should be connected by the same type of facility when feasible.
2. Hiking Trails
   a.   Because hiking trails and equestrian trails may require different grades
        and alignments, separate hiking and equestrian trails, especially in
        steep, unstable terrain, may be warranted.
   b.   Part of the hiking trail system should be constructed so as to provide
        for short, easy neighborhood strolling.
3. Equestrian/Hiking Trails
   a.   Equestrian/hiking trails should be routed to serve community stables
        and residential areas where horsekeeping on lots is permitted.
   b.   Trail design should be such that horses are encouraged to remain on or
        near trails in developed parts of parks, shopping areas, school yards,
        and other such places where they could interfere with pedestrians and
                         Trails and Paths
                                  7
        other users. Hitching racks should be provided at the limits of such
        areas to discourage passage through the areas.
   c.   Where equestrian/hiking trails cross driveways, non-slip surfaces shall
        be required.
   d.   Bicycles should only be allowed on equestrian/hiking trails where
        width, grade and sight distance provide sufficient safety and the town
        council, after considering concerns of habitat and erosion, has
        designated by policy that the specific segment of trail may be used by
        bicycles.
   e.   In the vicinity of schools, where children typically ride bikes to school,
        segments of trails should be studied with the objective of allowing
        bicycle use. The town council may make this decision. Such segments
        may have a suitable all-weather surface applied.
4. Multiuse Corridors
   a.   Because corridors are intended to serve a wide variety of users, care
        must be taken in the design of facilities to recognize the special needs
        of each user group.
   b.   The exact location and design of the facilitiy(ies) in the corridor should
        be tailored to respect conditions of the natural setting, including slopes,
        trees and drainages.
5. Pedestrian Paths, Bicycle Paths, Bicycle Routes, and Bicycle Lanes
   a.   In the less precipitous parts of the town, multiuse corridors, pedestrian
        paths and bicycle paths, routes and lanes should provide convenient
        and safe access to community facilities, particularly to schools.
   b.   Pedestrian paths should be provided where needed along busy streets
        to serve school bus stops.
   c.   The pavement of short culs-de-sac may be used in lieu of paths and
        bicycle lanes if they provide safe bicycling and walking, but
        equestrian/hiking trails should not be on the pavement.
   d.   Bicycle routes should be provided within town limits on the paved
        shoulders of most, if not all, arterials where high speed bicycling is
        anticipated, and provided elsewhere as necessary for more local use,
        especially to serve children going to school. Outside the town limits,
        bicycle lanes and bicycle routes should be provided.
                          Trails and Paths
                                  8
              e.     Bicycle routes, to the extent possible, should have striped shoulders to
                     indicate the area preferred for bicycle use and receive scheduled
                     maintenance.
Standards
3211   1.     Safe facilities should provide access for children to schools within at least the
              following distances from schools as measured by the shortest traveled route:
                                                Pedestrian Facility        Bicycle Facility
               Kindergarten - Grade 3                3/4 mile                  1-1/4 miles
               Grades 4 to 8                          1 mile                     2 miles
Description
3212   The facilities intended to meet the needs of hikers, pedestrians, equestrians and
       bicyclists are shown on the trails and paths plan diagram. This diagram shows a
       system of through trails for the entire planning area and a system of local trails and
       paths in the valley floor developed portion. In the large undeveloped hillside part
       of the town, it is recommended that as development plans are prepared the routes
       shown should be refined and a more extensive local trail and path system
       developed. Street shoulders should be indicated as potential trails in lieu of a
       comprehensive sidewalk system.
3213   The connections of through trails to bordering jurisdictions are indicated. Hikers,
       pedestrians and equestrians from outside the town are expected to be relatively
       few – largely residents from near the town limits. Bicyclists, because they can
       travel further and faster than walkers and riders, are expected to be the principal
       visitors. To discourage use of local trails by motorists leaving their cars, no auto
       parking facilities should be provided adjacent to any trail, except as may be
       required to serve a local facility or as may be necessary to permit reasonable use
       and enjoyment of lands of the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District.
3214   The diagram does not indicate through routes as distinct from the local routes, nor
       does it distinguish what can be called main routes. Main routes would include the
       through trails and paths and most heavily used and essential parts of the local
       routes, and would be the routes most clearly a public responsibility. The
       designation of the main routes and a study of maintenance cost for them is needed.
3215   While the trails and paths element plan diagram shows a system of trails and paths
       in the town, as proposed subdivisions or conditional use permits are reviewed by
                                      Trails and Paths
                                              9

          the town it may be appropriate to add trails and paths to provide safety for
          pedestrians, equestrians and bicyclists. Such additions are consistent with the trails
          and paths element as long as they meet the objectives, principles and standards of
          this element and are approved pursuant to public hearings for which affected
          property owners have been given notice.
Hiking Trails
3216      Equestrian/hiking trails will be used by hikers in all parts of the town but the hiking
          trails are limited to several areas where environments are particularly conducive to
          hiking and where hikers can generally find a “hiking only” experience.
Equestrian/Hiking Trails
3217      An extensive system of equestrian/hiking trails exists in the developed part of the
          town. It is primarily a roadside system on the road rights-of-way and adjacent
          private easements. The plan proposes only minor changes and additions to these
          existing trails to improve hazardous situations and secure the few opportunities
          that remain for good off-road riding and hiking in natural surroundings. In
          Westridge, all trails except in Unit #10 (Escobar Road area) are private and are not
          maintained by the Town.
3218      Some of the best equestrian and hiking opportunities in the eastern portion of the
          town are outside the town limits but largely within the planning area – along the
          floor of Portola Valley to Searsville Lake, along San Francisquito Creek to Los
          Trancos Creek, and along Los Trancos Creek. Further development of a permanent
          riding system in these valley-bottom areas will be dependent upon cooperation
          with other jurisdictions and the major property owner, Stanford University. The
          integrity of Jasper Ridge and the Searsville Lake marsh needs to be protected in
          order to preserve these areas for research and wildlife; therefore, no trails or paths
          should penetrate these areas.
3219      In the western undeveloped part of the town, two major traversing
          equestrian/hiking trails are proposed. The upper trail would be an integral part of
          Skyline Scenic Corridor. A mid-level trail is proposed, but the final location will be
          dependent on future negotiations with land owners. Also, connections from the
          valley floor to the Skyline are proposed.
Multiuse Corridors
3220      These facilities are intended for a wide variety of users and have been likened by
          some to a “country lane.” With this design, separate facilities are not needed for
          different types of users. A major route is proposed along Portola Road from Alpine
          Road to the crosswalk opposite Wyndham Way. In addition to other users, this
          connection would serve as a principal source of equestrian traffic since it is directly
                                         Trails and Paths
                                                 10

          accessible to the Springdown Farm Boarding Stable and close to the intersection of
          Westridge Drive with a trail connection serving Westridge. A second route is
          proposed at the base of the western hills starting north of the town center and
          extending south to Alpine Road. This second route is intended to provide an all-
          weather level route for use by residents to enjoy open spaces and bypass the more
          heavily travelled facilities along Portola Road. A third route is along Arastradero
          Road.
Pedestrian Paths, Bicycle Paths, Bicycle Routes and Bicycle Lanes
3221      The pedestrian path system is limited in extent. It provides permanent, safe,
          reasonably direct access to schools for children living nearby – the prime function
          of the paths. The system is limited because of the difficulty of providing paths in
          already developed areas, the desire to avoid the more urban aspects and costs of a
          complete walkway system. Improved bus loading areas and shelters as supported
          by the school district are recommended. Equestrian/hiking trails, upon approval by
          the town council, may be used for bicycle use, and when necessary to allow year-
          round use, an all-weather surface may be added.
3222      While it is the intention to minimize the use of asphalt in the trail and path system,
          the use of asphalt for the heavily used path along Alpine Road is warranted to serve
          the needs of bikes, pedestrians, strollers, wheelchairs and similar uses. An
          alternate all-weather surface may be used instead of asphalt if such surface has
          been adopted by the town as a standard suitable for the users cited.
3223      Bicycle paths and bicycle routes provide for local trips to school and community
          facilities and for recreational loop trips. Most facilities proposed are restricted to
          the valley floor.
3224      In addition to the bicycle paths, the plan shows bicycle routes on Alpine Road and
          Portola Road inside the town and bicycle lanes outside the town. These two roads
          form two sides of the heavily used “triangle” which also includes Sandhill Road. The
          “triangle” accommodates bicycle groups or clubs as well as individuals. It is well
          known to those in the bicycling world. Also indicated are bicycle lanes along Skyline
          Scenic Boulevard where they can form part of a major regional facility.
3225-3230 (Not used.)
Plan Diagrams
3231      Plan Diagram A shows existing and proposed facilities within the town and is
          included separately in a pocket following this general plan.
                                         Trails and Paths
                                                 11

3232 Plan Diagram B shows existing and proposed facilities outside of the town but
     within the town’s sphere of influence and is enclosed separately in a pocket
     following this general plan.
                                  Trails and Paths
                                          12

Trails and Paths Element Appendix 1:
Implementation of the Trails and Paths Element
Actions to date:
1.     The town adopted trail and path dedication requirements in the subdivision ordinance.
2.     The town adopted trail and path construction standards.
3.     The town has a trails committee that oversees and undertakes trail designs and
       maintenance.
4.     The town has developed some trails not otherwise developed by sudividers as a part of
       their subdivisions.
5.     The federal government provided the funds for the paved path that extends along
       Alpine Road from Junipero Serra Boulevard to Portola Road.
Future actions:
1.     The trails and paths diagram should be completely reviewed and revised as appropriate
       to reflect changes to the system that have taken place and that are anticipated.
2.     The town should indicate the routes that are to constitute the public system and
       determine the construction costs where public construction is required and annual costs
       of maintenance. The analysis should help indicate whether the system is approximately
       in balance with reasonable public expenditures (town, county, state and federal).
       Methods of obtaining voluntary maintenance should continue to be pursued, such as
       having specific organizations (user groups) assume responsibility for routine
       maintenance under town supervision.
3.     The town should set project priorities. Securing easements in critical places where they
       cannot be obtained by regulation is of first importance, especially where the chance of
       donation seems possible. In general, projects selected should try to serve the maximum
       number of residents while trying to balance the interests of walkers, riders and
       bicyclists. Worthy of first consideration is improving the pedestrian path system for
       school children, including attempting to eliminate hazardous road crossings.
4.     The town should proceed project by project to implement the plan. Projects should be
       detailed on the 1 inch equals 200 feet town base maps and care should be taken to
       follow the construction, route selection and inspection procedures as adopted by the
       town in the trail and path standards.
                                    Trails and Paths: Appendix
                                                 13
5. The location of new trail and path easements should be added annually to a master set
   of trail and path maps on file at Portola Valley Town Hall.
6.      A record of construction and maintenance costs incurred by private developers and
        the town should be kept to guide future work to build and maintain the system. A
        town trail inspector aided by volunteers may appropriately do this work.
                               Trails and Paths: Appendix
                                            14
