  CITY OF DAVIS
GENERAL PLAN
      Adopted May 2001
 Amended Through January 2007

CITY OF DAVIS
GENERAL PLAN
Adopted May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
Basic policies by the General Plan Update Committees:
     Cultural Diversity Committee
     Culture, Art and History Committee
     Economic Development Committee
     Environment Committee
     Growth Management/Neighborhood Preservation Committee
     Housing Committee
     Human Services Committee
     Mobility Committee
     Open Space Committee
     Parks and Recreation Committee
     Public Services, Infrastructure and Safety Committee
     Technology and Computers Committee
     Urban Design/Community Design Committee
     Youth and Education Committee
With assistance from City of Davis staff:
     Administrative Services Department
     City Manager’s Office
     Fire Department
     Parks & General Services Department
     Community Services Department
     Community Development Department
     Police Department
     Public Works Department
Illustrations by Brian Collett
Assistance in compilation:
     Design, Community & Environment,
     Berkeley, California
Date of Printing: March 2010


                                Davis General Plan
               Adopted May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                                 Table of Contents
Section I. Introduction                                         1
Section II. Planning Context                                   25
Section III. Visions                                           41
Section IV. Community Form
     1. Land Use and Growth Management                         45
     2. Mobility                                              103
     3. Urban Design, Neighborhood Preservation and Community
          Forest Management                                   151
     4. Housing                                               165
     5. Economic and Business Development                     193
Section V. Community Facilities and Services
     6. Water                                                 205
     7. Materials, Solid Waste and Recycling                  215
     8. Computers and Telecommunications                      219
     9. Parks, Recreation and Open Space                      225
     10. Youth and Education                                  253
     11. Human Services                                       265
     12. Art and Culture                                      273
     13. Diversity                                            277
Section VI. Community Resource Conservation
     14. Habitat and Natural Areas                            283
     15. Agriculture, Soils and Minerals                      289
     16. Historic and Archaeological Resources                299
     17. Energy                                               305
Section VII. Community Safety
     18. Police and Fire                                      311
     19. Hazards                                              317
                                          i
Table of Contents                                                 Davis General Plan
                                               May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
      20. Air Quality                                                           329
      21. Noise                                                                 333
Section VIII. Implementation
      On-Going Evaluation and Change                                            345
      Community Participation                                                   345
      Financing                                                                 347
      Streamlining                                                              349
      Inter-Departmental and Inter-Agency Cooperation                           351
      Standards for Future Studies                                              352
Section IX. Glossary                                                            353
Section X. Appendices
      A. Background Information on Environmental Acoustics
                                        ii
Davis General Plan                                               Table of Contents
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
List of Figures
1. Regional Location                                                            2
2. Planning Area and Sub-Areas                                                  5
3. Specific Plan Areas                                                         15
4. Growth of the City, 1923-1993                                               27
5. Comparison of City Sizes                                                    28
6. Surrounding Planning Areas and Spheres of Influence                         35
7. Vacant Commercial Land Within City                                          51
8. Neighborhood Facilities                                                     59
9. Neighborhood Center Concept                                                 61
10. Neighborhood Transit Stop Concept                                          62
11a. Land Use                                                                  67
11b. Land Use: City Area Enlargement                                           69
11c. Land Use: Core Area Specific Plan Land Use Map                            71
11d. Land Use: Gateway and Olive Drive Specific Plan Land Use & Zoning Map 73
12. Infill/Transit-Oriented Development Concepts                               99
13. Travel Times and Distances                                               105
14. Transit Routes                                                           109
15. Neighborhood Transit Locations                                           111
16. Street Classifications                                                   119
17. 2010 Planned Lane Configurations                                         121
18. Multi-Modal Street Character                                             128
19. Street Pattern Concept                                                   129
20. Traffic Calming Measures                                                 130
21. Corridor Plan Improvement Concepts                                       132
22. Truck Routes                                                             139
23. Primary Bicycle Network                                                  145
24. Garage Design Concepts                                                   153
25. Core Area Character                                                      155
26. Creative Street Design Concepts                                          156
27. City Population and UC Davis Enrollment                                  167
28. Residential Construction Permits Issued 1987-1996                        171
29. Commercial Construction Permits 1987-1996                                198
30. Existing and Proposed Parks and School Sites                             231
31a. Open Space                                                              233
31b. Open Space: City Area Enlargement                                       235
32. Urban Agricultural Transition Area                                       245
33. Agricultural Soils Classifications                                       291
34. Lands Under Williamson Act Contract                                      293
35. 100 Year Flood Areas                                                     319
36. Existing Noise Contours and Sensitive Receptors                          334
37. 2010 Noise Contours                                                      337
38. Sound Wall Design Concepts                                               342
                                        iii
Table of Contents                                                Davis General Plan
                                              May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
List of Tables
1. Gross Acreages of Planning Area and Planning Sub-Areas                         4
2. UC Davis Enrollment and Employment                                           31
3. Existing Land Use as of January 1, 1998                                      49
4. Acreages of Vacant Land within the City                                      50
5. 2010 Buildout of General Plan                                          101-102
6. Street Classifications and Guidelines                                       123
7. Geometric Cross Sections Guidelines                                         124
8. Planned Street Widenings                                                    125
9. Population Estimates and Projections                                        168
10. Population Characteristics, 1990                                           169
11. Housing Characteristics, 1990                                              172
12. Major Employers in the Davis Area                                          197
13. Existing and Planned Parks                                                 229
14. Park and Open Space Acreage Per 1,000 Persons                              237
15. Population Ethnic Breakdown                                                278
16. City Staff Ethnic and Gender Composition                                   278
17. Calls for Police Service                                                   311
18. Calls for Fire Service                                                     312
19. Standards for Exterior Noise Exposure                                      339
20. Target Interior Noise Levels                                               340
                                        iv
   SECTION I.
INTRODUCTION

                      SECTION I. INTRODUCTION
This document is the City of Davis’ General Plan, which has been updated and
revised after a lengthy and comprehensive public participation process. This general
plan will guide Davis’ growth through January 1, 2010.
A general plan articulates a community's vision of its long-term physical form and
development. The general plan is comprehensive in scope and represents the city's
expression of quality of life and community values; it should include social and
economic concerns, as well. General plans are prepared under a mandate from the
State of California, which requires that each city and county prepare and adopt a
comprehensive, long-term general plan for its jurisdiction and any adjacent related
lands.
The general plan serves as a basis for decision-making. The plan directs decision-
makers, who must balance competing community objectives, which sometimes
present trade-offs.
                                A.  Regional Location
Davis is located in the southeast corner of Yolo County, along Interstate 80 and the
main Union Pacific railroad line. Its regional location is shown in Figure 1.
Davis is located in the Central Valley of California, 50 miles northeast of the San
Francisco Bay area and 15 miles west of Sacramento. Davis is separated from
surrounding cities in the Counties of Yolo and Solano by ten to fifteen miles of
agricultural land. Surrounding cities in Yolo County are: Woodland to the north;
West Sacramento to the east; and Winters to the west. Located between Davis and
West Sacramento is the two mile wide Yolo Bypass, one of the overflow drainage
ways which provide flood protection for the Sacramento River valley. The City of
Dixon is located to the southwest in Solano County.
                                            1

Section I: Introduction                          Davis General Plan
                              May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
Figure 1: Regional Location
                            2
Davis General Plan                                                     Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
1. Planning Area, Sub-Areas and Planning Horizon
The planning area consists of approximately 160 square miles. It is bounded on the
north by County Road 27 and the City of Woodland planning area, on the east by
the easterly boundary of the Yolo Bypass, on the south by Tremont Road, and the
Pedrick Road-Interstate 80 interchange in Solano County, and on the west by an
extension of County Road 93 to generally match the westerly boundaries of the
General Plan areas of Dixon and Woodland. Because Davis is located in the corner
of Yolo County, a portion of the planning area is in Solano County.
The planning area consists of a total of 14 geographic sub-areas, which are shown in
Figure 2. The sizes of the planning subareas are shown in Table 1.
The planning horizon for this general plan is January 1, 2010. Projections regarding
city growth and needed changes made in this plan and in the accompanying
environmental impact report are made for 2010.
                               A. General Plan Contents
This general plan contains a total of nine sections:
     •   Section I contains this introduction.
     •   Section II contains background on the planning context in and around
         Davis.
     •   Section III contains the general plan visions, which set the overall
         framework for planning in Davis.
     •   Sections IV through VII contain the bulk of the general plan in the form of
         goals, policies, standards and actions for a total of 22 separate topics. Each
         of the 22 chapters within these sections provides background information
         on a topic and the goals, policies, standards and actions that apply to it.
     •   Section VIII contains goals, policies, standards and actions regarding general
         plan implementation. It tells how the city will work to implement Sections
         III through VII.
     •   Section IX is a glossary of terms.
     •   Section X contains the appendices.
                                             3

Section I: Introduction                                                                    Davis General Plan
                                                                    May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                                                           Table 1
                        GROSS ACREAGES OF PLANNING AREA
                                  AND PLANNING SUB-AREAS
                                      City of           Unincorp.        Unincorp.
  Planning Sub-Areas                  Davis             Yolo Co.         Solano Co.         TOTAL
  Northwest                                       90           16,310                                    16,400
  North Central                                 830              2,370                                    3,200
  Northeast                                                      5,200                                    5,200
  West Davis                                    900                                                         900
  Central Davis                               1,400                                                       1,400
  East Davis                                    950                                                         950
  East Davis / Mace                             630                 80                                      710
  Core Area                                     150                                                         150
  South Davis                                 1,210                590                                    1,800
  Southeast                                                      6,200                                    6,200
  Gateway / Olive Drive                         121                 44                                      165
  UC Davis                                                       2,900                 900                3,800
  Far North                                                    18,600                                    18,600
  Far South                                                      3,200              26,300               29,500
  Yolo By-Pass                                                 13,600                                    13,600
                                          6,281
  Total City Area
                                       (9.8 sq.mi.)
  Total Unincorp. Yolo Co.                                 69,094
  Area                                                  (108.0 sq.mi.)
  Total Unincorp. Solano Co.                                                 27,200
  Area                                                                     (42.5 sq.mi.)
                                                                                                 102,575
  Total Planning Area
                                                                                               (160.3 sq.mi.)
Source: City of Davis Public Works Department, June 1999.
                                                         4
Davis General Plan                      Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                                      5
Section I: Introduction                      Davis General Plan
                          May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                        6
Davis General Plan                                                     Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
The visions in Section III are broad philosophical statements describing desired end
states. Visions are not necessarily attainable now or in the foreseeable future. Some
of the visions may present value trade-offs with other visions.
Sections IV through VIII contain goals, policies, standards and actions which
explain what the city will strive to do over the life of the general plan.
  •    Goals are desired end states for particular issues which may be measurable or
       observable over a period of time.
  •    Policies are statements of values or direction which provide the basis for
       consistent decision making and resources allocation.
  •    Actions are the specific tasks to accomplish the policies.
  •    Standards are written as policy statements. Those standards containing the
       word “shall” are mandatory. Those that contain the word “should” are
       discretionary and will be applied by the city as appropriate through ordinances,
       resolutions, staff actions and decisions regarding specific development
       projects.
The City shall make every reasonable effort to fund the projects and programs in the
general plan. The implementation of some of the policies and actions in this plan,
however, would require a commitment of financial resources for both capital and
ongoing costs which may not be available currently and may not be available in the
future. Allocations of available resources are established in the annual city budget
and review of the Capital Improvements Master Plan.
           B. Assumptions and Parameters of the General Plan Update
In March, 1993, the City Council established assumptions and parameters for the
general plan update, which are summarized below.
  •    The 1987 General Plan was to be used as the base document.
  •    The general plan update was to correct weaknesses in the 1987 plan, provide
       new information where appropriate, enhance consistency between elements,
       and add elements.
  •    Efforts were to be taken to minimize costs of the revision.
  •    The process was to extensively involve citizens.
                                             7

Section I: Introduction                                                 Davis General Plan
                                                     May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
  •     The total acreage of developed land and the total number of units in the 1987
        General Plan was not to be increased, although the location and mix of uses
        could be changed. Planning for the 20-year sphere of influence of the Local
        Agency Formation Commission was to proceed.
  •     The importance of UC Davis within the future of the community was to be
        recognized.
  •     The planning process was to be thorough, and was recognized as potentially
        time intensive.
  •     The Planning Commission was to oversee the update process.
These parameters were altered slightly in June of 1995 when the Council approved
the Economic Development and Strategic Plan and directed staff to investigate
opportunities for zoning an additional 300 to 500 acres for commercial and
industrial development, as part of the General Plan process.
                                C. Public Participation
State law specifies that “During the preparation or amendment of the general plan,
the planning agency shall provide opportunities for the involvement of citizens,
public agencies, public utility companies, and civic, education, and other community
groups, through public hearings and any other means the city or county deems
appropriate” (Government Code Section 65351). Therefore, the City has conducted
an extensive citizen input process leading up to this General Plan update.
During the fall and winter of 1993, the city conducted seven community workshops
and 31 “kitchen” conferences soliciting the community's vision for Davis' long term
future. In April 1994, the Community Workshop Summary was released. The
workshop summary contained the comments from over 700 members of the Davis
community who provided comments from October 1993 to March 1994. Comments
were also included from various elementary school classes, letters, comment cards
from the city's FOCUS newsletter, responses to a newspaper flyer and the Internet.
In March 1994, the City Council appointed 215 people to be on 14 general plan
committees to review and revise the existing general plan. The general plan
committees were focused around the following topics:
  • Culture, Art and History
  • Cultural Diversity and Social Climate
  • Economic Development
                                            8

Davis General Plan                                                    Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
  •    Environment, Energy and Conservation
  •    Growth Management and Neighborhood Preservation
  •    Human Services (originally called Health and Social Services)
  •    Housing Affordability, Diversity and Innovation
  •    Mobility and Noise Issues of the Next Century
  •    Open Space
  •    Parks and Recreation
  •    Public Services, Safety and Infrastructure
  •    Technology and Computers
  •    Urban Design/Community Design
  •    Youth and Education
Although each committee was responsible for a particular topic area(s), they were
also encouraged to address any and all general plan issues.
From April 1994 to July 1995, the committees drafted visions, goals, policies and
implementing measures for the revised General Plan. Their efforts resulted in a
summary of Revised General Plan Committees Visions, Goals, Policies and Actions
that was published in October, 1995. This document was reviewed by the
committees from November 1995 to March 1996. From January to March, 1996,
the committees reviewed the General Plan Update Workbook that was prepared to
assist the committees in focusing their ideas on land use and policy issues.
The committees' comments on the Revised General Plan Committees Visions,
Goals, Policies and Actions and the Workbook were incorporated into the
Administrative Draft General Plan, dated May 1996. From May 1996 to September
1996, the city staff liaisons reviewed and commented on the Administrative Draft
General Plan.
A “Public Review Draft” of the general plan, which incorporates both committees'
and staffs' comments, was made available in November of 1996. The Planning
Commission and City Council reviewed that draft in public meetings between
December 1996 and March 1998. This Final Draft was published in June 1998.
From the beginning of the update process, a survey was anticipated to be conducted
as a way to validate that the positions established in the draft general plan reflect the
overall community. In July 1995, the City Council authorized the firm of Moore,
Iacofano and Goltsman (MIG) to conduct a telephone survey to 400 people. The
survey will be conducted after the Planning Commission workshops are held. The
City Council will hold a series of meetings after the Planning Commission
workshops and survey are completed.
                                            9

Section I: Introduction                                                   Davis General Plan
                                                     May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
An environmental impact report and fiscal studies will be conducted on this final
draft general plan. Once those studies are completed, additional public hearings will
be held by the Planning Commission and City Council. Adoption of the revised
general plan is anticipated in the fall of 1998.
                             D. Relationship to State Law
State law includes a number of specific requirements regarding the content of
general plans. This section describes where these required contents may be found in
this general plan.
State law requires a total of seven general plan elements. The required contents of
most of these elements are included in several of the chapters in this general plan.
The city’s housing element is contained in a separate document.
1.    Land Use Element
State law requires that a general plan include a land use element which “designates
the proposed general distribution and general location and extent of the uses of the
land for housing, business, industry, open space, including agriculture, natural
resources, recreation, and enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public buildings
and grounds, solid and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other categories of public
and private uses of land. The land use element shall include a statement of the
standards of population density and building intensity recommended for the various
districts and other territory covered by the plan.” This information is included in
Chapter 1, “Land Use and Growth Management.”
The land use element is also to “identify areas covered by the plan which are subject
to flooding.” This information is included in Chapter 19, “Hazards.”
The land use element is also required to designate any areas zoned for timberland
production. There are no such areas in Davis.
2.    Circulation Element
State law requires that a general plan include a circulation element “consisting of the
general location and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares,
transportation routes, terminals, and other public utilities and facilities, all correlated
with the land use element of the plan.” This information is contained in Chapter 2,
“Mobility.”
                                             10

Davis General Plan                                                       Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
3.     Housing Element
State law requires that a general plan include a housing element that “consists of an
identification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs and a statement
of goals, policies, quantified objectives, and scheduled programs for the
preservation, improvement and development of housing.” (Government Code
Section 65583). The Housing Element must also demonstrate the community’s
ability to accommodate the need for housing at all income levels. This document’s
Chapter 4, “Housing,” includes most relevant policies of the separate Housing
Element. Additional housing-related policies are contained in Chapters 1 (Land Use
and Growth Management), 11 (Human Services) and 17 (Energy).
A housing element must be submitted to the State of California Department of
Housing and Community Development (HCD) prior to adoption by the city. The
HCD determines whether the draft element is in compliance with the requirements
of state law. After adoption of the general plan by the city, the final housing element
requirements are submitted to the state.
This document contains the City's Housing Element policies. The full text of the
Housing Element and more specific information on the policies is contained in the
full Housing Element, available at the Community Development Department.
4.     Conservation Element
State law requires that a general plan include a conservation element “for the
conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources including water and
its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and other waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife,
minerals and other natural resources.”
     •    Chapter 6, “Water,” includes policies for the conservation of water.
     •    Chapter 15, “Agriculture, Soils and Minerals,” includes policies for
          conservation of agricultural land, soils and minerals.
     •    Chapter 14, “Habitat and Natural Areas,” includes policies for conservation
          of riparian areas and wildlife.
Davis does not have any significant waters with hydraulic force, forests, harbors,
large rivers, important fisheries, or areas with identified mineral deposits of statewide
or regional significance.
                                              11

Section I: Introduction                                                  Davis General Plan
                                                      May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
5.    Open Space Element
State law requires that a general plan include an open space element that addresses
preservation of open space for four reasons: 1) preservation of natural resources, 2)
managed production of resources, 3) outdoor recreation, and 4) public health and
safety. Land use categories that meet each of these criteria are mapped and
described in Chapter 1, “Land Use and Growth Management.” More specific
policies regarding open space are included in Chapter 9, “Parks and Open Space.”
Open space elements must include action plans. All chapters of this general plan
include specific lists of implementing actions.
Open space elements must consider demands for trail-oriented recreational uses.
Trails are covered in Chapter 2, “Mobility.”
6.    Noise Element
State law requires that a general plan include a noise element that analyzes and
quantifies current and projected noise levels from a variety of sources, and shows
noise contours on a map. The noise element is also to include implementation
measures and possible solutions to address existing and foreseeable noise problems.
These items are contained in Chapter 21, “Noise.”
The noise contours are to be used as a guide for establishing a pattern of land uses in
the land use element that minimizes the exposure of community residents to
excessive noise. This has been done in the compilation of the land use map in
Chapter 1, “Land Use and Growth Management.”
7.    Safety Element
State law requires that a general plan include a safety element “for the protection of
the community from any unreasonable risks associated with the effects of seismically
induced surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam
failure; slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides; subsidence and other
geologic hazards; flooding; and wild land and urban fires. The safety element shall
also include mapping of known seismic and other geologic hazards. It shall also
address evacuation routes, peakload water supply requirements, and minimum road
widths and clearances around structures, as those items related to identified fire and
geologic hazards.”
                                            12

Davis General Plan                                                        Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
There are no known faults in Davis, so the city is not subject to seismically induced
surface rupture. It is not near the ocean or any large lakes, so it is not subject to
tsunami or seiche. It is relatively flat, so it is not subject to slope instability leading
to mudslides and landslides. There are no city requirements for clearances around
structures since the city has no areas of heavy brush that could lead to fire danger.
The city’s evacuation plans, along with planning associated with ground shaking,
ground failure, dam failure, subsidence, other geologic hazards and flooding are
addressed in Chapter 19, “Hazards.” Fire safety is addressed in Chapter 18, “Police
and Fire.” Minimum road widths are addressed in Chapter 2, “Mobility.” Water
supply is addressed in Chapter 6, “Water.”
       E. Relationship to Other Plans, Ordinances, Policies and Reports
The City of Davis has a number of planning and land use regulations tools beyond
this general plan. These others tools are described in this section.
This general plan is consistent with the policies and regulations of all documents
described here. These plans, ordinances and policies will remain in effect after this
general plan is adopted.
1.    Specific Plans
Local governments are authorized by the California Government Code to adopt
specific plans. A specific plan is a detailed plan for the development of a specific
area. It implements the general plan by creating a bridge between general plan
policies and individual development proposals. Ideally, a specific plan directs all
facets of future development: distribution of land uses; development standards;
location and sizing of supporting infrastructure; and methods of financing public
improvements. A specific plan may be policy oriented, regulatory, or both.
The City of Davis has prepared or is preparing specific plans for four areas. The
locations of the four specific plan areas are shown in Figure 3. The specific plans
contain additional policies and actions, and should be consulted to determine
development policy in their areas. This section describes the concepts in each of the
specific plans.
a. Core Area Specific Plan. The Core Area Specific Plan supports maintaining a
small-town downtown and encourages pedestrian, social and cultural activities and
shopping in the core area. The plan promotes building up the “downtown core”
(the area between First and Third Streets and D Street and the railroad tracks east of
G Street) before greatly increasing densities in the remainder of the core area,
thereby protecting existing residential neighborhoods and their character.
                                              13

Section I: Introduction                                                  Davis General Plan
                                                      May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
The Core Area Specific Plan encourages:
     •     the retention of a residential base;
     •     mixed uses in structures and neighborhoods;
     •     appropriate scale transitions between buildings;
     •     the retention and adaptive reuse of existing buildings;
     •     retail at street level;
     •     maintenance of a pedestrian priority;
     •     maintenance of the existing street and bike path grid with no additional four
           lane roads developed; and
     •     landscaping and plazas.
b. Gateway / Olive Drive Specific Plan. The Gateway/Olive Drive Area
encompasses 121 acres adjacent to the core area (not including the 44-acre Nishi
property which was removed from the Specific Plan as part of the General Plan
Update). The area is bounded on the north by First Street, on the west by the
University, on the south by Interstate 80, and on the east by the railroad tracks and
I-80. The area is currently within the city limits.
In early 1992, the city's Redevelopment Agency initiated a process to redevelop the
area near the entrance to Davis. In late 1992 and early 1993, the City Council
broadened the study to include the entire 165-acre area and appointed a 27-member
Advisory Committee to prepare a specific plan. The committee and various sub-
committees met 20 times from 1993 through 1995 producing two study reports and,
ultimately arriving at a consensus plan for the area. City staff, with consultant
assistance, turned the consensus plan into the specific plan and accompanying EIR.
The purpose of the Gateway/Olive Drive Specific Plan is to provide the goals,
policies, design guidelines, and zoning mechanism necessary to realize the vision
created by the Advisory Committee. The specific plan provides guidance for what
uses will occur on vacant property, as well as reuse and revitalization of improved
parcels and various public improvements.
The plan is divided into district sub-areas including: East Olive Drive, West Olive
Drive, Aggie Village, and the Southern Pacific Depot. Each sub-area has distinct
characteristics and each entailed a slightly different planning process. The specific
plan knits together the neighborhood plan developed for East Olive Drive the
University-sponsored plan for Aggie Village, and the Depot.
                                              14

Davis General Plan                       Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                                      15
Section I: Introduction                       Davis General Plan
                           May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                        16
Davis General Plan                                                      Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
The plan provides details regarding land uses, roadways, buildings, open space and
bicycle/pedestrian connections, design guidelines and financing at buildout. The
plan area is Davis' visual front door and has been planned to work with the Core
Area Specific Plan to maintain the core area as the cultural and economic center of
Davis. In general, the eastern portion of the plan protects and enhances the historic
character and land uses of Olive Drive.
c. East Davis Specific Plan. The East Davis Specific Plan (EDSP), adopted in
1987, applies to a 658-acre area bounded by Cowell Boulevard, Mace Boulevard,
Interstate 80 and previously developed lands to the west. It describes land use
designations, development policies, roadway standards and a financing plan for East
Davis. The EDSP is consistent with this general plan, but it also provides additional
direction for East Davis. For example:
     •    Average single-family density is limited to 5.6 units per net acre.
     •    Multi-family density is limited to 15 units per gross acre, which is about 20
          units per net acre.
     •    The EDSP requires minimum numbers of parking spaces for each
          residential unit.
d. South Davis Specific Plan. The South Davis Specific Plan (SDSP), adopted
in 1987 and revised in 1989, covers 507 acres between Interstate 80 and the north
fork of Putah Creek and Montgomery Avenue. The SDSP includes land use
designations, a circulation system and community facilities policies for South Davis.
Land use designations in the SDSP are based on city zoning that was in effect when
the SDSP was adopted. The SDSP specifically states that “No project shall exceed
the densities allowed in the general plan.”1
2.     Bikeway Plan
The Bikeway Plan (Final Draft, May 1993) consolidates all aspects of bicycle
planning in a document which clarifies general plan goals and policies as they relate
to bicycles. The Bikeway Plan contains this overall goal statement for bikeway
planning:
“It is the goal of the City of Davis to maintain, through the plan, an integrated
system of bikeway facilities which provide for safe and convenient travel for
bicyclists throughout the city. The city recognizes the need to encourage bicycle
travel for both transportation and recreation. Use of bicycles as a travel mode
1 South Davis Specific Plan, page 8A.
                                             17

Section I: Introduction                                                   Davis General Plan
                                                      May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
conserves energy, contributes to cleaner air, and improves physical fitness.”
The plan also consolidates and clarifies the standards used by the City for bicycle
facilities. It presents specific bikeway projects with a project need statement,
description, funding source, and expected construction schedule.
3.     Redevelopment Agency
Redevelopment Plan. The Davis Redevelopment Plan was prepared in 1987. The
redevelopment area includes the South Davis specific plan area and the core area.
Proposed land uses within the redevelopment area include residential, commercial,
commercial / residential, industrial, public, and agricultural / public. These uses are
designated in accordance with the general plan.
Redevelopment Implementation Plan. In 1995, the city adopted an
Implementation Plan consistent with AB 1290. The Implementation Plan is
consistent with the original Redevelopment Plan. It specifies steps to carry out the
Redevelopment Plan over the next 20 years.
City / County Pass Through Agreement. On November 18, 1987, the City of
Davis and the County of Yolo executed a Pass Through Agreement, in response to
the city's redevelopment plan. The Agreement ensures that the city will “pass
through” specified property tax increments to the county. The “pass through” of
the tax increments is intended to alleviate any financial burdens or detriments to the
county which will have to increase the amount of services it provides to future
development in the redevelopment plan area. The “pass through” of the tax
increments to the county is conditioned upon the county not approving “urban
development” within the city's planning area without city approval, thereby avoiding
“leap frog” growth or growth which is difficult to service.
4.     Phased Allocation Ordinance
On May 20, 1992, the City Council adopted the current Phased Allocation
Ordinance. This ordinance is a housing allocation system to manage the rate of
development and ensure that residential development proceeds in a logical, orderly,
and environmentally sound manner.
The ordinance has a “rolling” five-year phasing period, whereby the City Council
annually designates the number of units to be constructed for the fifth year and may
also adjust the units designated for the first through fourth years. The City Council's
determination is based on criteria including but not limited to policies of the general
                                            18

Davis General Plan                                                     Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
plan and any specific plan; the number of units approved and actually constructed in
prior years; and completion of the city's infrastructure network.
The City Council's review of individual applications for allocations is based on
standards and criteria including but not limited to adequacy and availability of city
services and facilities; the inclusion of affordable housing units; and contribution to
major infrastructure and public facilities project priorities.
The city also regulates phasing for construction of residential, commercial, and
infrastructure development within individual subdivisions through development
agreements. As of 1997, these agreements were approved for the Evergreen, Mace
Ranch, Oakshade, Wildhorse, and Woodbridge projects. Since many allocations
have recently been determined by development agreements, the phased allocation
process has not been needed for a few years.
5.    Affordable Housing Ordinance
The ordinance establishing affordable housing requirements was adopted in 1990
and amended in 1993. The requirements are intended to implement general plan
policies that require affordable housing which is affordable to very low, low and
moderate income households; and meet the city's share of the regional housing need
for these households.
Under standard requirements, the developer of a project with for-sale units shall
provide at least 25 percent of the units for very low, low and moderate income
households. The requirements shall be met by the on-site construction of for-sale
affordable units; land dedication; and provision of lots for the construction of self-
help housing. Upon meeting the requirements, the developer is entitled to a 25
percent density bonus.
Under standard requirements, the developer of a multi-family rental development
shall provide at least 25 percent of the units affordable to low income households
and at least 10 percent of the units affordable to very low income households. Upon
meeting the requirements, the developer is entitled to a density bonus of 25 percent.
A developer may propose a “project individualized program” as an alternative to
standard provisions. Such a program must generate the same or more than the
number of affordable units generated under standard requirements.
6.    Development Impact Fee Study and Capital Improvements Master Plan
Development Impact Fee Study. The City’s Development Impact Fee Study is a
financial analysis of the cost of infrastructure requirements dictated by the new
                                             19

Section I: Introduction                                                    Davis General Plan
                                                     May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
development envisioned by the City’s General Plan. Allocations of infrastructure
cost are performed according to State law and local policy. The variety of grant and
other funding sources available are considered. The Study then translates the costs
allocable to new development into a series of fees, varying by land use and
geographical planning area that each unit of new development must pay as its
contribution toward meeting the additional infrastructure requirements.
The Development Impact Fee Study is updated annually to reflect changes in actual
and projected development in the community and to enhance the infrastructure
descriptions, costs and allocations.
Capital Improvements Master Plan. The Capital Improvements Master Plan is
the city’s master capital improvement program, which identifies funding sources for
various projects in a manner that is consistent with the General Plan and city specific
plans. The infrastructure projects include street and other transportation facilities,
core area, park and recreation, public safety, general city facilities and open space.
When a project is completed, it becomes a fixed asset, which requires an operation
budget to maintain.
The Capital Improvements Master Plan also incorporates a year to year cash flow
projection and a timetable for project initiations. The Capital Improvements Master
Plan is also updated annually to reflect changes in cash flow, project cost
refinements and any necessary adjustments in project timing or funding.
The Development Impact Fee Study and the Capital Improvements Master Plan
together have replaced the earlier Major Projects Financing Plan (MPFP). The
MPFP was the city’s initial attempt to quantify the cost of needed infrastructure
improvements and allocate the cost to new development. The City undertook a
substantial reassessment of a number of the policy approaches and implications of
the MPFP and the two current documents have taken its place.
7.    Right to Farm and Farmland Preservation Ordinance
The City of Davis adopted Chapter 30, the Right to Farm and Farmland
Preservation Ordinance on November 15, 1995.
The Right to Farm portion of the ordinance states that properly operated
agricultural operations are generally not to be considered a nuisance, and requires
that properties within 1,000 feet of agricultural lands carry a deed restriction that
notifies owners and buyers of potential inconveniences associated with lawful
agricultural operations when they are subjected to any discretionary permit issued by
the City of Davis. It also requires that lands within 150 feet of an agricultural,
greenbelt or habitat area shall to be maintained in an agricultural buffer/agricultural
                                           20

Davis General Plan                                                    Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
transition area. The buffer is to be made up of a 100-foot agricultural buffer without
public access, as well as a 50-foot transition area that may include bike paths, trails
and other facilities for public access.
The Farmland Preservation portion of the ordinance requires agricultural mitigation
by applicants for general plan or zoning changes or any other discretionary
entitlements that would change the use of agricultural land to non-agricultural uses.
Agricultural mitigation on a 1:1 replacement basis may include granting of a
farmland conservation easement or similar conservation mechanism for lands not
subjected to non-agricultural development or payment of a fee for purchase of
farmland rights in another area. Mitigation lands must be within the Davis planning
area. A portion of agricultural mitigation lands may be used for habitat mitigation.
8.    Zoning
The zoning chapter of the Davis Municipal Code zones property within the
incorporated city limits.
City staff is currently working on amendments to the zoning ordinance to resolve
minor problems and improve its everyday use. Examples of these amendments are
accessory structures, parking requirements, and clarification of definitions. Staff
will also update the zoning ordinance to reflect new policies in this general plan that
conflict with policies in the existing zoning code.
9.    Alternative Transportation Task Force Final Report
The City’s Alternative Transportation Task Force (ATTF) was created by City
Council resolution in October 1994 and charged with exploring “the potential for
increasing the use of transportation modes that provide an alternative to the gasoline
or diesel fueled automobile.” ATTF members met for approximately 16 months to
develop recommended policies and projects that would reduce dependence on
motor vehicles. The ATTF’s Final Report was accepted as an advisory report by the
City Council in March 1996.
The final report analyzes transportation trends in Davis. It notes that Davis is a
leader in non-vehicular transportation modes such as bicycling and alternative fuels,
but that auto use in Davis is also increasing. The final report recommends both
systemic changes to land use planning and transportation systems, as well as specific
short-term improvements that would enhance bicycle, pedestrian, electric vehicle
and transit transportation. Many of the programs and projects suggested in the
ATTF Final Report are included in this general plan.
                                            21

Section I: Introduction                                                Davis General Plan
                                                   May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
10. General Plan Policy Interpretations
In 1992, the City Council approved interpretations of General Plan policies to assist
in the review of major new development projects. Many of the interpretations
remain useful in that they provide direction for how the City will implement similar
policies in the General Plan. In many aspects, the interpretations involve details that
would not be appropriate in the General Plan text. In addition, the interpretations
can be updated without requiring a formal General Plan amendment.
The table on the next page provides examples of policies in the General Plan which
are related to the 1992 policy interpretations.
                                           22
Davis General Plan                                                                                         Section I: Introduction
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
 1992 General Plan Policy Interpretation                            Examples of Related Policies in General Plan
                                                                    Update
 Residential Density Yields and Neighborhood                        •      Land Use Categories, Residential, Allowable
 Greenbelts                                                                Uses and Densities
                                                                    •      Policy LU A.5, “Require neighborhood
                                                                           greenbelts…”
                                                                    •      Standard POS 3.1a, “Ten percent of the
                                                                           area…shall be greenbelt.”
 Locational Guidelines for Residential Densities and                •      Policy LU 2.1, “Develop and implement
 Senior Housing                                                            guidelines for infill development..."
                                                                    •      Standard LU 2.1a, “Guidelines should recognize
                                                                           various forms and patterns of infill
                                                                           development…”
                                                                    •      Policy MOB 4.3, “Require new development
                                                                           designs that maximize transit potential.”
 Ratio of Housing, Mix of Residential Types and                     •      Policy LU A.3, “Require a mix of housing
 Integration of Affordable Housing Units                                   types…”
                                                                    •      Policy HOUSING 1.1b, “Each new
                                                                           development should include a mix of housing
                                                                           types…”
                                                                    •      Standard HOUSING 1.1a, “Affordable housing
                                                                           should include a range of unit sizes…”
                                                                    The current General Plan does not include a policy regarding
                                                                    the ratio of single family to multi-family housing.
 Energy Efficient Subdivision Design                                •      Policy ENERGY 1.5, “Encourage…energy
                                                                           efficient subdivisions…” and Standards 1.5 a, b,
                                                                           c.
 Major Arterial Landscaping, Noise Attenuation                      •      Standard MOB 1.1a, “The City of Davis shall
 Design and Greenstreets                                                   have a network of vehicular circulation
                                                                           routes…”
                                                                    •      Action MOB 1.1k, “Upon adoption…study
                                                                           rights of way…including Greenstreet
                                                                           standards.”
                                                                    •      Table 6, Street Classifications and Guidelines,
                                                                           including notes
                                                                    •      Table 7, Geometric Cross Section Guidelines,
                                                                           notes
                                                                    •      Policy MOB 3.1, “Greenbelts and Greenstreets
                                                                           should serve…”
                                                                    •      Policy NOISE 1.2, “Discourage the use of
                                                                           soundwalls whenever…” and Standards
                                                                    •      a, b, c.
 Institutional Uses                                                 •      Land Use Categories, Residential, Allowable
                                                                           Uses and Densities, Note 4, “Make provision
                                                                           for institutional uses…”
 Agricultural Buffers                                               •      Section LU.N, Urban Agricultural Transition
 This policy interpretation is no longer applicable. Instead, see          Area
 references listed in column to right.                              •      Figure 32a and 32b, Open Space
                                                                    •      Policy LU 1.6, “For developments… a
 See Farmland Preservation Ordinance for requirements related              minimum of a 150 foot wide urban agricultural
 to agricultural buffers.                                                  transition area is required.”
                                                                  23

Section I: Introduction                        Davis General Plan
                           May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                        24
     SECTION II.
PLANNING CONTEXT

               SECTION II. PLANNING CONTEXT
                                A. Brief History of Davis
This section provides a brief history of Davis and the surrounding area. An in-depth
history of Davis is described in Davisville '68, The History and Heritage of the City of
Davis, published in 1969.
Prior to recorded history, the Patwin Indians inhabited the area and were sustained
by the abundant native plants and animals. Hunters, trappers and pioneer
agriculturalists brought great changes in the 19th Century.
The Davis town site was established north of the original streambed of Putah Creek,
Rio de los Putos. Putah Creek is named after the Patwin Indian village of “Puta-to”,
which contains the Patwin root “pu”, or “east”.
In the early 1850's, livestock production and cultivation in the Sacramento Valley
were profitable. A number of American and European immigrants sought title to
portions of Rancho Laguna de Santos Calle, the unconfirmed Mexican land grant on
which most of the current City of Davis and UC Davis campus are located.
Prominent early settlers were Jerome and Mary Davis, the son-in-law and daughter
of Joseph Chiles, whose cattle interests in the area began in 1849. The Davis'
holdings were expanded to 12,000 acres by 1858. By 1868, they moved to
Sacramento and sold 3,000 acres of the Davis ranch to developers of the California
Pacific Railroad.
In 1868, daily railroad service began from Vallejo to Davis Junction, spurring
residential and business construction. The official town plat was recorded and
covered a 32-block, 119-acre area that fronted on Putah Creek. By 1870, there were
400 citizens in Davisville. Agriculture remained the primary economic activity in the
area through the end of the century.
In 1906, the University of California selected the site for the newly established State
Agricultural Station near Davisville.
As a result of a disastrous fire in November 1916, the residents of Davisville voted
to incorporate on March 20, 1917. The vote was 317 for incorporation and 87
against. The County Board of Supervisors adopted a resolution declaring Davisville
incorporated under the name of The City of Davis.
                                             25

 Section II: Planning Context                                            Davis General Plan
                                                      May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
On March 28, 1917, the City's incorporation was official. The resolution declared
officers for the new city, including a Board of Trustees, a City Clerk, and a City
Treasurer. At their first meeting, the Board voted John B. Anderson as president of
the Board. By 1928, the mayor-council form of government was adopted.
Both the campus and community experienced steady growth after 1922, when a
four-year degree program was offered. In 1959, the UC Regents designated Davis as
a general campus, with all major academic disciplines. Subsequently, enrollment
grew rapidly and professional schools were added. Although remaining outside of
the City's corporate limits, the University's presence has been and remains central to
the growth, identity and culture of the city.
Figure 4 shows the growth of the City from 1923 to 1993, in the form of its street
system. Figure 5 compares Davis’ population and area to the cities of San Luis
Obispo and Woodland.
                              B. Planning History of Davis
In 1925, a city planning commission was established and in 1927, zoning was
adopted.
Davis' first comprehensive General Plan was adopted in 1958, which stated the
community would grow slowly from 7,735 people in 1958 to between 30,000 -
35,000 people by 1980. The major tenets of the first plan were that Davis was to
continue to be an attractive family-oriented residential community that maintains a
friendly relationship with the University; that Davis was to continue to provide high
quality public services and facilities; that Davis was to provide for a complete central
business district and system of small neighborhood shopping centers with a high
degree of convenience and service; that the highest use of agricultural soils would be
encouraged; and that orderly development should be based on a sound economic
base through the encouragement of attractive and acceptable industrial, distribution,
research, administrative and professional activities and developments.
In 1964, the General Plan was amended because it was assumed the student
population at UC Davis would grow to 15,000. The plan then assumed Davis would
grow from 11,750 people in 1964 to 75,000 people by 1985. An additional objective
was added to discourage leap frog development.
In 1967, a bikeway system was established, on-street bike lanes were delineated, and
off-street bike paths began to be constructed.
In 1969, the Davis General Plan was amended to allow Davis to grow from 23,450
(1970) people to 90,000 by 1990 with a holding capacity of 110,000 people. The
objectives were the same as the 1964 plan. However, the 1969 plan assumed UC
Davis would grow to 17,000 students.
                                             26

Davis General Plan                       Section II: Planning Context
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
Figure 4: Growth of the City 1923-1993
                                      27
Section II: Planning Context                               Davis General Plan
                                        May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
Figure 5: Comparison of City Sizes, January 1, 1996
                                 28
Davis General Plan                                               Section II: Planning Context
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
As a result of the 1969 plan, the community became alarmed by how large the
community could grow and the Council appointed a 110-person committee which
developed the 1974 plan. The 1974 General Plan assumed Davis would grow to
50,000 by 1990. It was the result of this plan that Davis gained national reputation
for community efforts in energy conservation and several Davis architects, engineers
and builders pioneered energy-efficient building and subdivision design. The Davis
General Plan for the first time discussed managing growth yet providing affordable
housing; that the community should provide for the internally generated needs of
the people who work or study in Davis; and that distinct neighborhoods should be
encouraged. This plan also addressed conservation, recycling, planning for solar
energy use, preserving prime agricultural land as open space, providing a mix of
affordable housing, planning for bike and transit, and requiring public art.
In 1975, the City enacted its own building code sections that included energy
conservation standards for new construction. Many of the code provisions were
subsequently incorporated into State requirements.
In 1977, the plan was amended because the City Council thought the City would not
exceed 50,000 people by the year 2000.
In 1984, a new plan was adopted, still assuming 50,000 people by the year 2000.
This plan expanded some of the concepts found in the 1974 plan, such as a detailed
growth management program. This plan included an urban limit line concept with
an agricultural buffer, phasing and an urban reserve designation. It also said
commercial land outside of the Core area was possible and allowed mixed use
developments. It also contained special policies for the Core area, University
Avenue and Olive Drive; and a fiscal element.
In December 1987, the City Council adopted a new General Plan. The plan was in
response to concerns about potential developments in the unincorporated portions
of the Davis area. The plan assumed that Davis would grow from 50,666 people in
1987 in the Planning Area to about 75,000 people, which is an increase of about 50
percent. The plan assumed that approximately 9,700 new residential units would
need to be built to accommodate the additional 25,000 people. It assumed that the
total number of residential units in Davis would increase from 19,523 to 29,249
units.
The 1987 General Plan also stated the following:
    •    Davis would remain a small University-oriented town surrounded by
         farmland, greenbelt and natural habitat areas and preserves.
    •    The urban land uses designated on the General Plan land use map only
         contained the amount of land needed to accommodate the internally-
         generated needs of its residents and the regional fair-share housing need.
    •    The core would remain the retail/cultural/office center for the entire
         community designed at a pedestrian scale.
                                           29

Section II: Planning Context                                              Davis General Plan
                                                      May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
     •     University-related research businesses, administrative offices, and
           manufacturers using non-nuisance processes would be encouraged to locate
           in Davis.
     •     Each residential neighborhood would be served by a neighborhood
           greenbelt, retail, school and a park.
                       C. UC Davis and Surrounding Jurisdictions
This section looks at the relationships between the City of Davis and UC Davis and
surrounding jurisdictions.
1.     UC Davis
Since early days as the 778-acre “University Farm” for training in agriculture, UC
Davis has grown to offer more than 100 undergraduate majors and 80 graduate
programs in the College of Agricultural and Sciences, College of Engineering and
College of Letters and Science. In addition, the university has four professional
programs: the School of Law; the Graduate School of Management; the School of
Medicine; and the School of Veterinary Medicine, the latter being the only such
school in California.
Today, UC Davis is the northernmost and has the largest of the UC campuses,
occupying 3,600 acres adjacent to the City of Davis and 5,200 total acres, including
the Russell Ranch property 2½ miles to the west of the main campus. UC Davis is
second among UC campuses in budget and total expenditures, and third in
enrollment with just over 22,000 students in 1996.
UC Davis is one of the nation's top 20 universities in research funding and has made
significant contributions in a variety of fields. Examples of special contributions and
programs are: the viticulture and enology (wine making) department; the studio art
program; AIDS research, combining the skills of medical, biomedical and veterinary
scientists; bioengineering center for plant pathology research; an agricultural health
and safety center; and institute for transportation studies; a center for neuroscience;
and a center for studying the health of ecosystems.
The UC Davis Medical Center in Sacramento, the only level-1 trauma center in the
interior of California, operates a teaching hospital, a regional burn center, cardiac
services (including open-heart and transplant surgery), an eye and tissue bank, and a
cancer center.
Enrollment and Employment. Table 2 shows the enrollment and employment
trends of UC Davis. In 1995-96, UC Davis had a three-term average on-campus
enrollment of 22,339, including the undergraduate colleges, graduate studies, and the
professional schools (source: UC Davis Planning and Budget Office). This does not
                                              30

Davis General Plan                                                      Section II: Planning Context
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
include students off-campus, such as at the UC Davis Medical Center in
Sacramento.
In April of the 1995-96 year, UC Davis employed a total on-campus personnel of
9,944 persons, consisting of full-time and part-time academic, management and staff
personnel. Including student staff, personnel consisted of 15,293 persons.
Housing. Approximately 92 percent of the UC Davis students live on campus, in
the City, or elsewhere in the Planning Area.
Based on information in the University's Long Range Development Plan
Environmental Impact Report (EIR), approximately 26 percent of the total students
were housed on the UC Davis campus, in residence halls, apartments and group
quarters.
                                           Table 2
                UC DAVIS ENROLLMENT AND EMPLOYMENT
                                     Enrollment on            Employment            Employment
                                     Davis Campus              Excluding              Including
                                   (3-Term Average)           Student Staff         Student Staff
  1995-96                                22,339                   9,944                 15,293
  1994-95                                22,251                   9,707                 15,043
  1993-94                                21,522                   9,800                 15,419
  1992-93                                21,060                   9,550                 14,856
  1991-92                                21,512                   9,933                 15,128
  1990-91                                22,343                   9,747                 15,121
  1989-90                                20,961                  10,393                 15,537
  1988-89                                20,315                   9,850                 14,411
  1987-88                                19,314                   9,188                 13,845
  2005-06 Forecast                       26,000                  12,630              Not Available
Source:     UC Davis Admissions and Personnel Offices, May 1996.
            UC Davis Long Range Development Plan, 1994.
It is the University's currently adopted policy to provide housing for at least 25
percent of all students and 90 percent of the incoming freshman class. The City and
the University entered into a Memorandum of Understanding in 1989. The MOU
establishes a goal of providing on campus housing for 25% of the 1989-90 base
population of 21,000 and for 35% of subsequent increases in student enrollment,
                                               31
Section II: Planning Context                                               Davis General Plan
                                                        May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
but only to the extent that it is financially feasible. This goal was revised by U.C.
Davis in the 1994 Long Range Development Plan to reflect a comprehensive target
of achieving 25% of students on campus. The city and University representatives
are considering various modifications to the 1989 MOU at this time.
Approximately 66 percent of UC Davis students live in Davis, occupying nearly one-
third of all housing units in the City, with an average ratio of students per unit of 2.6.
Approximately eight percent of the students live outside of Davis.
The University is also taking steps to add housing and meet its target of 25% of
students living on campus. It is constructing 676 dormitory units in Orchard,
Solano and Russell Park dormitories, and also plans additional beds in the Cuarto
dormitory, Primero Grove and Webster/Emerson, all to be constructed by the
beginning of the 2001-02 academic year.
Approximately one-half of UC Davis employees live in Davis. While the proportion
of students living off campus in Davis has remained fairly steady, the proportion of
faculty and staff living in Davis has been decreasing.
Long Range Development Plan. The Long Range Development Plan (LRDP) is
a comprehensive plan that addresses physical planning issues for a campus of the
University of California system. It is intended to guide physical development in
order to achieve the academic needs and goals of the campus during the planning
horizon of 2005-06. The current plan was adopted by the UC Regents in 1994.
The plan addresses University goals and growth; program needs; goals of physical
development; and physical plan elements. Approximately 1,750,000 square feet of
new space will be required on campus to meet projected academic, administrative,
construction and support needs. The plan will enable the campus to accommodate
an optimal enrollment of 26,850 students (26,000 at the Davis campus) by the year
2005-06. New housing will be required to continue providing on-campus housing
for 25 percent of the student enrollment. New facilities and playing fields will be
required to meet the physical education, intramural sports, and recreational needs of
students. The LRDP also identifies Enterprise reserves to enable University
partnerships with the private sector for University-related projects. The Enterprise
reserve program is designed to use alternative funding mechanisms like public-
private partnerships to create space in certain portions of the UC campus for
research activities, faculty-staff housing, student housing, office space, recreational
and cultural opportunities, and open space.
Six complementary planning concepts will guide development of the campus: the
creation of positive environments for academic and social interaction; development
of the entire campus as an educational resource; concentration of new development
within existing developed areas of campus; maintenance of the open character of the
campus; the augmentation of the LRDP with guidelines for campus neighborhoods
or districts; and building upon the historic pattern of campus development.
                                             32
Davis General Plan                                                 Section II: Planning Context
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
The plan consists of elements that address land use; the campus open space system;
and pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation on campus.
2.     Surrounding Jurisdictions
Although other jurisdictions are sovereign, the City of Davis is interested in the
plans of surrounding jurisdictions for various physical, social and economic reasons.
The land use and resource policies of other jurisdictions can affect the region's
population, housing, economy, air quality, water supply and quality, drainage,
mobility, open space, and long-term viability of agriculture. The City of Davis may
find that it is in its interest to develop policies which support the policies of other
jurisdictions (on such issues as agriculture) or reach agreements with other
jurisdictions (on such issues as habitat management).
Below is a brief summary of the General Plans for the surrounding areas. Figure 6
shows the planning areas and spheres of influence of the jurisdictions surrounding
Davis.
The Yolo County Local Agency Formation (LAFCO) adopts Spheres of Influence
to assist decisions on boundary changes of cities and special districts. Planning areas
are adopted by the individual cities themselves, and sometimes overlap. When this
occurs, there is no legal problem, since planning areas do not carry regulatory
weight.
Yolo County General Plan. The Board of Supervisors adopted the most recent
Yolo County General Plan on July 17, 1983. While there have been some policy
changes since that time (land use policies specific to the Knight’s Landing
development were updated in 1990), there have been no comprehensive revisions of
the Plan since its adoption. County policy and practice is of critical importance to
future expansion and maintenance of the agricultural setting with limited urbanized
areas in the land outside the city. The County's goals of agricultural preservation and
contiguous urban development are generally consistent with Davis policies.
The County General Plan contains 42 goals. The goals which relate to Davis are as
follows:
     •   Protect prime and other agricultural land from urban development.
     •   Create urban open spaces, greenbelts and scenic highways.
     •   Discourage urban sprawl.
     •   Continue to improve existing urban uses and place new urban uses in
         existing planned urban areas.
     •   Conserve natural resources.
                                              33

Section II: Planning Context                       Davis General Plan
                                May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                             34
Davis General Plan                       Section II: Planning Context
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                                                                ___
                                      35
Section II: Planning Context                                         Davis General Plan
                                                  May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
________________________________________________________________________________ __
                                         36
Davis General Plan                                                Section II: Planning Context
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
The plan contains significant policies related to vigorously conserving and preserving
agricultural land; non-agricultural land uses are prohibited from agriculturally
designated areas. An administrative policy states that “Yolo County shall require
urban development to be placed within city limits in urban areas of Davis,
Woodland and Winters”. The plan also discusses preserving open spaces (such as
streams, drainage channel, rivers and habitat), creating an open space corridor plan
and establishing wildlife areas.
Yolo County Davis Area General Plan. In addition to the Yolo County General
Plan's goals and policies, the Davis planning area is affected by the policies and land
use map found in the Yolo County Davis Area General Plan. This plan was adopted
by the Board of Supervisors on August 3, 1976. Most of the land on the County
land use map is designated for agriculture with some land being designated for
residential and limited industrial land uses. Although some of the land uses are in
conflict with the existing City of Davis General Plan, the basic policy statement
conforms with the Davis General Plan. The policy states that all urban development
within the sphere of influence of the City of Davis should take place only after
annexation.
Woodland General Plan. The City of Woodland lies approximately seven miles
north of Davis and had a population of 44,140 on January 1, 1997. The Woodland
City Council adopted a new Woodland General Plan in February of 1996.
Following adoption of the General Plan by the City Council, a referendum petition
was submitted. The Plan was put on the ballot in November of 1996 and Woodland
residents voted to retain the General Plan as adopted by the City Council. The 1996
General Plan replaces the previous General Plan of 1988.
The 1996 Plan foresees the city population growing from 42,500 residents in 1995 to
66,000 by 2020, eventually covering approximately 10.2 square miles. The Plan also
assumes an increase in employment from 15,400 to 35,000 in the same time period.
With concerns over development pressures, floodplains, preservation of prime
agricultural land, preservation of town character, and efficient extension of
infrastructure, the Plan defines an urban limit line. This line encompasses all land to
be considered for urban development within the time frame of the General Plan
(2020). The Plan encourages infill development and re-use of underutilized lands
within the urban limit line. The Plan also envisions that a permanent urban limit line
will protect agricultural land outside the city in perpetuity. The western and
northern boundaries of the permanent line coincide with the urban limit line, while
the boundaries to the south and west will be determined after further study. Areas
east of County Road 102 and south of Main Street are designated as urban reserve.
The boundary of the LAFCO Sphere of Influence study for Woodland coincides
with the planning area boundary.
West Sacramento General Plan. The City of West Sacramento is located
approximately nine miles east of Davis and had a population of 30,467 as of January
                                            37

Section II: Planning Context                                              Davis General Plan
                                                     May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
1, 1993. The West Sacramento City Council adopted its first General Plan in 1990.
The LAFCO Sphere of Influence study is coterminous with the city limits. The
general plan area of interest extends west to the easterly city limits of Davis.
The West Sacramento General Plan assumes the city would grow from 27,756
people in 1988 to 79,903 in 2010. The plan does not discuss phasing the growth,
but it is acknowledged that before 40,000 people can be located in the Southport
area (the area south of the Deep Water Ship Channel), many major infrastructure
improvements must be made.
Winters General Plan. The City of Winters is approximately 14 miles west of
Davis and had a population of 4,875 on January 1, 1993. The Winters General Plan,
which was adopted in 1992, assumes a three percent growth rate from a population
of 4,500 people in 1992 to 12,500 by 2010. The plan does not include a phasing
plan except to say services must be available. The plan includes an urban limit line
concept showing where the urban uses are expected for the next twenty years. The
Urban Limit Line assumes the city will contain 1,980 acres, (1,277 are already in the
city) and is bounded by I-505 on the east, Putah Creek on the south, County Road
88 on the west and County Road 32- A on the north. The plan also includes a study
area northwest of the urban limit line, where additional land may be allowed within
the city in the future. The LAFCO Sphere of Influence is coterminous with the
General Plan map.
Solano County General Plan. The Solano County General Plan was adopted by
the Solano Board of Supervisors in 1980. Generally the Solano County General
Plan conforms with the Davis General Plan policies. Solano County's General Plan
contains policies regarding preserving agricultural land and encouraging urban
development within existing communities.
Solano County’s Proposition A was adopted by the voters in the mid-1980's and
stated that no urban development can occur outside city spheres of influence. The
principles contained in Proposition A were renewed by Solano County’s voters in
1995 with the passage of a measure called the Orderly Growth Initiative. The
initiative works similarly to Proposition A and is valid through 2010.
Most of the land in Solano County within the Davis Planning Area is designated for
intensive agriculture except for the land at the Pedrick Road interchange which is
designated for highway commercial. Putah Creek is designated in the Park and
Recreation Element as a recreation resource area.
Dixon General Plan. The City of Dixon is approximately 7 miles south of Davis
and had a population of 11,824 people on January 1, 1993.
The Dixon City Council updated its General Plan in 1993. The 1993 Plan
accommodates a population of about 20,325 by 2010 and also contains a policy
which encourages the preservation of open space between Davis and Dixon to
                                           38

Davis General Plan                                               Section II: Planning Context
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
maintain community integrity and urban form. Population projections under the
Plan are based, in part, on Measure B which allows a 3 percent growth rate in total
housing units per year, bringing the City’s total to 6,775 by 2010. Dixon had an
estimated 3,911 housing units on January 1, 1993. Designed to better balance the
City’s land use, the Dixon General Plan shows a considerable increase in the amount
of land being designated for planned business/industrial, highway commercial and
residential.
The Dixon Sphere of Influence northern boundary, closest to Davis, is south of
Tremont Road.
                                           39

Section II: Planning Context                              Davis General Plan
                               Adopted May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                             40
SECTION III.
VISIONS

          SECTION III. GENERAL PLAN VISIONS
The visions in the General Plan are broad philosophical statements describing
desired end states. They are intended to convey purpose and mission and are not
necessarily attainable now or in the foreseeable future. The vision statements set the
tone for the goals, policies, and actions in Section IV through VII of the General
Plan, but they are not prescriptive or legal mandates.
1. Quality of Life
    •   Value, support and nurture Davis’ individuals, families and youth; their
        quality of life; and the ethic of lifelong learning and contribution.
    •   Foster a safe, sustainable, healthy, diverse and stimulating environment for
        all in the community.
    •   Promote wellness, strive to be a community where basic human needs are
        met, and provide opportunities for all community members to reach their
        maximum potential.
    •   Become a community where the impacts of traffic, noise, pollution, crime
        and litter are minimized.
2. Small Town Character
    •   Maintain Davis as a cohesive, compact, university-oriented city surrounded
        by and containing farmland, greenbelts, natural habitats and natural
        resources.
    •   Reflect Davis’ small town character in urban design that contributes to and
        enhances livability and social interaction.
    •   Maintain a strong, vital, pedestrian-oriented and dynamic downtown area.
    •   Encourage carefully-planned, sensitively-designed infill and new
        development to a scale in keeping with the existing city character.
                                             41

Section III: General Plan Visions                                           Davis General Plan
                                                        May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
3. Diversity
     • Celebrate and encourage a diverse cultural community.
     • Identify and promote changes of those social structures which limit equal
         access or participation on the basis of race, ethnicity, culture, age, education,
         religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, or socio-economic background.
4. Arts and Culture
     • Promote and support the arts, emphasizing the potential for the arts to build
         strong community character.
     • Identify and preserve Davis’ archeological, historical and cultural resources.
         Foster understanding and appreciation of the city’s heritage.
5. Natural Resource Protection and Restoration
     • Promote a clean, safe, healthy, livable and ecologically sound environment
         for today and the future.
     • Pursue sustainability.
     • Minimize impacts on Davis’ land, water, air and biological resources and seek
         to enhance and restore Davis’ environment, through such projects as
         wetlands and multi-functional drainage ponds.
6. Distinct Neighborhood Identity
     • Preserve and create an array of distinct neighborhoods so that all residents
         can identify a neighborhood that is “home” for them.
     • Promote in each neighborhood a diversity of housing options that will enable
         people with wide range of needs, economic levels, cultural identities and ages
         to live in Davis.
     • Enhance neighborhoods by supporting schools, retail centers, parks and
         community facilities that can be the foci and gathering places for each
         neighborhood.
                                             42

Davis General Plan                                          Section III: General Plan Visions
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
7. Broad Range of Services and Businesses
    • Develop a broad range of services and businesses to meet the daily needs of
        Davis citizens for employment, shopping, education and recreation.
    • Promote economic vitality by developing a diversity of business enterprises.
    • Promote equal opportunities in employment.
8. Neighborhood-Oriented Transportation System
    • Encourage a clean, quiet, safe and attractive transportation system that
        harmonizes with the city’s neighborhoods and enhances quality of life.
    • Promote alternative transportation modes such as bicycling, walking, public
        transit and telecommuting.
9. Parks and Open Space Program
    • Implement an open space program that creates, preserves and enhances open
        space and wildlife habitat.
    • Provide a park system and recreational programs and facilities that meet the
        diverse needs of Davis citizens, enhance the environment and foster a sense
        of community.
10. Agriculture
    • Protect the viability of agriculture and prime agricultural land in and around
        Davis.
    • Encourage agriculture practices that are not injurious to the city's
        environment or residents.
11. Synergistic Partnership with UC Davis
        Recognize and strengthen the positive synergistic partnership between the
         City and UC Davis.
                                           43

Section III: General Plan Visions                                      Davis General Plan
                                                    May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
12. Regional Context
     • Recognize Davis’ role within the broader region.
     • Make decisions on City policy with an understanding of regional impacts.
     • Maximize available resources through joint planning with other agencies and
         jurisdictions.
13. Regional Leadership
     • Make Davis a regional leader in slow and well-managed growth, agricultural
         and environmental preservation, and cultural diversity.
14. Accountable, Citizen-Based Planning
     • Involve citizens on a continuous basis in all aspects of planning.
15. Embracing Technology
     • Make the advantages of new technologies available to Davis residents.
     • Embrace information technology as a tool for solving problems.
                                          44

   SECTION IV.
COMMUNITY FORM

  Chapter 1. Land Use and Growth Management
BACKGROUND
The way we use the land, today and in the future, is at the heart of the General Plan.
Land use decisions affect all other aspects of the City including traffic, noise and air
quality; opportunities for jobs, housing and businesses; community character and
design and the need for public facilities and services of all types. This chapter
provides the basic facts regarding existing land uses in and around the City, trends
for future land use, and various opportunities for change or maintaining existing
patterns.
Existing Land Use
Table 3 shows the estimated number of housing units and amount of commercial
development by planning sub-area in Davis as of January 1, 1998.
The data reveals the following basic facts:
    •    The total number of housing units (including dwelling unit equivalents for
         living group quarters) was 22,074 in the City.
    •    The sub-area with the most existing housing units is Central Davis, followed
         by East Davis.
Figure 7 shows vacant land within the City as of May 31, 1996. Table 4 shows the
number of acres of vacant land by sub-area.
Growth Management and Growth Limits
Since UC Davis became a general campus of the University of California in the early
1950's, Davis’ average growth rate has been among the highest in the Sacramento
Metropolitan Area. Concern about this growth rate was expressed by the electorate
in June 1986, when 58 percent of those voting approved an advisory measure calling
for Davis “to grow as slow as legally possible.”
The following provides a chronology of Council and community decisions on
growth in the past three decades:
                                           45

Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management              May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
1973                     General Plan adopted with an anticipated population of 50,000
                         by the year 1990.
June 1982                General Plan text amended to reflect revised goal of 50,000 in
                         the year 2000.
February 1984            General Plan adopted, anticipating a population of 50,000 in
                         the urban area by the year 2000.
June 1986                City of Davis voters approve Measure L, an advisory measure
                         to “grow as slow as legally possible.”
June 1987                South Davis Specific Plan approved, allowing 1,800 residential
                         units.
November 1986            Pass-through agreement among City, Redevelopment Agency,
                         and Yolo County. Agreement requires Agency to pass through
                         a portion of its property tax revenues to Yolo County. The
                         Agency may stop payments if the County approves urban
                         development within the City’s planning area, but only if the
                         City maintains an average population growth rate of 1.78
                         percent per year.
December 1987            General Plan adopted, accommodating a population of 75,000
                         in the Davis Planning Area by 2010 and 27,390 total units
                         within the City of Davis, for an approximate city population of
                         65,500.
February 1989            South Davis Specific Plan amended to be consistent with the
                         General Plan, including a reduction to 1,510 residential units.
1989-1994                Several Development Agreements approved, including Mace
                         Ranch, Woodbridge, Evergreen, and Wildhorse.
May 1995                 Voters ratify the Wildhorse Development Agreement.
May 2001                Council adopts General Plan Update, reducing potential urban
                        growth sites on the periphery and focusing growth inward to
                        accommodate population increases and housing needs.
July 2004               Council adopts Housing Element consistent with State law. The
                        element included how the City will meet its regional housing fair
                        share for the planning period of 2002 to 2007 by providing a
                        range of housing options.
                                              46

Davis General Plan                                                Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007            Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
Studies of Internal Housing Needs
In October 2002, City Council appointed a subcommittee to study internally-
generated housing needs. The Council wanted to consider providing housing
opportunities for the local workforce as the primary reason for city residential
growth to provide housing opportunities for the local workforce. The Council
found that the public purposes served by providing such opportunities include:
    •    Help the City and school district better serve the public with vital services.
    •    Help businesses by facilitating greater employee productivity and morale,
         enhancing recruitment and retention efforts, and increasing service levels.
    •    Reduce traffic congestion and air pollution by people who otherwise would
         live outside Davis and commute longer distances to work.
    •    Improve the quality of life for Davis employees by bringing them closer to
         their place of work.
In March 2003, the City Council reviewed an “Internal Housing Needs Analysis”
prepared by Bay Area Economics (BAE). This study analyzed the City’s share of
housing needs based on local employment growth, UCD growth, and “natural”
growth through 2015. The study accounted for the new housing planned by UCD
on the main campus and in the new neighborhood west of Highway 113.
In October 2004, the City Council reviewed a “Middle Income Housing – Needs,
Impacts, and Options” analysis by BAE. This study analyzed the need for middle
income housing, the public benefits and potential impacts of a middle income
housing inclusionary requirement, and the public benefits and potential adverse
impacts on protected classes from establishing a preference for local workers to
purchase or rent local housing. The study found that a middle income inclusionary
housing requirement would result in a reduced opportunity for developer profit
compared to building and selling market rate units. The study and follow-up
analyses found that the developer would not need to subsidize the middle income
costs through the construction and pricing of the market rate units in the project
unless the project had unusually high development costs and few housing units to
absorb these costs.
In February to March 2005, City Council reviewed a final phase of the analysis, an
evaluation of available program options to implement a middle income inclusionary
requirement. On March 8, 2005, the City Council adopted an updated resolution
directing staff to implement an annual City growth guideline of 1% based primarily
on internal housing needs. The Council also adopted a resolution regarding key
issues of a middle income housing requirement and a local employee preference
system that would be utilized in the sale and re-sale of inclusionary housing units.
                                           47

Section IV: Community Form                                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Mix of Housing Types
Land Use policies A.2 and A.3 Housing policy 1.1 and related standards and actions
and housing mix policy interpretations call for a variety of housing types, unit sizes,
densities, prices and rents, designs, and architecture diversity. New housing shall
meet minimum densities in the General Plan. A percentage of small residential lots
and structures shall be considered as a requirement in new large residential
developments to contribute to the variety of housing opportunities.
The intent is to provide a mix of housing types and prices that will serve a variety of
households and lifestyles, particularly the needs of local employees. A new
development is expected to provide the greatest mix of housing types, prices and
designs that is feasible (that is, capable of being accomplished in a successful manner
within a reasonable period of time, taking into account environmental, economic
and social factors) in addition to providing required affordable units. A single mix
requirement would be inappropriate to apply to all projects because a project’s ability
to provide a diverse mix of housing types is affected by the site’s unique size,
location, infrastructure requirements, and other economic factors. In recognition of
these differences in projects, a developer should justify how the proposed housing
mix constitutes the greatest range that is feasible.
The “Planned Development” district in the City’s zoning ordinance implements the
housing mix policies by encouraging a variety of well designed dwelling types.
                                             48

Davis General Plan                                                           Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                       Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
                                             Table 3
                         EXISTING LAND USE AS OF JANUARY 1, 1998
                                      Residential Units
       Planning                 Low              Medium                 High
         Areas                Density            Density              Density           Total
 Northwest                                 0                   0                  0              0
 North Central                           807                   0                120            927
 Northeast                                 0                   0                  0              0
 West Davis                            2,402                  48              1,554          4,004
 Central Davis                         3,608                 298              3,574          7,480
 East Davis                            2,763                   0              1,781          4,544
 East Davis/Mace                         720                  63                 48            831
 Core Area                               217                   6                291            514
 South Davis                           1,936                 148              1,371          3,455
 Southeast                                 0                   0                  0              0
 Gateway/Olive Dr.                       154                   0                165            319
 City Totals                          12,607                 563              8,904         22,074
 Note: Mobile homes counted as low density. Condominiums counted as medium density.
                                         Non-Residential Uses
       Planning           Neighborhood           General              Office/
          Areas                Retail         Commercial          Business Park       Industrial        Total
 Northwest                                 0               4,000             13,000              0         17,000
 North Central                             0             19,000              71,000       564,000         654,000
 Northeast                                 0                   0                  0              0              0
 West Davis                           55,000             11,000              57,000              0        123,000
 Central Davis                       276,000             29,000             188,000              0        493,000
 East Davis                          124,000            278,000             202,000       131,000         735,000
 East Davis/Mace                           0                   0            104,000         44,000        148,000
 Core Area                            48,000            516,000             459,000              0      1,023,000
 South Davis                         137,000            286,000             455,000         61,000        939,000
 Southeast                                 0                   0                  0              0              0
 Gateway/Olive Dr.                         0            140,000               4,000              0        144,000
 City Totals                        640,000           1,283,000           1,553,000       800,000       4,276,000
 Note: Public uses, including Sutter Davis Hospital in the Northwest planning area, are not included in
 the data in this table.
                                                    49
Section IV: Community Form                                                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management                     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                               Table 4
                  ACREAGES OF VACANT LAND WITHIN CITY
                                      AS OF MAY 31, 1996
             Planning Subareas Within City                             Vacant Land
             Northwest                                                              31.1 acres
             North Central                                                          67.0 acres
             West Davis                                                            141.4 acres
             Central Davis                                                          12.3 acres
             East Davis                                                             39.0 acres
             East Davis – Mace                                                     329.6 acres
             Core Area                                                               0.8 acres
             Gateway                                                                16.9 acres
             South Davis                                                           372.5 acres
             Total Vacant Land Within City                                       1,009.8 acres
          Note:     The following lands are not annexed the time of this survey: Wildhorse;
                    Willowbank 9; Nishi Property; and Covell Center.
                                                   50

Davis General Plan                                      Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007    Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
                                       51
Section IV: Community Form                                          Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management       May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
____________________________________________________________________________________
                                          52
Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007             Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
Infill Potential
In January 1996, at the request of General Plan committees, the City completed an
"Infill Potential Study" as a technical analysis supporting the General Plan Update.
The study examined the potential for infill development as an alternative to
accommodating growth through expansions to City boundaries. Citywide infill
potential was assessed based on 36 potential sites. Five detailed case studies were
prepared to examine specific design and economic issues related to infill
development feasibility.
Infill is defined as urban development or redevelopment on vacant or
"underutilized" urban-designated land within a city's boundaries, as an alternative to
accommodating growth through expansions of city boundaries. "Underutilized"
urban-designated land is defined as developed or partially developed urban-
designated land which could be developed in other uses or more dense and intense
use consistent with City policies, surrounding uses and potential impact issues.
Vacant and urban-designated lands do not include non-urban designations such as
Agriculture, Urban Agriculture Transition Area, Parks, Natural Habitat, Greenbelts
and Greenstreets nor creeks, sloughs or channels.
The study identified the potential for more than 1,000 residential units and 300,000
square feet of retail and office use beyond those in the 1987 General Plan. The
study also indicated that the following factors make financial feasibility difficult for
an infill project: high cost of land; large differences in values per square foot
between detached and attached single-family homes; the lack of a difference in
impact fees based on the size of the unit; the small difference between development
fees for infill projects and peripheral growth areas; and parking requirements versus
available space.
Neighborhoods
Davis' many neighborhoods are key building blocks of its land use pattern, urban
design and transportation system. Figure 8 shows the facilities that serve Davis'
existing neighborhoods.
Land Use and Economic Analyses Completed for the General Plan Update
In February 1996, the City of Davis retained Economics Research Associates to
provide three economic analyses to inform land use decisions for the General Plan
update: 1) industrial market; 2) retail acreage demand and downtown strategies; and
3) grocery store demand versus supply by subarea. The major findings and
recommendations from these analyses are summarized below.
Industrial market. The study concluded that there is existing unmet demand for
new industrial space in Davis and that Davis could accommodate 200 to 250 gross
acres of industrial growth through 2010. The major dilemma facing Davis regarding
                                             53
Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management               May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
the industrial market is that much of the regional industrial market serves the
warehouse and distribution sector, for which Davis does not offer any competitive
advantage relative to other cities in the market area. In fact, Davis' industrial
development price structure (due to Mello-Roos burdens, fees and land costs)
essentially prohibits Davis from attracting a major share of this important regional
sector.
The sector for which Davis offers advantages— high tech startups, R&D and
manufacturing— demand either more affordable space, larger lots than Davis in its
inventory, or lots located away from residential uses. Without resolving this
dilemma, Davis is not in a position to absorb the amount of industrial development
assumed in the Major Projects Financing Plan, creating public facility financing cash
flow problems for the City.
Recommendations for consideration included the following:
     •    Develop a strategy that targets higher value-added, technology oriented
          industrial uses that are attracted to Davis' competitive advantages,
          particularly its University linkages, educated workforce and quality of life for
          employees;
     •    Offer a variety of lot sizes for these industries, including affordable
          incubator facilities for start-ups, flexible R&D space, and large lots (20-50
          acre lots that may be assembled) for manufacturing firms and build-to-suit
          developments;
     •    Shorten the approval process with discretionary approvals completed up
          front; and
     •    Relieve the Major Projects Financing Plan fee burden for industrial uses by
          reviewing the nexus assumptions.
Retail acreage demand and downtown strategies. Findings and conclusions
included the following:
     •    Excluding the grocery and automotive sectors, Davis area retail sales
          amounted to only 54 percent of community demand. Compared to
          northern California communities of similar size, Davis is one of the lowest
          sales tax generators on a per resident basis. Much of the $112 million in
          sales tax leakage flows to Sacramento and Woodland and is concentrated in
          the apparel and general merchandise sectors.
     •    Davis' automotive sector is by far its most important sector in terms of sales
          tax generation, accounting for 41 percent of the City's total sales tax
          revenue.
                                               54

Davis General Plan                                                   Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
     •    The retail strength and market niche of Davis' downtown consists of eating
          and drinking establishments, small specialty shops, theater, cinema and
          service establishments. The downtown satisfies less than one-tenth of the
          community's need for apparel, accessories, general merchandise and
          department store space.
Recommendations for consideration included:
     •    The updated General Plan should accommodate two new community scale
          shopping centers or districts to intercept 50 or 60 percent of the retail
          leakage. The first community shopping center should be 20 to 25 acres in
          size and should have a strong (60 percent or more of the floor area) apparel
          and soft goods emphasis. The second center will require 20 to 30 acres, is
          probably ten or more years away and its composition should be determined
          at a later date.
     •    Large warehouse style retailers (in excess of 60,000 square feet) are
          inappropriate given the nature and scale of the Davis market. Their
          competitive impacts would be excessive and do not target the nature of the
          Davis market.
To protect the future vitality of downtown Davis and the distinctive character of the
city, future restaurant and cinema developments should be channeled into the
downtown vicinity.
     •    The General Plan should accommodate the expansion of the automotive
          sector, specifically the auto dealers, by approximately 50 percent over the
          next 20 years. Such an expansion of the current 20 acres in auto dealers
          could be accommodated on the additional 15 acres of undeveloped land in
          the auto center district.
Grocery store demand versus supply by subarea. The findings of this analysis
included the following:
     •    The Davis area currently has sufficient demand for one additional
          neighborhood center (anchored by a supermarket and drug store) of
          approximately ten acres. The development of a second neighborhood
          center in the immediate future would impact existing stores.
     •    If one neighborhood center is developed in South Davis, sufficient demand
          for the second store will not materialize in East Davis for approximately a
          decade. In the 2005 to 2015 time frame, a second neighborhood center of
          this scale may be needed.
Subsequent grocery store supply and demand studies (including, BAE, 1998) found
that if either 25,000 or 40,000 square feet of grocery store space is built at Mace
Ranch then one or two existing grocery stores would be negatively impacted, even
                                              55

Section IV: Community Form                                                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management                  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
with the residential buildout of the General Plan. New, unanticipated residential
uses would be needed to off set this impact.
Note: The recommendations in all of the land use and economic analyses described above were
considered and weighed against other community objectives but were not necessarily incorporated into
the General Plan Update adopted by City Council. Some of these recommendations related to
community scale shopping centers and industrial uses were not implemented in the General Plan
Update because of concerns with other general plan goals and policies, various impacts on the
community and fiscal revenue/costs.
PRINCIPLES USED IN CREATING LAND USE MAP
The land use map (Figure 11) portrays the ultimate uses of land in and around
Davis. It is to be read in conjunction with the descriptions of the land use
categories, which follow, and which describe the intent, allowed uses, and special
regulations within each land use category. The land use map shows areas intended
for urban development during the term of the General Plan. Other areas are not
intended for urban development.
The land use map has been created to implement the following principles, which
form the foundation for land use planning in Davis:
     1. Provide land use and zoning categories to generally reflect existing densities
          and to allow for a broad range of housing types, configurations and
          densities.
     2. Focus growth inward to accommodate population increases. Infill
          development is supported as an appropriate means of meeting some of the
          city’s housing needs.
     3. Create and maintain housing patterns that promote energy conserving
          transportation methods.
     4. Accommodate new buildings with floor area ratios that can support transit
          use, especially within ¼ mile from commercial areas and transit stops, but
          maintain scale transition and retain enough older buildings to retain
          small-city character.
     5. Support the opportunity for efficient public transit by siting large apartment
          complexes on arterial streets, in the core and near neighborhood centers and
          the University.
     6. Site local services, retail and recreation strategically to minimize the lengths
          of trips and to facilitate walking, bicycling and transit use as alternatives to
          auto use.
                                                56

Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007             Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
    7. All neighborhoods, both new and existing, should include a centrally located
         hub or activity node within walking distance of housing in the
         neighborhood, as illustrated in Figures 9 and 10. Transit stops,
         neighborhood commercial uses and activity centers should be in this hub.
         Hubs should be designed to support transit, pedestrian and bicycle travel,
         and to serve neighborhood needs.
    8. Provide locations in several sectors of the City for commercial services, such
         as automobile sales and repair, building materials and yards, nurseries, banks,
         and convenience stores.
    9. Designate neighborhood shopping centers and, where feasible, create a
         neighborhood activity center in each neighborhood area.
    10. A maximum of three acres of commercial uses may be permitted within an
         area with residential designations on the map.
    11. Protect residences and other sensitive uses from noise, air pollution and
         traffic related impacts.
    12. Designate areas along the freeway for aesthetically pleasing, non-noise-
         sensitive uses that will provide a noise buffer for adjacent residences.
    13. Maintain lands for open space land uses including outdoor recreation,
         natural habitat preserves and agriculture within and beyond the proposed
         urban-development boundaries.
    14. Create an open space buffer between urban and agricultural uses to maintain
         the integrity of the adjoining agricultural/natural areas, to serve as a
         transitional space between urban and rural lands, to provide a visual edge,
         and to be an aesthetic and recreational resource.
    15. To preserve existing agriculture and control growth, relocate the boundary
         of the General Plan Area farther to the west from the current County Road
         97D (one mile west of Stonegate) to County Road 96 (2½ miles west of
         Stonegate). This is intended to increase Davis’ area of planning concern
         farther into the possible growth area of the city of Dixon, not to expand the
         urban growth area.
    16. Do not delineate any particular parcels or areas for acquisition, preservation
         or enhancement activities in rural areas until the City or other responsible
         entity is successful in establishing a program for the site with willing
         landowners. This is in the interest of not unduly disturbing rural landowners
         and others.
                                             57

Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management               May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
     17. Designate land within one mile of the new Davis landfill as Agriculture in
          order to prohibit urban development on it.
     18. Focus community-serving retail shopping uses in the Core Area and to a
          limited extent in areas designated Neighborhood Retail and General
          Commercial. General Commercial areas are intended to provide for
          primarily commercial service uses and may allow moderate size community
          retail stores subject to discretionary review.
          A moderate-sized community retail store (up to 30,000 square feet) located
          in the General Commercial land use designation (that is, not in the
          downtown or an existing neighborhood retail center) must be a "stand
          alone" retail use and not part of a retail cluster.
                                              58
Davis General Plan                                      Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007    Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
                                       59
Section IV: Community Form                                           Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management       May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
____________________________________________________________________________________
                                          60
Davis General Plan                                        Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007    Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
Figure 9: Neighborhood Center Concept
                                       61
Section IV: Community Form                                       Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Figure 10: Neighborhood Transit Stop Concept
                                          62
Davis General Plan                                                  Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007              Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
          Moderate-sized community retail under consideration is conditionally
          allowed and shall meet the following criteria:
                   a.     Must be designed and located to maximize accessibility and
                          safety for pedestrians.
                   b.     Have a uniform design which is consistent with and
                          complimentary to the City's small town ambience and
                          neighborhood preservation goals.
                   c.     Incorporate state-of-the-art energy conservation in its
                          planning and design.
                   d.     If located near a freeway, orient toward the community and
                          away from the freeway.
                   e.     Favor retail types that are not likely to be able to locate in
                          the downtown and that are not currently adequately
                          available in Davis (such as apparel and soft goods,
                          appliances, home furnishings and electronics).
                   f.     Shall be allowed only if:
                          1) The downtown or neighborhood centers cannot
                               accommodate the retail type, and
                          2) The retail type in question is not adequately available in
                               Davis. Under this provision, the size and type (for
                               example appliances, electronics) of the conditionally
                               allowed retail use shall be strictly limited to the
                               maximum size (up to 30,000 sq. ft.) and to the specific
                               type(s) of retail use necessary to address the
                               community's need(s).
                   g.     The uses may not endanger the viability of similar retail uses
                          in the City's primary and secondary retail zones (i.e. the
                          downtown and existing neighborhood centers).
                   h.     Retain the overall City goal of maintaining the economic
                          vitality of the downtown and neighborhood centers, and
                          assure, using economic studies, that any community-serving
                          retail use is consistent with this goal.
It is the intent of this General Plan to prevent major concentrations of retail uses
that would compete with the downtown and neighborhood centers as this
conflicts with desired goals related to community character, downtown primacy,
alternate transportation (including pedestrian, bicycle and public transit) and the
stability of existing and planned retail areas. To implement this intent, strictly
limit new designations or rezonings for retail shopping centers outside of the
downtown and neighborhood centers. Specifically, the General Retail land use
designation shall be limited to more than one site not to exceed a total of twenty
acres located approximately on the north side of Second Street at the existing
                                             63
Section IV: Community Form                                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management          May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
eastern intersection of Faraday Avenue and Second Street, at a project site
commonly known as Second Street Crossing. Community and Neighborhood
Retail designations shall not be located adjacent to General Retail designations.
LAND USE CATEGORIES
This section explains the intent, allowed land uses and other regulations for each
land use category shown on the General Plan land use map in Figure 11a and 11b.
All land uses must conform to the regulations for the mapped land use categories.
The land uses of the Core Area Specific Plan are shown in Figure 11c. See the
Specific Plan for more information.
The land uses and zoning of the Gateway/Olive Drive Specific Plan are shown in
Figure 11d. See the Specific Plan for more information.
                                           64
Davis General Plan                                        Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007    Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
                       Figure 11a
                       Planning Area
                       Land Uses
                        June 19, 2007
                                       65
Section IV: Community Form                                       Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                          66
Davis General Plan                                       Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007    Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
                                                                                ____
                                       67
Section IV: Community Form                                    Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                      68
Davis General Plan                                        Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007    Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
                                       69
Section IV: Community Form                                       Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
____________________________________________________________________
                                          70
Davis General Plan                                      Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007    Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
                                       71
Section IV: Community Form                                       Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
____________________________________________________________________
                                          72
Davis General Plan                                      Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007    Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
                                       73
Section IV: Community Form                                       Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
____________________________________________________________________
                                          74
Davis General Plan                                                   Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
A. Residential
Intent: This category is intended to allow for residential development emphasizing
compact clustered development in new areas and infill in existing neighborhoods,
together with a mixture of local-serving retail and institutional uses, to meet housing
demands, reduce pressure for peripheral growth and facilitate transit and
bicycle/pedestrian travel.
Allowable Uses and Densities:
1.       A mix of all types of housing, including single-family, mobile homes,
         split lots, and multi-family units. Allowed densities shall be as follows:
                       • Low Density: 3.00 to 5.99 units per gross acre.
                       • Medium Density: 6.00 to 13.99 units per gross acre.
                       • High Density: 14.00 to 25.00 units per gross acre.
                       • The maximum allowable “pre-bonus” density would be 4.79
                            units per gross acre in the low density category; 11.20 in the
                            medium density category, and 20.00 in the high density
                            category.
                       • The maximum allowable “post-bonus” densities would be
                            5.99 in the low-density category, 13.99 in the medium
                            density category, and 25.00 in the high density category
                            (assuming a 25% density bonus).
                       • The minimum “pre-bonus” density would be 2.40 units per
                            gross acre in the low-density category. The minimum “post-
                            bonus” density would be 3.00 units per gross acre in the
                            low-density category.
         The maximum allowable density in the core area shall be retained as
         provided in the Core Area Specific Plan.
2.       Make provision for home occupations, offices, retail shops, public buildings,
         public facilities, cemeteries and wells, provided they are compatible with
         surrounding residential development (in terms of traffic generation, parking
         requirements, design and similar neighborhood issues) and consistent with
         specific zoning.
                                              75

Section IV: Community Form                                                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management                  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Table of Minimum and Maximum Densities
                                                        Gross              Net**
                         Without density            2.40 - 4.79       2.88 - 5.75
            Low          bonus
            Density      With density               3.00 - 5.99       3.60 - 7.19
                         bonus*
                         Without density            4.80 - 11.20      5.76 - 13.44
            Medium       bonus
            Density      With density               6.00 - 13.99      7.20 - 16.79
                         bonus*
                         Without density            11.21 - 20.00     13.45 - 24.00
            High         bonus
            Density      With density               14.00 - 25.00     16.80 - 30.00
                         bonus*
                  Notes:
          a.      With density bonus * is assumed to be 125% of without density bonus for the
                  purpose of this table.
                  Net density ** is assumed to be 120% of gross density for the purpose of this
                  table.
          b.      Some of the non-residential land use categories (that is, Neighborhood Retail,
                  Business Park, and Office) allow limited residential uses to the extent that the
                  residential uses do not conflict with the primary use of the area. The
                  residential component in a mixed use project in one of these land use
                  categories is limited to an additional 15% floor area ratio (in addition to the
                  50% allowable floor area ratio in these land use categories).
          c.      The allowable residential densities in the Core Area shall be retained as stated
                  in the Core Area Specific Plan.
          d.      See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled
                  "Residential Density Yields and Neighborhood Greenbelts."
          e.      Through a specific plan or Planned Development, the City may approve
                  developments with densities on any given parcel that are lower than the
                  otherwise allowable minimum or higher than the otherwise-allowable
                  maximum density for a given area, provided the overall density is consistent
                  with the allowable density.
                                                76
Davis General Plan                                                      Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                  Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
3.       Open space in various forms, including greenbelts, squares, parks, ponds,
         drainage detention facilities, and wildlife habitats.
4.       Make provision for institutional uses that are needed near homes and which
         benefit from a residential environment, including schools, places for
         religious assembly, city facilities, child care and adult day care facilities,
         residences for disabled persons, nursing homes, and half-way houses. Such
         uses are subject to restrictions specified in the zoning code and must be
         compatible with surrounding residential development, and shall be dispersed
         throughout the City to avoid an over concentration in one area.
         See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Institutional Uses".
5.       Existing developments, on specific parcels of record, if built pursuant to
         General Plan and zoning requirements at the time of project approval, will
         be considered to be in compliance with the Element, even if built at
         densities higher than those shown on the Land Use Map. This General Plan
         will not preclude their being rehabilitated or allowed to re-build if destroyed,
         up to the gross density prior to the rehabilitation or destruction, subject to
         zoning and other standard City requirements. Additional principal dwelling
         units will not be allowed unless consistent with maximum General Plan
         densities and zoning.
6.       Duplexes, multiple single family dwellings on one lot, or multi-family
         dwellings, where proposed on an existing lot of record and permitted under
         applicable regulations in the R-2 zoning district, may be permitted even if
         said units result in a density on the individual lot of record that exceeds the
         density range of the underlying Residential Low Density designation in the
         General Plan. The purpose is to allow a mix of housing types while
         maintaining the overall density within a Residential Low Density designated
         area. To ensure compliance with the overall intent of this General Plan
         Update, however, the City shall limit the number of additional duplexes,
         multiple single family dwellings on one lot, or multi-family dwellings
         proposed on land zoned R-2 that may be approved until the infill guidelines
         and strategies contained in this plan are completed (see Policy LU 2.1 and
         related Standards and Actions).
                                                77
Section IV: Community Form                                                       Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management                 May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Policies
          Policy LU A.1 In infill projects, respect setback requirements, preserve
                  existing greenbelts and greenstreets, and respect existing uses and
                  privacy on adjacent parcels.
          Policy LU A.2 A minimum of 50% of future residential lots (exclusive of
                  any required affordable or multifamily lots) within a new residential
                  development of 50 single-family lots or more shall be designated as
                  “diverse architecture lots” (DAL). These lots shall be designated as
                  part of the project zoning and on the tentative and final maps.
                  Houses built on DAL lots may not be of the same stock plan nor
                  have a floor plan and front elevation substantially similar to any
                  other house within the same final map area.
                  All residential lots not designated as DALs, including any required
                  single-family affordable housing lots and lots within new
                  developments of 50 units or less, shall comply with the City’s new
                  site design standards, to be developed under Action UD 5.1e.
          Policy LU A.3 Require a mix of housing types, densities, prices and rents,
                  and designs in each new development area.
                  See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Ratio of
                  Housing, Mix of Residential Types and Integration of Affordable Housing
                  Units".
          Policy LU A.4 Allow home occupations, home offices and live/work uses
                  by right where appropriate provided that the home occupation is
                  compatible with the surrounding neighborhoods and does not cause
                  significant negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods.
          Policy LU A.5 Require neighborhood greenbelts in all new residential
                  development areas. Require that a minimum of 10 percent of
                  newly-developing residential land be designated for use as open
                  space primarily for neighborhood greenbelts.
                  See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Residential
                  Density Yields and Neighborhood Greenbelts".
          Policy LU A.6 A maximum of three acres of commercial uses may be
                  permitted within an area with residential designation on the map
                  provided that it is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood
                  and that it does not cause significant negative impacts.
                                              78

Davis General Plan                                                  Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007              Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
B. Core Specific Plan Area
Intent: To provide for mixed-use development of a variety of types in downtown
Davis, in keeping with the downtown's role as the commercial and social center of
Davis.
Allowable Uses and Densities: As shown in the Core Area Specific Plan (Figure
11 c). See the Specific Plan for more information.
C. Gateway / Olive Drive Specific Plan Area
Intent: To provide for vital, mixed-use development that connects the University
and Core Area along Interstate 80 at the Gateway to Davis.
Allowable Uses and Densities: As shown in the Gateway/Olive Drive Specific
Plan (Figure 11 D). See the Specific Plan for more information.
D. Neighborhood Retail
Intent: To provide shopping opportunities to meet Davis residents’ daily needs in
areas conveniently located to each neighborhood. The city supports many smaller
neighborhood commercial centers each at a focal point instead of fewer larger
centers. Residential uses would be conditionally allowable.
Allowable Uses and Densities:
1.       Neighborhood shopping centers, which are shopping centers that serve the
         daily needs of the surrounding neighborhood for goods and services, such as
         groceries, pharmaceuticals, dry cleaning, and other uses.
2.       Residential uses to the extent they are secondary and do not conflict with
         the primary use of the area.
3.       Offices as an ancillary use.
Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 50 percent, with an additional 15 percent allowed for
the housing component of a mixed-use project. Such additional floor areas shall
include any housing units allowable under an affordable housing bonus.
Policies
         Policy LU D.1 Encourage the redevelopment of existing neighborhood
                   shopping centers to include second stories for retail, residential or
                   office uses and/or intensification of first stories.
                                            79

Section IV: Community Form                                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management              May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Policy LU D.2 All neighborhood shopping centers shall include
                  neighborhood grocery stores / supermarkets except for the property
                  located at the southeast corner of Pena Drive and Fifth Street
                  (commonly known as Fifth Street Commerce Center) and the site at
                  the northwest corner of Mace Boulevard and Alhambra Drive.
          Policy LU D.3 Consider neighborhood grocery store/supermarket supply
                  and demand within the City as part of discretionary reviews of new
                  neighborhood grocery stores/supermarkets and expansions of such
                  stores/supermarkets, within the limits of development agreements.
          Policy LU D.4 The City shall regulate the size of neighborhood grocery
                  stores / supermarkets through the zoning code.
          Policy LU D.5 Avoid locating liquor outlets near schools, parks and other
                  locations where youth congregate.
          Policy LU D.6 The City shall amend its C-N zoning ordinance to: (a)
                  remove "food store" and replace it with " neighborhood grocery
                  store / supermarket ", and (b) remove "or liquor store" in any
                  shopping center zoning policy which offers a choice of "food store
                  or liquor store" or implies a need for a liquor store in an area.
          Policy LU D.7 Every neighborhood shopping center shall be a Planned
                  Development.
          Policy LU D.8 Encourage rehabilitation of existing neighborhood shopping
                  centers and the restoration of neighborhood shopping services.
          Action LU D.9 After adoption of the General Plan Update, work with the
                  Mace Ranch property owner /developer to consider amendments to
                  the zoning and development agreement which would allow a mix of
                  uses of small-scale retail, office, public /semi-public and medium
                  density residential. Involve the neighborhood, the community at
                  large, and the environmental community in the process of defining
                  the proposed uses.
E. General Commercial
Intent: To provide locations in several sectors of the City for a broad range of
commercial service uses, such as automotive sales and repair, building materials,
contractors’ offices, nurseries, and similar uses.
Allowable Uses and Densities:
1.        Automotive sales and service, building supplies, nurseries, equipment rental,
                                              80

Davis General Plan                                                   Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
         repair services, light wholesale and storage, office, and similar service-
         oriented commercial uses.
2.       Conditionally allowable uses include service stations, motels, restaurants,
         commercial recreation, limited convenience retail uses, public storage,
         moderate size community retail stores, warehouses and similar uses.
         Special Considerations for Moderate Size Community Retail Stores:
                   a. Must be designed and located to maximize accessibility and
                       safety for pedestrians.
                   b. Have a uniform design which is consistent with and
                       complimentary to the City's small town ambience and
                       neighborhood preservation goals.
                   c. Incorporate state-of-the-art energy conservation in its planning
                       and design.
                   d. If located near a freeway, orient toward the community and
                       away from the freeway.
                   e. Favor retail types that are not likely to be able to locate in the
                       downtown and that are not currently adequately available in
                       Davis (such as apparel and soft goods, appliances, home
                       furnishings and electronics).
                   f. Shall be allowed only if:
                           (1) The downtown or neighborhood centers cannot
                                accommodate the retail type, and
                           (2) The retail type in question is not adequately available in
                                Davis. Under this provision, the size and type (for
                                example appliances, electronics) of the conditionally
                                allowed retail use shall be strictly limited to the
                                maximum size (up to 30,000 sq. ft.) and to the specific
                                type(s) of retail use necessary to address the
                                community's need(s).
                   g. The uses may not endanger the viability of similar retail uses in
                       the City's primary and secondary retail zones (i.e. the downtown
                       and existing neighborhood centers).
                   h. Retain the overall City goal of maintaining the economic vitality
                       of the downtown and neighborhood centers, and assure, using
                       economic studies, that any community-serving retail use is
                       consistent with this goal.
Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 100 percent for public storage, warehouse, and other
similar low intensity uses. 50 percent for all other uses.
F. Office
Intent: To provide locations for small administrative, professional and medical
offices in centrally located areas near the downtown and/or residential
                                              81
Section IV: Community Form                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
neighborhoods. Residential uses would be conditionally allowable.
Allowable Uses:
1.        Administrative, professional and medical offices.
2.        Residential uses to the extent that they are secondary and do not conflict
          with the primary use of the area.
Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 50 percent, with an additional 15 percent for the
housing component of a mixed-use project, subject to a limit of 150 housing units.
The additional floor area ratio allowed for housing does not apply to all sites,
including large sites intended for non-residential uses only.
G. Business Park
Intent: To provide locations for administrative, professional, government and
medical offices and non-polluting science, technology, light manufacturing and
ancillary warehouse facilities in pleasant, pedestrian-oriented mixed-use
environments featuring freeway and airport access, a variety of amenities and
high-quality architectural and landscape design. Residential development would be
conditionally allowable.
A “Business Park” is a hybrid of industrial and office parks which contains multiple
uses and activities such as traditional industrial uses (such as warehouse/distribution
light manufacturing, and research and development activities) as well as other types
of land uses including headquarter offices, recreational facilities, health clubs, day
care centers, incubator spaces for emerging companies, and secondary residential
uses.
It is intended that a "Business Park" be functionally and aesthetically integrated into
the community and not provide commercial uses that are encouraged in the
downtown and neighborhood centers.
Allowable Uses:
1.        Offices, light industry, research and development, light manufacturing and
          warehousing (as an ancillary use), provided they meet City standards
          regarding pollution, health and safety. Limited food establishments tailored
          to serve business park employee needs subject to conditional use review.
2.        Residential uses to the extent that they are secondary and do not conflict
          with the primary use of the area.
Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 50 percent, with an additional 15 percent for the
housing component of a mixed use project, subject to a limit of 150 housing units.
Such additional floor area shall include any housing units allowable under an
                                             82

Davis General Plan                                                   Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
affordable housing bonus. The additional floor area ratio allowed for housing does
not apply to all sites, including large sites intended for non-residential uses only.
Policies:
         Policy LU G.1 Business parks should include sophisticated land planning,
                   high quality architectural and landscape design, building flexibility, a
                   variety of amenities and environmental controls.
         Action LU G.1a After adoption of the General Plan Update, work with the
                   Mace Ranch property owner / developer and other affected
                   property owners to consider possible reconfiguration of land uses in
                   the vicinity of the Upper Second Street" location. This might
                   include revisions to the 11-acre Service Commercial site and
                   factoring in additional information that will become available
                   through the Frontier Fertilizer re-use process that is being initiated
                   through an EPA grant. The study could lead to the City co-
                   sponsoring zoning amendments to create a more logical land use
                   pattern in this area. This might include some Community Retail
                   combined with a scaling back of the Service Commercial provision
                   of the public / semi-public use, or similar changes.
H. University-Related Research Park
Intent: To provide sites for high-tech and science companies to conduct research
and development activities, such as product development, engineering, sales and
administration, as well as ancillary light manufacturing and wholesale uses. A URRP
primarily involves collaborative research and shared laboratories with educational
institutions. In this regard, it is the desire of the City of Davis to advance
technology employment activities, and the transfer of technology between the
university, colleges and businesses in the Research Park, which arise from the
synergies created by the proximity of the URRP to UC Davis.
The research park shall be compatible and on a scale consistent with Davis as a small
university town. The research park shall be characterized by superior site planning,
architectural and landscape architectural design; traffic management; and
environmental controls. In order to achieve this goal, planned development zoning
and design guidelines shall be utilized. It is the intent that the URRP utilize the
existing support services within the community rather than developing its own
support services.
Allowable Uses: Offices and research and development uses (including but not
limited to biotechnology) with limited amounts of ancillary light manufacturing,
assembly, warehousing and distribution. Minor amounts of light manufacturing and
                                              83
Section IV: Community Form                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
assembly with limits on the sizes of such facilities. Minor amounts of retail,
restaurant and other services which do not compete with the downtown and
neighborhood shopping centers with limits on the sizes of such facilities and
designed to support the tenants of the park. Related amenities and open spaces
serving the research park may also be allowed. The types and amounts of allowable
uses shall be addressed in zoning regulations.
Prohibited Uses: Major retail or highway commercial; major manufacturing,
distribution and warehousing; outdoor storage or processing; residential housing;
and commercial recreation.
Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 50 percent
Policies:
          Policy LU H.1 University-Related Research Parks should include
                 sophisticated land use planning, high quality architectural and
                 landscape design, building flexibility, a variety of amenities and
                 environmental controls.
I. Industrial
Intent: To provide areas for basic industries, manufacturing and employment in
Davis, with adequate separation from incompatible uses and appropriate
environmental controls.
Allowable Uses:
1.        Manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, research and development,
          commercial recreation, open space areas for buffering, transportation and
          employee recreation.
          Solid waste transfer/processing stations would be conditionally allowable
          and subject to applicable performance standards in the municipal code. The
          Davis Waste Removal site at 2727 Second Street, between Cantrill Drive and
          Pena Drive, is considered a potential solid waste transfer/processing facility.
          The intensity of the facility would be determined as part of the conditional
          use review.
Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 50 percent.
                                             84
Davis General Plan                                                Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007            Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
J. University of California, Davis
Intent: To recognize the campus of the University of California of Davis.
Allowable Uses: Academic research, institutional and student residential uses of
UC Davis. By State law, the campus is not subject to City or other local land use
control. However, the City seeks to work cooperatively with the University in issues
of mutual planning interest.
K. Public/Semi-Public
Intent: To provide appropriate, centrally-located sites for community facilities.
Allowable Uses: Public facilities and offices, schools, child care facilities, hospitals
and accessory medical offices, religious institutions, drainage facilities and utilities. A
Public/Semi-Public site historically in agricultural use may continue in agricultural
use until a public/semi-public use is developed.
Public/Semi-Public Site at Northwest of SH113/Covell Boulevard
Interchange
Intent: To provide sites for healthcare uses and other appropriate community
facilities.
Allowable Uses: Health related offices; health related research and development;
hospital/specialized health care; skilled nursing facility; diagnostics and treatment;
pharmacies; schools; ancillary support services such as food service; and drainage
ponds, roads and similar public facilities.
Special Considerations: The following shall be considered at the time of zoning
in the northerly 30-acre portion of the “Public/Semi-Public – Hospital” designation:
1. It is encouraged that very low, low and moderate income levels be served in
     skilled nursing uses.
2. The city should consider whether the amounts of land and building areas for
     specific uses should be limited for the purpose of ensuring a mix of uses rather
     than a single use.
3. The northerly portions of the site shall be designed and managed as wildlife
     habitat and seasonal wetlands. These portions are expected to consist of a
     minimum of 12 acres and can include the needed drainage facilities and the
     seven-acre agricultural buffer.
                                            85

Section IV: Community Form                                                   Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management               May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
L. Parks/Recreation
Intent: To offer a full range of park amenities to Davis residents.
Allowable Uses: Neighborhood, community and regional parks, golf courses, and
other outdoor recreational facilities within urban development. Specific uses include
public recreation sites, including golf courses, baseball fields, tot lots and play
apparatus, adult playing fields, soccer fields, swimming pools, community center
buildings, meeting facilities, libraries, art centers, after school care facilities, art in
public places, facilities for night time recreation, trails, benches, interpretive markers,
picnic areas, barbecue facilities, water fountains, landscaping and irrigation, city
wells, trees for shade and wind protection, visual and sound screens, shade
structures (including arbors and trellises) and natural habitat areas.
M. Neighborhood Greenbelt
Intent: To provide safe and secure linear parkways and connectors close to
residences as alternatives to biking or walking on streets. Neighborhood greenbelts
connect to the Urban/Agricultural Transition Area, Greenstreets, parks, other open
space network elements, activity centers and public facilities.
Allowable Uses: Neighborhood open space corridors required by Policy LUA.5
and developed with landscaping and trees, natural habitat areas, bikeways, benches,
picnic areas, lighting, barbecue sites, play areas, open space meadow areas, horseshoe
pits, and volleyball courts. More information on Neighborhood Greenbelts is
included in the Parks and Open Space Chapter.
N. Urban Agricultural Transition Area
Intent:           1) To provide a buffer and minimize conflicts between urban and
                       agricultural areas.
                  2) To provide public open space.
                  3) To define the planned urbanized edge of the City, as one of
                       many useful growth management tools.
Allowable Uses: Passive open space recreation such as trails and bikeways, wildlife
and habitat preservation, drainage ways, community gardens, plant stock portions of
nurseries, agriculture.
Policies
          Policy LU N.1 Designate new lands for this category in an incremental
                  fashion as resources and opportunities become available.
                  Development of the segments should be prioritized based on
                                               86
Davis General Plan                                                   Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
                   importance of use and opportunity for implementation, and in
                   cooperation with all affected parties.
         Policy LU N.2 Include the lands in this category within city limits
                   whenever feasible.
         Policy LU N.3 Segments can vary in size and width but to the greatest
                   extent possible, a minimum 150-foot width should be pursued.
                   Wider segments should be pursued when opportunity permits.
         Policy LU N.4 Where public access is desired, the width of the buffer
                   must be sufficient to also include a 100-foot wide area where public
                   access is restricted to allow for ground spraying on adjacent
                   agricultural land.
         Policy LU N.5 Ideally, wider segments should be located where:
                   - Willing sellers are available,
                   - Natural resource protection opportunities exist,
                   - Open space recreation opportunities exist.
         Policy LU N.6 Prime agricultural land should remain in agricultural
                   production in the wider segments of the Urban Agriculture
                   Transition Area.
         Policy LU N.7 Allocate a portion of the Open Space DUE fees and
                   Construction Tax for the Urban/Agricultural Transition Area.
         Policy LU N.8 Pursue funding measures to fund buffer acquisition in areas
                   where no new development is proposed.
O. Agriculture
Intent: To protect valuable natural resources such as agricultural land and wildlife
habitat, to allow for productive agricultural use surrounding or within Davis, to
ensure a permanent buffer between adjacent jurisdictions that will maintain the
separate identities of Davis and the surrounding cities, and to serve as a visual
amenity around urban development.
Allowable Uses and Densities: Farmlands (including farmhouses and farm
buildings), production of food, fiber and other agricultural crops, animal husbandry,
and other appropriate agricultural uses not including agriculture related operations
whose impacts are of urban intensity. New residential subdivisions are not allowed.
         Policy LU O.1 Should the City consider a General Plan Amendment from
         “Agriculture” to an urban land use category or to the “University of
                                               87

Section IV: Community Form                                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management              May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          California, Davis” category on the 44-acre Nishi Property located between
          Interstate 80 and the Union Pacific Railroad west of Olive Drive, the
          following parameters shall be integrated in the planning for the urban/
          university use of the property:
               1. Land Uses: The potential uses of the site shall be limited to
                   university related uses such as student housing and high technology
                   research uses. The type of uses, the intensity/density of the uses,
                   and the sizing of the infrastructure shall be consistent with the
                   property’s development carrying capacity as limited by the
                   parameters established in this policy and as determined by the
                   results of a development potential study.
               2. Access: Any university related uses shall provide primary motor
                   vehicle access from the UC Davis campus and not from Richards
                   Boulevard to avoid impacts on the Richards corridor. Access
                   assumptions and parameters shall include:
                   a. Primary motor vehicle, pedestrian and bicycle access shall
                       connect directly with developed portion of the UC Davis
                       campus via a grade-separated crossing of the railroad. Primary
                       access shall not consist of an at-grade crossing of the railroad
                       tracks.
                   b. Access via the Richards Boulevard corridor is anticipated to
                       limited to pedestrians, bicyclists and emergency vehicles.
                   c. The Putah Creek bicycle underpass facility shall remain a bicycle
                       and pedestrian path (including maintenance access and possibly
                       emergency service access) and shall not be widened to
                       accommodate motor vehicle access to the Nishi Property.
               3. Design: Project design shall incorporate and implement state-of-
                   the-art ecological and new urbanism planning and design principles.
P. Urban Reserve
Intent: To identify land for potential urban development after full development of
the lands designated for urban uses on the General Plan Map or after the next
revision of the Davis General Plan. Designation of land as urban reserve in no way
assumes the right or entitlement on the part of the owner to develop the land in the
future; such lands may be re-designated as agriculture at any time, subject to the
standard General Plan Amendment process.
Allowable Uses and Densities: Agriculture. Future development with other uses
may be allowed under a General Plan Amendment.
          Policy LU P.1 Give priority to development on lands designated "Urban
                   Reserve" over development on lands designated as Urban
                   Agricultural Transition Area, Agriculture or Habitat Areas.
          Action LU P.1a Revise the Gateway/Olive Drive Specific Plan to detach
                   and remove Nishi Property from the Specific Plan text.
                                             88

Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007             Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
Q. Natural Habitat Area
Intent: To preserve existing wildlife habitat and develop new wildlife habitat.
Allowable Uses and Densities: Wildlife preserves, habitat for permanent and
migratory waterfowl and other species, native tree and plant areas, seasonal and
permanent wetlands, drainage facilities. Agriculture, low intensity recreation, nature
study and interpretive centers are also allowed provided they are compatible with
habitat uses.
R. Community Retail
Intent: To provide opportunities for moderate-sized retail stores in existing retail
clusters selling the kinds of retail goods for which there is substantial leakage within
Davis, including appliances, electronics, furniture, clothing, and soft goods, and
similar types of products.
Allowable Uses: Retail shopping centers and freestanding buildings selling the
goods listed above, with ancillary retail uses and restaurants. May include some
neighborhood-serving uses such as a food store. Residential uses would be
conditionally allowable.
Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 50 percent, with an additional 10 percent allowed for
development of shared parking facilities with neighboring uses. An additional 15
percent allowed for the housing component of a mixed–use project.
Special Considerations for Moderate Size Community Retail Stores:
    a. Must be designed and located to maximize accessibility and safety for
         pedestrians.
    b. Have a unified design that is consistent with and complementary to the
         City’s small town ambience and neighborhood preservation goals.
    c. Incorporate state-of-the-art energy conservation in its planning and design.
    d. If located near a freeway, orient toward the community and away from the
         freeway.
    e. Favor retail types that are not likely to be able to locate in the downtown
         area and that are not currently adequately available in Davis (such as apparel
         and soft goods, appliances, home furnishings and electronics).
    f. Shall be allowed only if:
         1. The downtown or neighborhood centers cannot accommodate the retail
              type, and
         2. The retail type in question is not adequately available in Davis. Under
              this provision, the size and type (for example, appliances, electronics) of
              the conditionally allowed retail use shall be strictly limited to the
              maximum size (up to 50,000 square feet) and to the specific type(s) of
              retail uses necessary to address the community’s need(s).
                                             89

Section IV: Community Form                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
     g. The use may not endanger the viability of similar uses in the City’s primary
          and secondary retail zones (i.e. the downtown and existing neighborhood
          centers).
     h. Retain the overall City goal of maintaining the economic vitality of the
          downtown and neighborhood centers, and assure, using economic studies,
          that the community-serving retail use is consistent with this goal.
S. General Retail
Intent: The intent of the General Retail designation is to provide opportunities for
retail stores and centers favoring retail uses that are not currently adequately
available in Davis, and not likely to be able to locate in the downtown area, and that
are consistent with the overall City goal of maintaining the economic vitality of the
downtown and neighborhood centers. To implement this intent the General Retail
land use designation shall be limited to no more than one site not to exceed a total
of twenty acres located approximately on the north side of Second Street at the
existing eastern intersection of Faraday Avenue and Second Street, at a project site
commonly known as Second Street Crossing. Community and Neighborhood Retail
designations shall not be located adjacent to General Retail designations.
Allowable Uses: Retail shopping centers and freestanding buildings, including but
not limited to, department stores, general merchandise stores, specialty food stores
with a conditional use permit, appliance stores, electronics stores, furniture stores,
clothing stores, soft goods stores, and other similar types of products, with ancillary
retail, neighborhood serving, and restaurant uses. Residential uses are conditionally
allowable.
Prohibited Uses: Discount superstores (e.g. general merchandise stores with more
than 20% of the gross floor area dedicated to non-taxable / grocery sales), as such
stores are considered inconsistent with desired goals related to community character,
downtown retail primacy, preservation of neighborhood shopping centers, traffic
impacts, and air pollution.
Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 50 percent, with an additional 10 percent allowed for
development of shared parking facilities with neighboring uses. An additional 15
percent allowed for the housing component of a mixed-use project.
Specific Considerations for Designation: Designation of General Retail sites
shall occur only with the concurrent adoption of a site-specific Planned
Development (PD) zoning district, consistent with the City’s desire to ensure
consideration of site planning and development standards in relation to the project
context. Such designations shall be made with consideration of General Plan
policies to prevent over-concentrations of retail uses as such concentrations are
inconsistent with desired goals related to community character, downtown primacy,
preservation of neighborhood shopping centers, traffic impacts, and air pollution.
                                             90

Section IV: Community Form                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GROWTH MANAGEMENT
GOAL LU 1. Maintain Davis as a small, University-oriented city surrounded
by and containing farmland, greenbelt, and natural habitats and reserves.
          Policy LU 1.1 Recognize that the edge of the urbanized area of the City
                  depicted on the land use map under this General Plan represents the
                  maximum extent of urbanization through 2010, unless modified
                  through the Measure J process.
          Standards
          a.      The General Plan Map is a representation of the ultimate geographic
                  size of the city in the year 2010. No expansion of the City beyond
                  those areas shown for urban use on the land use map will be
                  permitted unless authorized through the Measure J process.
          b.      All developments, including those entering into development
                  agreements, are subject to the Phased Housing Allocation
                  Ordinance or a similar ordinance.
          c.      Housing allocations shall be valid for only five years beyond their
                  initially-intended construction year.
          Actions
          d.      Maintain a growth management system that regulates the timing of
                  residential growth in an orderly way considering the following:
                  infrastructure, geographical phasing, local employment increases,
                  environmental resources, economic factors, DJUSD school
                  enrollment and sustainability. Such a system shall pursue programs
                  and partnerships which will allow the City to target residential
                  development to meet identified needs (e.g., University students and
                  staff, faculty housing, senior housing, housing for low and very low
                  incomes, school district staff, City employees).
                                             91
Davis General Plan                                                  Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007              Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
         e.        Create and maintain an effective growth management system
                   designed to keep the population of the City below 64,000 and the
                   number of single-family dwellings below 15,500 in 2010, which
                   corresponds to a sustained 1.81 percent annually- compounded
                   growth rate from January 1, 1988 to January 1, 2010 and a sustained
                   1.4331 percent annually-compounded growth rate from January 1,
                   1996 to January 1, 2010 due to “front loading”.
         f.        Immediately following General Plan adoption, modify the Phased
                   Allocation Ordinance to make smaller projects subject to allocation
                   requirements. Upon the completion of infill related studies and the
                   adoption of infill and densification design guidelines and strategies,
                   further adjust the Phased Housing Allocation Ordinance to give
                   preference to infill and redevelopment of urban areas within the
                   community over the development of agricultural and open space
                   lands to extent feasible under any new infill and densification design
                   guidelines and strategies.
         g.        Urge the University to adopt an ultimate UC Davis size consistent
                   with the City's desire to maintain itself as a small city.
         h.        Acquire the information that would provide the City and the Davis
                   Joint Unified School District the number of persons per household
                   by housing type.
         i.        Closely monitor and participate in any updates to UCD's LRDP, to
                   determine and minimize impacts on the City's General Plan policies
                   and land use map. Consider possible adjustments to the General
                   Plan to address the new LRDP revision upon determination that a
                   reasonable share of student and faculty growth will occur on
                   campus.
         j.        Immediately upon adoption of the General Plan Update, the City
                   and UC Davis should initiate direct, comprehensive discussions
                   addressing the impacts of projected UC Davis growth, with the aim
                   of assuring, to the maximum extent feasible, that UC Davis plans
                   proceed on a mutually acceptable basis consistent with the goals and
                   policies of the City's General Plan. Any plans to develop the Nishi
                   property should be undertaken only in the context of such
                   discussions.
         k.        The City shall actively work with SACOG to ensure that fair share
                   housing numbers reflect community slow growth goals and other
                   external factors, such as UC Davis providing its fair share of
                   housing on campus. The City shall attempt to secure from SACOG
                                              92

Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management               May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                  the methodology used for generating fair share numbers including
                  monitoring any changes in the methodology to be used for the
                  generation of future numbers in advance.
          l.      At the next revision of the Housing Element, the City should revise
                  the land use map and pertinent Land Use and Growth Management
                  polices, standards, and actions, if necessary, to ensure that the
                  supply of land available for residential development can
                  accommodate the needs of future residents of all income levels.
                  Alternatives for revisions may include re-designating land from non-
                  agricultural and non-residential to residential use, identifying new
                  locations for selective infill, or other programs authorized under
                  state law for accommodating housing needs. If adequate sites are
                  not available to meet the 5-year need for housing at all income levels
                  as determined by SACOG in accordance with Section 65584 of the
                  Government Code, the City must provide sufficient sites with
                  zoning that permits owner-occupied and rental multi-family
                  residential uses by right, including density and development
                  standards that shall accommodate low-or moderate-income housing.
                  Agriculture designated lands should be a low priority for re-
                  designation in comparison with other non-residential lands.
          m.      The City shall work with other jurisdictions on local, regional and
                  state levels, including public and private environmental and planning
                  interest groups to identify and define accepted planning
                  methodology as it relates to housing and transportation issues that is
                  consistent with a sustainable small city concept and agriculture and
                  open space preservation policies.
          n.      Work with SACOG and other jurisdictions in the Sacramento
                  region to lower urban growth projections to ensure the viability of
                  agriculture uses in the region.
          Policy LU 1.2 Work in concert with UC Davis and the UC system to arrive
                  at an ultimate size for the UC Davis campus consistent with the
                  City’s desire to maintain itself as a small city.
          Policy LU 1.3 Establish and require a citizens’ vote process for any
                  proposed amendment to the Land Use Map as amended through
                  August 1, 1999 from an agricultural or urban reserve designation to
                  an urban designation, or from an agriculture designation to an urban
                  reserve designation; or for any development proposal on the Covell
                  Center and Nishi properties1; to ensure full public participation and
                  consideration of issues related to such decisions, including impacts
                  on policies calling for compact urban form, preservation of
                  agricultural lands surrounding the City for long term agricultural use,
                                              93

Davis General Plan                                                        Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                   Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
                   and provisions of an adequate housing supply to meet internal needs
                   of the City. This policy and land use designations affected by this
                   policy shall remain in effect in the General Plan or any update to the
                   General Plan until December 31, 2010 or as long as the Citizens’
                   Right to Vote on the Future of Agricultural and Open Space Lands
                   Ordinance remains in effect.
                   This policy is intended to assure full participation in land use decisions by the
                   citizens and voters of the City, including but not limited to public debate and a
                   vote of the people, and to assure that the principles set forth in the General Plan
                   relating to land use, affordable housing, open space, agricultural preservation and
                   conservation and the like are fully implemented.
                   1 (a) The property known as Covell Center, or any portion of said property,
                   bordered by Covell Boulevard on the south, the Hunt property and County
                   Road 101A on the west, County Road 102/Pole Line Road on the east, and
                   the southern edge of the City owned property (old closed landfill) and
                   extending to F Street on the north.
                      (b) The Nishi property, or any portion thereof, the boundaries of which are
                   established in the Gateway/Olive Drive Specific Plan, dated January, 1996.
         Actions
         a.        Prepare and implement the requirement for a citizen voter approval
                   process set forth in Policy LU 1.3.
         Policy LU 1.4 Establish a distinct permanent urban edge which shall be
                   defined by an open space, hedgerows, tree rows, similar landscape
                   features, passive recreation spaces, buffer containing transitional
                   agricultural uses, or similar elements.
         Actions
         a.        Require that projects adjacent to rural parcels be designed to
                   minimize impacts on adjacent lands to prevent conversion to other
                   land uses.
         b.        Develop design guidelines that require landscaping at the urban
                   periphery to include appropriate plants, help ensure the integrity of
                   the adjoining agricultural or natural areas, provide a view transition
                   between urban and rural environments, prevent trespass on
                   neighboring lands, and protect public safety.
         c.        Require that projects adjacent to rural parcels be designed to
                   minimize impacts on adjacent lands to discourage arguments for
                   premature conversion to other land uses.
                                                  94

Section IV: Community Form                                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          d.      Develop guidelines that would apply to development projects
                  subject to the citizen voter approval process. Such guidelines would
                  establish objectives and expectations for baseline project features
                  and minimum project details necessary for any project that may be
                  presented to the voters for decision (including but not limited to
                  objectives and expectations related to environmental protection,
                  economic health, adequate public facilities and services and “green”
                  development and building). Such guidelines would be consistent
                  with General Plan policies and principles and would be in place
                  prior to consideration of any projects subject to the voter approval
                  process.
          Policy LU 1.5 Aggressively work to prevent urban sprawl on the periphery
                  of Davis and in the region utilizing a variety of legislative / legal
                  methods and strategic land acquisitions.
          Actions
          a.      Negotiate with affected governmental jurisdictions and public and
                  private agencies or organizations to obtain support for permanent
                  designation of open-space and agricultural zoning within the Davis
                  Planning Area beyond proposed designated urban development in
                  the General Plan.
          Policy LU 1.6 For developments that are on the edge of City, a minimum
                  of a 150-foot wide urban agricultural transition area is required.
          Policy LU 1.7 Plan for the timing and costs of infrastructure when
                  developing new areas. The planning process shall include working
                  with public transit providers and the Davis Joint Unified School
                  District.
          Standards
          a.      Reservation or an offer of dedication of right-of-way necessary for
                  the number of lanes projected for each existing and planned arterial
                  street shall be required as a condition of development approval.
          b.      Occupancy of new development areas shall not be allowed until all
                  necessary public services, including water mains and service, fire
                  hydrants and roads or other improved access meeting City
                  standards, are in place.
          c.      Lifecycle costing shall be used to determine and evaluate the relative
                  tax contribution and tax burden of development.
                                             95

Davis General Plan                                                      Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                  Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
         Actions
         d.        Establish an equitable system for developers/tenants/owners to
                   meet a share of community facilities, services, and program needs
                   related to their presence.
INFILL
GOAL LU 2. Define the types, locations, pace, and intensity of infill
development consistent with neighborhood, agricultural and open space
preservation policies.
         Policy LU 2.1 Develop and implement guidelines for infill development
                   and comprehensive car management strategies immediately
                   following the adoption of the General Plan so that guidelines and
                   strategies will be in place prior to the approval of significant new
                   infill development.
                   See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Locational
                   Guidelines for Residential Densities and Senior Housing".
         Standards
         a.        Guidelines should recognize various forms and patterns of infill
                   development including:
                   (1)       new mixed use, transit oriented development in new
                             neighborhoods developed on urban land zoned for non-
                             residential uses. (Land designated on the General Plan Land
                             Use Map for uses of agriculture, agriculture buffer, or
                             various open space uses are not to be considered as, nor re-
                             designated as, urban land for infill purposes.)
                   (2)       new mixed use, transit oriented development in/near
                             established neighborhoods.
                   (3)       residential infill in/near established neighborhoods (e.g.,
                             Grande and Wildhorse school sites).
                   (4)       densification of existing single family lots.
                   (5)       targeted residential infill to help address the needs of UC
                             Davis students and employees, City and school district
                             employees, seniors, lower income households and other
                             special needs groups (e.g., prospective joint UC-City-RDA-
                             private sector sponsored projects).
                   (6)       redevelopment of older apartment complexes.
                                                96
Section IV: Community Form                                                       Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management                 May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                  See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Locational
                  Guidelines for Residential Densities and Senior Housing".
          b.      Guidelines and car management strategies should be sensitive to the
                  impacts and obstacles unique to each infill type.
          Actions
          c.      Immediately following the adoption of the General Plan, initiate a
                  study of the existing zoning code, other relevant City ordinances,
                  capital projects, etc. and make recommendations for
                  changes/additions that will reduce the reliance on the automobile
                  before (1) approving significant new infill development, or (2)
                  implementing any increases in densities in established
                  neighborhoods. Strategies may include the establishment of remote
                  parking sites, the establishment of special parking districts, the
                  separate rental of parking spaces, etc.
          e.      Immediately following the adoption of the General Plan, initiate a
                  process (1) to develop residential infill and densification design
                  guidelines and strategies and (2) examine zoning in conjunction with
                  neighborhoods and neighborhood councils where applicable. Such
                  guidelines may include the establishment of floor area ratios, second
                  story setback requirements, below grade construction to address
                  scale and mass issues, "green" development and building,
                  landscaping and other "buffering".
          e.      Immediately following the adoption of the General Plan, initiate a
                  study to examine potential infill sites for additional
                  residential/mixed use development on land designated for non-
                  residential urban uses. (Land designated on the General Plan Land
                  Use Map for uses of agriculture, agriculture buffer, or various open
                  space uses are not to be considered as, nor re-designated as, urban
                  land for infill purposes.) The study should attempt to address the
                  type or pattern of infill appropriate to each site, intensity of use,
                  likely impacts (including infrastructure constraints) timing or
                  phasing issues, etc.
          f.      Initiate a zoning ordinance amendment that would encourage
                  density bonuses for residential projects in proximity to public
                  facilities and services including bus stops.
          g.      Adopt specific plans or master plans for areas around rail station
                  and transit centers (see Figure 15, Mobility) upon completion of
                  infill-related studies and guidelines (actions c, d, and e above).
                                               97
Davis General Plan                                                  Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007              Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
         h.        Initiate a study of older apartment complexes that are currently
                   blighted as well as underutilized or vacant residential parcels that
                   could be developed and/or densified. The study should (1) give
                   priority to adaptive reuse or older structures and historic
                   preservation and (2) include consideration of a variety of innovative
                   housing types including affordable housing, affordable senior
                   housing, limited-equity co-op-housing, etc.
         i.        In order to assure the consistency of infill development (1) with
                   historic and neighborhood preservation policies, (2) with policies
                   calling for the adaptive reuse of existing structures, and (3) in order
                   to avoid the blight associated with vacant parcels, adopt a
                   demolition ordinance establishing a public review process which
                   may, under certain circumstances/contexts, include a requirement
                   that plans for a replacement structure be approved before a
                   demolition can proceed. This ordinance should be integrated
                   into/cross referenced with relevant infill guidelines upon their
                   adoption
         j.        Develop policies and regulations that allow home occupations,
                   home offices, and live/work uses by right, provided that they are
                   compatible with surrounding neighborhoods and do not cause
                   significant negative impacts.
         k.        Upon the completion of infill related studies and the adoption of
                   infill and densification design guidelines and strategies, the
                   Community Development Department shall make available a basic
                   information sheet to inform interested parties that second or
                   additional units are allowed in residential categories and the
                   guidelines affecting their construction and design.
         l.        Re-examine R-2 zone districts for compatibility with underlying
                   General Plan designations and existing land uses. Consider changes
                   where appropriate to bring zoning into greater consistency with the
                   plan designations and existing plan uses.
                                              98
Section IV: Community Form                                       Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                          99
Davis General Plan                                                   Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management
DEVELOPMENT PROCESSING
GOAL LU 3. Integrate land use, economic development, environmental, and
transportation planning.
         Policy LU 3.1 Create an efficient system of planning and zoning.
         Standards
         a.        Specific plans or master site plans that indicate land use densities
                   and intensities, building types, building variety, transit provision,
                   bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and open space areas shall be
                   required for major development areas.
         b.        General Plan land use designations for new development areas are
                   conceptual. Consequently, redesign or clustering that do not
                   increase traffic generation, change the average density, or create
                   additional impacts on adjoining areas can be found consistent.
         Actions
         c.        Periodically review Zoning Ordinance performance standards and
                   revise them as needed to ensure high environmental quality,
                   streamlined processing where appropriate, and compliance with
                   State standards.
         d.        Determine appropriate uses for city property that may be unused or
                   under-utilized, including leasing or selling, as feasible.
GENERAL PLAN BUILDOUT
Table 5 shows the 2010 buildout assumed in the land use plan in this general plan.
                                             100
Section IV: Community Form                                                           Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management                    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                              Table 5
                    2010 BUILDOUT OF GENERAL PLAN
                                       Within City of Davis
                                       Residential Units
       Planning               Low           Medium           High
         Areas              Density          Density        Density           Total          Notes
Northwest                              0                0               0             0
North Central                      1,468                0           365           1,833        a
Northeast                              0                0               0             0
West Davis                         2,604              83          2,031           4,718
Central Davis                      3,605             311          3,633           7,538        b
East Davis                         2,839                0         1,973           4,812        c
East Davis/Mace                    1,142             105             374          1,621
Core Area                            217                6           371             594        d
South Davis                        2,269             210          1,849           4,313
Southeast                              0                0               0             0
Gateway/Olive Dr.                    203                0            331            534
City Totals                       14,347             715         10,927         25,989
Notes:
Land use assumptions include:
a. Grande School site: no development.
b. Simmon Ranch residential designation: 72 low density units.
c. Core Area: 80 high density infill units.
The 2010 population projection is 62,182 assuming a 1.95% vacancy rate and 2.484 persons per household.
                                                 101
Section IV: Community Form                                                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 1: Land Use and Growth Management                         May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                         Table 5, continued
                        2010 BUILDOUT OF GENERAL PLAN
                                          Within City of Davis
                                        Non-Residential Uses
    Planning           Neighborhood          General             Office/
       Areas               Retail         Commercial Business Park Industrial               Total Notes
Northwest                               0           69,000             296,000          0   365,000      a
North Central                           0           39,000               71,000   782,000   892,000 b
Northeast                               0                  0                  0         0          0
West Davis                       55,000             11,000               65,195         0   131,195
Central Davis                   276,000             29,000             188,000          0   493,000
East Davis                      124,000           422,808              291,182    131,000   968,990
East Davis/
Mace                            117,000           120,000            1,368,000    203,000 1,808,000      c
Core Area                        48,000           833,000              625,000          0 1,506,000      d
South Davis                     161,000           806,000              948,873     61,000 1,961,873      e
Southeast                               0                  0                  0         0          0
Gateway/                          3,500           147,000                 4,000         0 154,500        f
Olive Drive
City Totals                     784,500        2,476,808            3,857,250   1,177,000 8,295,558
Notes:
Land use assumptions include:
a. Sutter Davis North site: 215,000 square feet.
b. Hunt Wesson North site: 50% of 40 acres at .25 FAR.
c. Mace Ranch: existing zoning.
d. Core Area: 50% of total square feet in Core Area Specific Plan.
e. Willowcreek office / business park site: 50%.
f. Gateway / Nishi site: no development.
g. Sites assumed at 100 % of approved: Head property, Mace Ranch
      business park, Auto Center, Interland, University Research Park,
      Juniper Point.
h. General assumption for non-residential uses unless otherwise noted:
      industrial at .25 FAR of gross land area; all other land uses at .30 FAR
      of gross land area.
                                                       102
                            Chapter 2. Mobility
BACKGROUND
The City's transportation and circulation system consists of the four sub-systems of
streets, bikeways, transit and pedestrian ways. Figure 13 shows approximate travel
times and distances for various trips within the City.
Streets
Streets in Davis primarily carry vehicular traffic, but many also accommodate
bicycles, transit and pedestrians walking on sidewalks.
Traffic Volumes. In 1987, the estimated average daily number of vehicular trips
starting from and/or finishing in Davis was approximately 190,000. The estimate
for 1996 is about 262,000 trips.
For the purposes of citywide traffic analysis, roadway congestion is generally
represented by an alphabetic level of service A through F. Level F is indicative of a
roadway that has exceeded its theoretical maximum capacity, and therefore fully
congested.
Truck Routes. Trucks in excess of three tons of gross vehicle weight are required
to travel on designated routes, to the extent feasible, to avoid streets not suited for
truck traffic. Allowances are made for trucks making deliveries, such as to
construction sites and businesses. Existing designated truck routes include:
     •  Russell Boulevard, from Highway 113 to B Street
     •  Fifth Street, from “B” Street to “L” Street
     •  First Street, from “B” Street to Richards Boulevard
     •  Richards Boulevard
     •  B Street, from First Street to Fifth
     •  L street, from Second Street to Fifth Street
     •  Second Street, from “L” Street to Mace Boulevard
     •  Covell Boulevard, from Pole Line Road to Mace Boulevard
     •  Pole Line Road, from Covell Boulevard to the north City limits
     •  Mace Boulevard, from Covell Boulevard to the south City limits
                                           103

Section IV: Community Form                                                           Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                         May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
With the opening of the Pole Line Road overcrossing of Interstate 80, three additional truck routes may
be added:
     • Fifth Street, from “L” Street to Pole Line Road
     • Pole Line Road, from Fifth Street to Cowell Boulevard
     • Cowell Boulevard, from Pole Line Road to Richards Boulevard
Transportation Systems Management. The Transportation Systems
Management (TSM) concept refers to coordinated policy measures which are
designed to reduce peak-hour auto traffic. These measures include flexible working
hours, carpooling and vanpooling, public transit, bicycles, and incentives to
encourage alternatives to auto use by individuals.
The greatest opportunity for managing traffic and reducing trips is with UC Davis
and large businesses and agencies, because of the large number of employees
commuting during the morning and evening peak hours.
In 1991, UC Davis and the City of Davis prepared a "Joint TSM Plan Study." The
purpose of the study was to identify various options for reducing single occupancy
vehicle trips by residents, students and employees in Davis. Among the alternative
strategies were variable work hours, rideshare programs, parking pricing, employer
transportation programs, transit subsidies, bicycle and pedestrian programs, and
transit.
In 1992, the City Council adopted a Trip Reduction Ordinance, establishing
requirements for employers located in Davis. The purpose of the requirements is to
promote commuting options and to reduce vehicular trips. Major employers having
100 or more employees are required to file a Transportation Management Plan with
a goal to reach a ridership of 1.5 per vehicle during the peak commuting period by
1999. Employers with fewer than 100 employees, and apartment complexes shall
distribute and post information on commute alternatives. The City has created a
Transportation Management Association to serve as a clearinghouse for information,
coordination and marketing of transit services.
In October of 1992, the City Council initiated an alternative fuel test program to
experiment with various clean fuel technologies and provide public education. The
City has purchased three electric vehicles and one fuel-flexible sedan that can run on
any combination of methanol, ethanol and gasoline. The Police Department is using
a propane powered patrol car. Data is being gathered on these vehicles to improve
the technology for more widespread use. The City also plans to purchase two CNG-
powered paratransit vehicles.
                                                104

Davis General Plan                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 2: Mobility
                                       105
Section IV: Community Form                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                           106
Davis General Plan                                                Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                       Chapter 2: Mobility
The Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) has promoted alternative fuel use,
most recently through the installation of a compressed natural gas fueling station
and support of the City's electric vehicles.
UC Davis has recently initiated a program in "fuel cell" research in its Zero-
Emission Vehicle Technology and Policy Center. Fuel cells convert hydrogen and
air into electricity that can power a zero-emission vehicle. U.C. Davis is researching
various other alternative fuel technologies, including a hybrid vehicle which is half
electric/half natural gas powered.
Transit System
The City of Davis is primarily served by the following transit systems: Unitrans,
providing bus service within the City; Yolobus, which connects Davis to other cities
in Yolo County; and Davis Community Transit / Davis Senior Transit, which
provides door-to-door demand response service to the general public, seniors, and
individuals with disabilities. A map of existing and proposed transit routes is shown
in Figure 14. Figure 15 shows how existing and proposed transit service relates to
Davis’ neighborhoods.
Unitrans is funded by UC Davis student registration fees and city revenues.
Registered undergraduate students and City employees ride the bus for free, while
graduate students and others pay $.50. Unitrans has a fleet of approximately 30
buses, of which eight are imported double-deckers from England. Unitrans has 12
routes radiating from the campus and one that serves the city's perimeter. Although
it primarily serves UC Davis students, an emerging goal for the system is to make
the service more usable by the general public. With the current emphasis on
reduction of single occupant vehicle use, bus ridership is expected to continue to
increase. Between 1994-1995 and 1995-1996, ridership increased from 1.76 million
rides to 1.85 million rides annually. Unitrans provides full service with 30 minute
headways while UC Davis is in session. During breaks and summer quarter, the
headways are less frequent, generally at one hour. Beginning in Fall 1996, Unitrans
will begin its first trial Saturday service, providing service along the two lines around
the perimeter of campus. Unitrans is converting their fleet from diesel fuel to
compressed natural gas (CNG) and has installed a CNG fueling station on campus.
Yolobus is operated by the Yolo County Transit Authority and serves Davis,
Woodland, Winters, West Sacramento, and other smaller rural towns in Yolo
County. With 13 fixed routes and a fleet of 28 buses, Yolobus seeks to fill the need
for commute and other travel between cities in the County and Sacramento, as well
as service to the Sacramento International Airport. Yolobus also provides curb-to-
curb paratransit service within Woodland and West Sacramento and will begin inter-
city paratransit service in September 1996. Yolobus has also increased express
                                              107

Section IV: Community Form                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
service to Davis; it operated two such lines in 1991 and now operates four.
Yolobus, like Unitrans, has initiated a compressed natural gas conversion; thirteen
buses currently operate on CNG. Headways vary considerably, but are about one
hour for local and intercity service. The basic fare is $1.00. On its inter-city lines,
Yolobus has enjoyed an annual upswing in ridership ranging from one to four
percent.
Davis Community Transit is a demand-response system operated by the City of
Davis that provides door-to-door service to the general public, seniors and
individuals with disabilities. Using three 14-passenger vehicles, service is provided
from 7:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M., Monday through Friday; from 8:00 A.M. to 8:00
P.M., Saturdays; and from 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M., Sundays. Fares are $1.25 for the
general public and $1.00 for seniors and people with disabilities. 24-hour advance
reservations are required. Since 1990, the annual ridership has been approximately
10,500 but increased to nearly 11,426 in 1995-1996.
Davis Senior Transit is also a city-operated demand-response system. Service is
provided using one 16-person vehicle. Serving senior citizens over 55 and persons
with disabilities on a space-available basis, Davis Senior Transit provides service to
destinations in Woodland from Monday through Friday and to Sacramento on the
second and fourth Tuesdays of the each month. Fares are not charged, but
donations are suggested at $3.00 per round trip to Woodland and $5.00 to
Sacramento.
In addition to the transit systems described above, the Baylink bus-ferry system
provides service between Sacramento and San Francisco. This service allows Davis
riders to take a bus to Vallejo and continue to San Francisco by ferry or Bay Area
Rapid Transit (BART).
                                           108
Davis General Plan                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 2: Mobility
                                       109
Section IV: Community Form                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                           110
Davis General Plan                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 2: Mobility
                                       111
Section IV: Community Form                          Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                           112
Davis General Plan                                                Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                       Chapter 2: Mobility
Bicycle System
The City of Davis and the UC Davis campus are nationally acknowledged leaders in
bicycle planning and use. Bicycles probably serve the transportation needs of
students, faculty, and staff better than any other mode. It is estimated
that there is an average of more than one bicycle per person in Davis, and that 25
percent of person trips in Davis are currently made by bicycle.
As UC Davis grew from about 2,200 students in 1958 to over 20,000 by the late
1960s, the demands for bicycle facilities increased. The primary concern of the 1966
City Council election was providing commuter bikeways on public streets. A trial
system of bike lanes proved to be immensely popular and was rapidly expanded.
The system steadily grew and matured.
In 1993, the major routes consisted of approximately 36.8 miles of bike lanes, which
are along streets, and 29.1 miles of bike paths, which are separated from streets or
within neighborhood greenbelts. These two types of facilities have different
advantages for the different types of cyclists. Avid and experienced bicycle
enthusiasts often prefer bike lanes, which generally allow more direct routes but can
create conflicts with cars; young bicycle riders and beginning bicyclists often prefer
quieter bike paths, even if they are less direct than bike lanes. The keys to Davis'
successful bike system are its linkages of key origins and destinations and its
connections across physical barriers such as freeways, creeks and major streets.
Both Yolo and Solano Counties have adopted bicycle plans with bikeways that
connect to those in Davis.
Pedestrian System
The pedestrian system includes facilities designed solely for pedestrians (sidewalks)
and facilities designed to be shared by pedestrians and bicyclists. Some facilities are
oriented toward basic circulation between destinations and other facilities are more
recreation oriented.
Existing pedestrian circulation facilities in the City consist of sidewalks on almost
every street, off-street paths shared with bicyclists, neighborhood greenbelt paths,
bridges, and other path systems.
Planned pedestrian circulation facilities include mid-block pedestrian passageways
(paseos) and pedestrian plazas in the core area, and parkway demonstration projects
in north and south Davis.
Future pedestrian system planning is tied closely to land use planning, including
circulation to community facilities. Other issues to be addressed in corridor plans
                                            113
Section IV: Community Form                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                   May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
are improving safety for pedestrians, especially at street crosswalks; and providing
for a comfortable and attractive environment for the pedestrian.
Rail and Air Service
The Amtrak rail, Greyhound bus and Baylink bus companies operate from the
historic station in the core area. Capitol Corridor trains arrive and depart the station
daily service through Davis between Roseville/Sacramento and the Bay Area. One
Coast Starlight train arrives and departs daily with service via Sacramento to Seattle.
One California Zephyr arrives and departs daily with interstate service. There are
also four daily bus connections to rail service out of Stockton. Approximately 145
passengers are served daily from the Davis station. The station is a multi-modal
terminal for various modes of travel including rail, bus, and bicycle.
The Sacramento Regional Transit District has prepared a study of the feasibility of
various light rail routes in the region, including a planning route between Davis and
Sacramento. The planning route was shown along side of the railroad tracks used by
Amtrak, with possible stations on the UC Davis campus opposite Mrak Hall, at the
Amtrak Depot, and at Mace Boulevard (see Figure 14, Transit Routes). Funding for
light rail service between Davis and Sacramento is not available at present and would
be subject to regional priorities based on ridership and the costs of providing
service.
The only airport in the Planning Area is the UC Davis Airport, which serves general
aviation. The Yolo County Airport, approximately one mile east of the Planning
Area, is a general aviation airport serving private planes.
The Sacramento International Airport is located 12 miles northwest of the
downtown Sacramento, approximately 20 miles northeast of the City of Davis. It is
served by 10 major national and international carriers and four commuter airlines.
There are approximately 135 arriving and departing flights daily, serving
approximately 14,000 persons. Forecasts for the year 2005 include serving
approximately 23,000 persons daily. Yolobus provides public transit service to the
airport, and a private airport shuttle also provides service between Davis and the
airport.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
ROADWAYS AND MOTOR VEHICLES
GOAL MOB 1. Provide attractive streets designed to serve a broad spectrum
of travel modes as well as automobiles. A multi-modal street is illustrated in
Figure 18.
                                            114
Davis General Plan                                                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                                Chapter 2: Mobility
         Policy MOB 1.1 Provide and maintain a roadway network to meet the
                   needs of vehicular traffic in Davis.
         Standards
         a.        The City of Davis shall have a network of vehicle circulation routes
                   consisting of major arterials, minor arterials, collectors, local streets
                   and cul-de-sacs, as shown in Figure 16. Definitions and suggested
                   widths of each type of street are shown in Table 6. Lane widths are
                   shown in Table 7. Planned street widenings are shown in Table 8.
                   Lane configurations planned for 2010 are shown in Figure 17.
                   See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Major
                   Arterial Landscaping, Noise Attenuation Design and Greenstreets".
         b.        Streets, bike paths, bike lanes and trails should generally conform to
                   the City guidelines, as shown in Tables 6 and 7.
         c.        Unless preempted by the County Congestion Management Plan,
                   Level of Service 'E' for automobiles is sufficient for arterials and
                   collectors (both intersection and segment operations) during peak
                   traffic hours (e.g. rush hour). Level of Service 'D' for automobiles is
                   sufficient for arterials, collectors and major intersections during
                   non-peak traffic hours. (See Glossary and Definitions for definition of
                   “Major Intersections”). Neighborhood plans or corridor plans can allow
                   for a level of service at peak times of 'F' if approved by the City
                   Council. LOS ‘F’ is acceptable during peak hours in the Core Area.
                   The reasons for adopting the new standards include:
                   • High LOS standards to achieve low levels of congestion are not necessarily
                        linked to urban vitality and quality of life.
                   • The reduced standards would be consistent with community objectives of
                        avoiding road widenings which would be unacceptable in terms of community
                        character.
                   • High LOS standards make infill development more difficult because infill
                        uses the capacities of streets and may cause traffic volumes to approach the
                        capacities of streets.
                   • Allowing higher levels of congestion may encourage alternative modes of
                        transportation.
         d.        Davis streets shall have no more than four through automobile
                   lanes, plus a single left-hand turning lane, even if this requirement
                                                   115

Section IV: Community Form                                                          Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                           May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                    reduces level of service. Additional turning lanes may be added for
                    safety or design considerations.
          e.        Class II bicycle lanes shall be provided along all collector and arterial
                    streets. Class I bike paths may also be provided where appropriate
                    except where physically infeasible.
          f.        The City shall require reservation of an offer of dedication of right-
                    of-way necessary for the number of lanes projected for each existing
                    and planned arterial street shown in Figure 10 as a condition of
                    development approval for new developments and substantial
                    changes to existing structures. Prior to implementing the planned
                    street widenings shown in Table 8 and Figure 17 in response to a
                    development proposal, the City shall first consider the feasibility and
                    effectiveness of other measures to improve the Level of Service
                    (LOS) to City standards. Such measures could include but would
                    not be limited to Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
                    measures such as requiring businesses to stagger their hours of
                    operation or employees to a non-peak time, charging for parking
                    and encouraging carpools. Only when such measures are
                    determined by City Council to be infeasible and ineffective to
                    improve the LOS to City standards would the City implement the
                    street widening.
                    The need and funding for street widenings, and perhaps public agreement on their
                    eventual necessity, may not be certain at the time development proposals are
                    received. The ability to maintain LOS standards by adding lanes, however,
                    should not be foreclosed.
          Actions
          g.        The City will work with the Transportation District to revise or
                    repeal the current CMP or take other appropriate steps (e.g.
                    preparation of a "Deficiency Plan") to reflect the City's level-of-
                    service standard for roadways.
          h.        Work with citizens and technical interests to review the street width
                    standards and revise them as needed to reflect the policies in this
                    chapter.
          i.        Update the City-wide Traffic Study every five years and upon the
                    approval of the new UC Davis Long Range Development Plan
                    (LRDP).
                                                 116
Davis General Plan                                                      Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                             Chapter 2: Mobility
         j.        Preserve rights-of-way for potential roadway widenings identified in
                   the City-wide Traffic Study.
         k.        Upon adoption of the general plan, the City shall study the pros and
                   cons of expanding rights-of-way for new developments to include
                   additional street trees. Such studies shall include considerations of
                   the City's Greenstreet standards.
                   See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Major
                   Arterial Landscaping, Noise Attenuation Design and Greenstreets".
         l.        Investigate and facilitate where appropriate the use of County, State
                   and Federal roadways to accommodate regional traffic to minimize
                   regional through traffic on City of Davis Streets (for example,
                   consider signs to direct traffic as set forth in this action).
         Policy MOB 1.2 As part of the initial project review for any new project,
                   the City Engineer may determine that a project-specific traffic study
                   shall be prepared. Studies shall identify impacted roadway segments
                   and intersections and recommend mitigation measures designed to
                   reduce these impacts to acceptable levels.
         Policy MOB 1.3 Encourage the use of alternative transportation modes.
         Actions
         a.        Design minor and collector streets to slow vehicular traffic to 30
                   mph or less.
         b.        Provide convenient bike and pedestrian access between areas where
                   cars are prohibited.
         c.        Continue to support policies and programs that encourage
                   alternative fueled vehicles.
                                               117
Section IV: Community Form                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                           118
Davis General Plan                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 2: Mobility
                                       119
Section IV: Community Form                          Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                           120
Davis General Plan                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 2: Mobility
                                       121
Section IV: Community Form                          Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                           122
Davis General Plan                                                                        Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                                                 Chapter 2: Mobility
                                                              Table 6
                       STREET CLASSIFICATIONS AND GUIDELINES
                                                                                                                    Typical
                                                                                                                    Curb-to-
 Street                                                                   # of                Bike      ROW           Curb
 Type            Description                                             Lanes   Median       Lanes     Width        Width
 Major           A continuous street located to serve large traffic
 Arterial        volumes and designed to minimize access to
                 abutting property via driveways, alleys and business
                 entrances. Streets feeding into major arterials
                 should be spaced at one-quarter-mile intervals.
                 Major arterials should not penetrate neighborhoods
                 and should be planned so as to eliminate through
                 traffic in residential neighborhoods and adjacent to
                 schools.                                                  4         √          √      102'-146'        78'
 Minor           A continuous street located to provide a direct
 Arterial        route between, but not through, separate
                 neighborhoods. Minor arterials should be planned
                 to eliminate through traffic in residential
                 neighborhoods and adjacent to schools.                    2      Varies        √         75'         51-56'
 Collector       A noncontinuous street located to collect traffic
 Street          from local streets and distribute it to minor and
                 major arterials. The difference, other than size,
                 between a collector and an arterial is that a
                 collector penetrates a neighborhood, while an
                 arterial does not.                                        2                    √         62'           52'
 Modified        Same as a local street, but with additional right-of-
 Local           way. Typically used for higher volume local streets,
 Street          particularly with high bicycle volumes.                   2                              50'           40'
 Local           A street, other than a collector or arterial, providing
 Street          access to abutting property and designed not to
                 accommodate or encourage through trips.                   2                              44'           34'
 Cul-de-sac A local street terminating in a turning area and
                 generally not exceeding 400 feet in length.
                                                                           2                              38'           28'
Notes:
1.      Additional street and right-of-way widening at intersections may be necessary to accommodate
        turning vehicles and transit stops or to create greenstreets.
2.       Additional easements may be required for utilities, street appurtenances, and planting.
3.       The City Council may approve design standards different from above in P-D (Planned Development) zoning
         district.
4.       Right-of-way width shall be measured at the back of sidewalks for all streets with the exception of arterials.
         Additional right-of-way or easement will be required for sidewalk, bike paths, and landscaping on major arterials.
         Additional right-of-way or easement may be required for other streets in order to provide for separate bicycle
         facilities.
5.       Detailed recommended standards for streets are available in the Public Works Department and detailed
         recommended standards for landscaping along streets are available in the Community Development Department.
6.       Widths shown assume on-street parking on all collector, local and cul-de-sac streets. No parking is assumed on
         arterials.
7.       See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Major Arterial Landscaping, Noise
         Attenuation Design and Greenstreets".
                                                                 123

Section IV: Community Form                                                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                              May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                                  Table 7
                   GEOMETRIC CROSS SECTION GUIDELINES
  Item                                Typical Width                      Street Classification
  Moving Lane                                12'           Arterials (subtract 1-foot when adjacent to
                                                           emergency parking)
  Moving Lane                                11'           Collector with bikes
  Two-Way Left-Turn Lane                     11'           Minor Arterials
  Parking                                    8'            All Streets
  Emergency Parking                          6'            All Streets
  Center Median                              14'           Major Arterials and some Minor Arterials
  Bike Lane                                  7'            Arterial and Collectors (add 1 foot next to curb
                                                           lane)
  Bike Path                                  10'           Arterial and Collector
  Curb Lane                         Add 2' to minimum lane width ("shy distance")
Notes     These cross-sections may not apply to designated Greenstreets, which should be consistent with
          the City’s Greenstreets Policy, unless modified by the Corridor Plan approval process.
          See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Major Arterial
          Landscaping, Noise Attenuation Design and Greenstreets".
                                                    124

Davis General Plan                                                                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                                                  Chapter 2: Mobility
                                                        Table 8
                                 PLANNED STREET WIDENINGS
                                                                                               1996           Proposed
   Roadway                       Segment                                                    Condition         Condition
   1.  Covell Blvd               Baywood to Alhambra                                             2                 4+
   2.  Mace Blvd                 Alhambra to Chiles                                              2                 4+
   3.  F Street                  Seventh to Third                                                2                 21
   4.  Pole Line Rd              Overcrossing                                                   2+                2+2
   5.  Pole Line Rd              Covell to N City Limits                                        2+                4+3
   6.  B Street                  First to Fifth                                                 2+                2+5
   7.  Cowell Blvd               Pole Line to Drew                                              2+                  4
   8.  Cowell Blvd               Research Park Dr to Drummond                                    2                  4
   9.  Second Street             Frontier Fertilizer to Mace                                     2                 2+
   10. Second Street             Harrison Site to DWR                                            2                 2+
   11. Covell Blvd               Shasta to Denali                                                2                 4+
   12. Covell Blvd               SR 113 SB Ramp to Sycamore                                     4+                 4+
   13. Pole Line Rd              Fifth to Covell                                                2+               2+3,4,6
   14. Chiles Rd                 Ensenada to EB I-80 Ramps                                      2+                  4
   15. Fifth Street              Contec to Pena                                                 2+                  4
   16. Eighth Street             F Street to J Street                                            2                  2
   17. Second Street             ¼ mi. W of Mace to Mace                                         2                  4
   18. Covell/Mace               Alhambra to Alhambra                                           2+                 4+
   19. Fifth Street              B Street to L Street                                            4                 43
1.     With short turn lanes only at intersections.
2.     Corridor plan and mitigation apply. It is the clear intent of this plan not to re-stripe Pole Line Road to four-lanes.
3.     With Corridor Plan and mitigation.
4.     Four lanes north of Claremont acceptable for intersection capacity and operations.
5.     With traffic control at 2nd and B Streets.
6.     Use Corridor Plan process to identify location of turn lanes for increased capacity at intersections.
8.     The final configurations for the segment of Pole Line Road from Covell Boulevard to North City Limits shown in
       this table as segment #5 and in Figure 17, 2010 Land Configuration, shall be influenced by planning decisions
       regarding the 386-acre land site northwest of the Covell Boulevard / Pole Line Road intersection (known as the
       Covell Center” project site) and by County Road 102 configurations. The lane configuration of 4+ shown in this
       table and in Figure 17 may need to be only 2+ lanes.
9.     The City shall give strong consideration to the factors of existing trees and bicycle and pedestrian access prior to
       street widenings.
“2” and “4” indicate the planned number of through lanes and “+” indicates additional turn lanes at intersections.
                                                            125

Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Policy MOB 1.4 Create a network of street and bicycle facilities that
                    provides for multiple routes between various origins and
                    destinations.
          Standards
          a.        Davis should develop a connected street pattern with multiple route
                    options for bike and pedestrian travel in new and developed areas.
          b.        New developments should be designed generally with a grid pattern
                    to allow through traffic, to disperse the traffic throughout the
                    project, and to provide multiple connections to arterial streets. Cul-
                    de-sacs are allowed provided they connect to bicycle/pedestrian
                    corridors. Figure 19 depicts a conceptual diagram of desired street
                    patterns.
          Actions
          c.        Implement traffic calming measures where feasible to minimize the
                    impact of the use of residential streets by vehicular through traffic.
                    Conceptual diagrams of various traffic calming measures are shown
                    in figure 20. Other measures, such as roundabouts, may also be
                    employed.
          d.        Develop guidelines for traffic calming strategies that include, but are
                    not limited to, modified intersection designs, narrow streets, tight
                    turning radii, sidewalk bulb outs, parking bays, textured paving, and
                    parkways between sidewalks and streets.
          Policy MOB 1.5 Develop a traffic calming program and implement traffic
                    calming measures, where appropriate and feasible, to minimize the
                    impacts on the use of local streets by vehicular traffic and to
                    maintain, or as necessary enhance, livability of the neighborhoods.
                    Consider traffic calming measures along collector and minor arterial
                    streets, where appropriate and feasible, to slow speeds where
                    needed. Examples of assorted traffic calming treatments are shown
                    in Figure 20.
          Actions
          a.        Develop a comprehensive traffic plan and program which are
                    oriented toward residential streets and which are not necessarily part
                    of the City’s corridor plan program. The City’s Safety Advisory
                    Committee, a subcommittee of the Safety Advisory Committee, or a
                    new task force should be in charge of developing this
                    comprehensive traffic plan and program.
                                              126

Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                        Chapter 2: Mobility
         b.        Develop guidelines for traffic calming strategies and their
                   implementation.
         c.        Use traffic calming strategies to respond to requests by
                   neighborhoods for traffic calming measures.
         Policy MOB 1.6 Build new intersections and redesign existing intersections
                   to maximize pedestrian and bike convenience and safety relative to
                   automobile needs.
         Standards
         a.        Intersections should be designed to force cars to slow down when
                   turning, using techniques such as reduced corner radii. The design
                   elements of the signalized intersections of arterial streets shall be
                   determined on an individual basis consistent with the objectives of
                   this standard and other relevant policies in the general plan. The
                   design of corner radii at arterial intersections shall consider traffic
                   safety, including potential conflicts between motor vehicles and
                   bicycles.
         Actions
         b.        Continue to time traffic lights and their activation mechanisms to
                   give priority to bike and pedestrian travel.
         c.        Study configuring intersections to allow bikes to maintain their
                   momentum.
                                             127
Section IV: Community Form                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
18: Multi-Modal Street Character
                                 128
Davis General Plan                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                Chapter 2: Mobility
19: Street Pattern Concept
                                       129
Section IV: Community Form                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                 May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Figure 20: Traffic Calming Measures
                               130
Davis General Plan                                                  Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                         Chapter 2: Mobility
         Policy MOB 1.7 Adopt development policies to improve the appearance of
                   each major arterial street, as illustrated in Figure 21.
         Actions
         a.        Develop "corridor plans" for selected streets which warrant special
                   treatment because of existing impact problems or problems related
                   to future projected conditions. Corridor plans should take into
                   consideration adjacent land uses and result in streets that are both
                   functional and aesthetic. The plans should utilize innovative means
                   of slowing traffic, where appropriate, and providing safe access for
                   pedestrians and bicyclists. Mitigation shall be incorporated to
                   protect residences and sensitive receptors from noise, air pollution
                   and other traffic related impacts. The corridor plans may deviate
                   from the standards established in the General Plan, if deviations
                   improve the livability of the area. For example, Pole Line Road was
                   designed to have only two lanes, rather than four as shown in the
                   previous General Plan.
         The streets to consider for participation in this program are listed below in
         order of priority.
                   1.   Fifth Street
                   2.   F Street
                   3.   Eighth Street
                   4.   L Street (south of Eighth)
                   5.   Loyola Drive
                   6.   Anderson Road
                   7.   Covell Blvd.
                   8.   Cowell Blvd.
                   9.   Lillard
                   10.  Richards Blvd.
                   11.  Mace Blvd.
         b.        Beautify the entrances to the City, in addition to Interstate 80 and
                   Highway 113 corridor plan improvements. Such entrances include
                   Covell Boulevard, Mace Boulevard, Olive Drive, Pole Line Road,
                   Richards Boulevard and Russell Boulevard.
         c.        As the city’s top corridor plan priority, continue to plan and
                   implement the Pole Line Road Corridor Plan from the northerly city
                   limits to the Cowell Boulevard intersection.
                                             131

Section IV: Community Form                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
      Example of Existing Corridor
      Possible Improvements
      Figure 21: Corridor Plan Improvement Concepts
                                   132
Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                        Chapter 2: Mobility
         d.        Work with Caltrans, other affected agencies and developers to
                   implement the Interstate 80/Highway 113 Corridor Plan through
                   public and private projects in these corridors. The following
                   policies shall be considered to achieve a high level of aesthetic
                   quality and to develop amenities within the corridors, including a
                   green backdrop with views to businesses adjacent to the freeway
                   corridors.
                   1.       Locate public art in areas of high visibility and works of art
                            in new freeway structures and corridor buildings.
                   2.       Develop freeway structures and overpass landscaping as
                            aesthetic focal points.
                   3.       Design architectural elements to complement the corridor
                            experience, define edges, and enhance vistas. Signage shall
                            be of high aesthetic quality and shall avoid visual clutter.
                   4.       Buildings and streets outside of the highway rights-of-way
                            shall have generous landscaped areas.
                   5.       Maintain viewsheds to important regional views.
                   6.       Develop new landmarks and vistas within the corridors.
                   7.       Preserve historic tree stands as well as individual trees to the
                            greatest extent possible.
                   8.       Maintain cultural resources along the corridors.
                   9.       Utilize drought tolerant vegetation.
         Policy MOB 1.8 Preserve and enhance the Richards Boulevard underpass
                   as an entrance to Davis and the Core, while maintaining the
                   historical character of the structure. Provide for the smoothest
                   possible flow of auto, bicycle and pedestrian traffic by implementing
                   transportation demand management measures.
         Standards
         a.        Implement various Transportation Demand Management measures
                   to reduce demand at the Richards Boulevard underpass to the extent
                   feasible, so that collectively these measures may reduce congestion
                   along the Richards Boulevard/First Street corridor. These measures
                   may include traffic control and diversion components, alternate
                   routes, bicycle safety and circulation components, emergency access
                                              133
Section IV: Community Form                                                      Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                    and drainage improvement measures, and beautification
                    components.
                    See Action MOB 1.7b regarding the beautification of City entrances.
          Actions
          b.        Continue to study and implement the Modified Transportation
                    Demand Management (TDM) Measures Alternative as developed in
                    the Richard Boulevard Corridor Upgrade Project EIR and
                    subsequent City Council actions, using extensive public
                    involvement.
          c.        Work with Caltrans to determine the feasibility of connecting the
                    Richards Boulevard northbound to I-80 westbound ramp to the
                    same lane that serves vehicles using the southbound to westbound
                    ramp to improve the merge with I-80 traffic.
          Policy MOB 1.9 Implement the following specific projects to improve
                    traffic flow and increase the use of non-vehicular transportation
                    modes.
          Actions
          a.        Study reconfiguring Fifth Street between "B" and "L" Streets as two
                    traffic lanes with center left turn lane and on-street bike lanes.
          Policy MOB 1.10 Prohibit through truck traffic on streets other than
                    identified truck routes shown in Figure 22.
          Actions
          a.        Direct through truck traffic away from residential areas and other
                    sensitive land uses. Study alternate truck routing to reduce truck
                    traffic on city streets.
          b.        Improve signs indicating truck routes.
          c.        Continue to provide a phone number with a recorder on which
                    citizens can report license numbers and names of trucking
                    companies that violate truck route regulations.
          d.        Continue to implement a follow-up program with trucking
                    companies with reported violations of truck route regulations.
          e.        Designate a second truck route other than Covell Boulevard to serve
                    the Hunt Wesson plant.
                                              134
Davis General Plan                                                Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                       Chapter 2: Mobility
         f.        Consider using County roads to divert truck traffic from the
                   intersection of Covell Boulevard and Pole Line Road.
         Policy MOB 1.11 Promote the use of electric vehicles and other low-
                   polluting vehicles, including Neighborhood Electric Vehicles.
         Standards
         a.        New development shall include charging stations for electric
                   vehicles in a distribution consistent with the future growth in the
                   number of electric vehicles.
         Actions
         b.        Establish charging stations for electric vehicles in public parking lots
                   in accordance with the future growth in the number of electric
                   vehicles.
         c.        Review and update the Davis Neighborhood Electric Vehicle Plan
                   (March, 1996).
PARKING
GOAL MOB 2. Balance the needs to provide adequate parking in residential
and commercial developments with the desire to limit automobile travel.
         Policy MOB 2.1 Use parking as a transportation system management
                   technique.
         Standards
         a.        Developments which support transit or include shared parking
                   beyond routine requirements shall have reduced parking
                   requirements.
         b.        On-street parking on Greenstreets with bicycle lanes is discouraged
                   in order to allow a narrower cross-section.
         Actions
         c.        Utilize the 1996 Downtown Parking Study and subsequent updates
                   as the basis for Core Area parking improvements.
         d.        Review city parking standards for residential and non-residential
                   uses, with priority on non-residential uses, to recognize the
                   utilization of transit and other modes and reflect shared parking
                   opportunities.
                                              135
Section IV: Community Form                                                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                         May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
DEDICATED BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
GOAL MOB 3. Increase walking and the use of non-polluting forms of
transportation, including bicycles.
          Policy MOB 3.1 Develop a continuous trails and bikeway network for
                    both recreation and transportation that serves the Core,
                    neighborhoods, employment centers, schools and other institutions,
                    minimizes conflicts between pedestrians, bicyclists, equestrians, and
                    automobiles, and that minimizes impacts on wildlife. Greenbelts and
                    Greenstreets should serve as the backbone of much of this network.
                    Figure 23 shows the City’s existing and planned primary bicycle
                    network.
                    See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Major
                    Arterial Landscaping, Noise Attenuation Design and Greenstreets".
          Standards
          a.        There shall be no removal of existing bike lanes to add through
                    traffic lanes.
          Actions
          b.        Enhance the safety, accessibility and coverage of the existing bicycle
                    network, especially in the vicinity of UC Davis, schools and
                    recreation areas.
          c.        Work with the University in improving access routes through
                    campus to connect with the open space network.
          d.        Plan bicycle route connections to neighboring communities.
                    Coordinate planning of these facilities with Yolo and Solano
                    counties, the City of Woodland, and their bicycle plans.
          e.        Establish charging stations for electric vehicles in public parking lots
                    in accordance with the future growth in the number of electric
                    vehicles.
          f.        Implement an on-going program to identify and eliminate hazardous
                    conditions to cyclists and conflicts between cyclists and other
                    transportation modes.
          g.        Consider installation of traffic calming measures wherever a bicycle
                    path crosses a street at-grade without a stop sign or a traffic signal.
          h.        Improve signage and/or cautionary signals on roadways marking
                    bicycle and pedestrian crossings.
                                                136

Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                        Chapter 2: Mobility
         i.        Establish guidelines as to when bike paths (in addition to on-street
                   bike lanes) along arterial streets ought to be considered.
         j.        Develop mechanisms to increase the funding for the creation and
                   maintenance of bike paths.
         k.        Develop standards to mitigate impacts of bicycle facilities on
                   sensitive land uses such as wildlife habitat.
                                             137
Section IV: Community Form                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                           138
Davis General Plan                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 2: Mobility
                                       139
Section IV: Community Form                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                           140
Davis General Plan                                                   Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                          Chapter 2: Mobility
         Policy MOB 3.2 Continue to build transportation improvements
                   specifically targeted at bicycles.
         Actions
         a.        Build the proposed Putah Creek Bicycle Crossing as the top priority
                   bicycle improvement. Include accommodations for police and
                   EMT vehicles, if necessary and feasible.
         b.        Build the Mace Ranch to Willow Creek Bicycle Overcrossing of I-
                   80. Include accommodations for police and EMT vehicles, if
                   necessary and feasible.
         c.        Strengthen the Campus-to-Core bike linkage along Third Street.
         Policy MOB 3.3 Provide pedestrian and bicycle amenities.
         Actions
         a.        Improve destination signage throughout the city on bikeways.
         b.        Install public facilities to serve bicyclists and pedestrians, such as
                   water fountains and attractive, secure and accessible bike parking.
         c.        Install secure and covered bike facilities at the train station.
         d.        Prepare and implement bicycle parking standards for new
                   developments.
         e.        Install bike racks on inter-city buses.
         f.        Encourage "for deposit" shopping cart arrangements so that
                   pedestrians can take carts away from commercial areas and return
                   them later.
         g.        Maintain and expand the City’s outreach program to promote
                   bicycle safety and the use of bicycles as a viable and attractive
                   alternative to cars.
         Policy MOB 3.4 Attempt to provide safe and convenient pedestrian access
                   to all areas of the city.
         Actions
         a.        Establish a level-of-service standard for walking (pedestrians) and
                   bicycling. Incorporate the level of service into this General Plan
                   when it is established.
                                               141

Section IV: Community Form                                                     Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                        May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          b.        Implement an ongoing program to identify and eliminate hazardous
                    conditions to pedestrians.
          c.        Maintain and repair sidewalks to make them as safe as possible for
                    pedestrians.
          Policy MOB 3.5 Develop a system of trails at the periphery of the city and
                    within the city for recreational use and to allow walkers and
                    bicyclists to reach open space and natural areas.
          Standards
          a.        The creation of an urban periphery loop trail is a low priority.
                    However, the City recognizes that some portions of such a trail
                    already exist, and should take advantage of opportunities for further
                    acquisition and construction as they present themselves.
          b.        Trails should be developed in roadway rights-of-way wherever
                    possible to minimize conflicts with surrounding rural landowners,
                    but should be separated from the roadway itself by a planting strip.
          c.        Tree planting between roads and roadside trails is encouraged, but
                    should not interfere with roadway visibility.
          Actions
          d.        Develop destination-oriented trails.
          e.        Work with the counties, other cities and the general public to
                    minimize conflicts with land uses such as agriculture and wildlife
                    habitat when developing a trails network.
          f.        Install additional landscaping along Old Highway 40/I-80 and
                    Second Street.
                    See also Policy POS 3.3 for additional specific projects.
TRANSIT
GOAL MOB 4. Reduce automobile use by improving transit service and
encouraging transit use.
          Policy MOB 4.1 Facilitate the provision of convenient, frequent,
                    dependable and efficient scheduled transit and demand responsive
                    transit for Davis residents.
                                                142
Davis General Plan                                                  Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                         Chapter 2: Mobility
         Standards
         a.        The greatest concentration of transit routes should be near high
                   density developments.
         Actions
         b.        Implement the Davis portion of the Yolo County Transit Plan.
         c.        Improve transit line coverage, frequency and seasonal regularity
                   throughout the city and to adjacent cities, with particular emphasis
                   on service to the core, employment centers, social services and
                   institutions.
         d.        Continue to provide para-transit services. Cooperate with volunteer
                   efforts to provide these services.
         e.        Publicize the availability of para-transit services.
         f.        Expand, improve and publicize the multi-modal transportation
                   center in the Core Area.
         g.        Work towards establishing neighborhood transit stops.
         h.        Provide bus schedules, maps, attractive shelters and clocks at transit
                   stops.
         i.        Establish a City/County/University transportation clearinghouse
                   service that provides information on bus schedules and other
                   alternative travel options.
         j.        Work proactively to coordinate transit service between the Yolo
                   County Transit Authority, Unitrans, and other transit service
                   providers.
         k.        Study technology to provide real-time information on bus locations.
         l.        Study installing transit-aware traffic signals to give priority to buses.
         m.        Support continuation and expansion of the federal subsidies needed
                   by all local transit systems.
         n.        Ensure that the existing railroad right-of-way between Davis and
                   Sacramento is maintained for existing and future rail service of all
                   types.
                                              143
Section IV: Community Form                                                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                         May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Policy MOB 4.2 Make transit more available and accessible to students and
                    youth.
          Actions
          a.        Facilitate better coordination between local transit providers and the
                    school district to optimize transit routes and services for youths.
          b.        Continue to support and inform the public about the availability of
                    school busing for the junior and senior high schools.
          c.        Explore the use of volunteer drivers to augment existing youth
                    transit services.
          d.        Establish methods and procedures to obtain input from youth to
                    help plan routes and schedules that better serve the city youth.
          e.        Consider the provision of busing to public elementary schools with
                    special programs that attract students from throughout Davis.
          Policy MOB 4.3 Require new development designs that maximize transit
                    potential.
                    See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Locational
                    Guidelines for Residential Densities and Senior Housing".
          Standards
          d.        New developments adjacent to arterial streets or transit routes shall
                    include bus loading zones, shelters and other amenities which make
                    transit attractive.
          b.        All arterial and collector streets shall be designed to accommodate
                    buses.
          c.        New developments shall provide unconstrained access to bus stops
                    for pedestrians and bicyclists.
                                                144
Davis General Plan                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007               Chapter 2: Mobility
                                       145
Section IV: Community Form                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                           146
Davis General Plan                                                  Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                         Chapter 2: Mobility
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
GOAL MOB 5. Develop alternative transportation solutions which will help
alleviate peak hour congestion and improve air quality.
         Policy MOB 5.1 Develop and maintain a trip-reduction program designed
                   to achieve a 10-percent reduction by 2010 in motor vehicle trips per
                   capita relative to 1987 levels, or higher if so required by the US
                   Environmental Protection Agency, the California Air Resources
                   Board or the Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District.
         Standards
         a.        Developers of new business and residential real estate shall provide
                   transportation improvements to offset trip increases caused by their
                   developments. Developers shall mitigate significant adverse traffic
                   impacts upon existing neighborhoods to reduce the impacts to less-
                   than-significant levels, unless the city finds that full mitigations
                   would be incompatible with the neighborhood.
         Actions
         b.        Adopt a program that requires participation by employers located in
                   concentrated commercial areas in TSM/TDM programs.
         c.        Cooperate with the University to ensure that the City and University
                   Transportation Systems Management (TSM) programs are
                   implemented to minimize traffic demand on city streets.
         d.        Establish a periodic evaluation of the effectiveness of the City's trip
                   reduction plan. Revise the City's trip reduction ordinance to be
                   consistent with changes in State law.
         e.        Encourage ride sharing and staggered work hours for City
                   employees.
         f.        Provide incentives to promote ridesharing among Davis residents.
         g.        Implement financial and parking incentives to encourage drivers to
                   use alternative transportation, including bicycles, electric vehicles,
                   transit systems and ridesharing.
         h.        Encourage existing parking lot owners to allow transit riders and
                   ride sharers to park in their parking lots.
         i.        Create a bicycle pool for use by City employees during working
                   hours.
                                             147
Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 2: Mobility                                    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          j.  Construct park-and-ride lots in Davis to support intercity transit and
              ridesharing.
          Policy MOB 5.2 Develop a student trip reduction program with DJUSD.
          Actions
          a.        Work cooperatively with the Davis Joint Unified School District to
                    develop a transportation and safety management program related to
                    all school sites. Explore as part of this program a trip reduction
                    program (i.e. encourage ride sharing, implement a neighborhood
                    parking program, encourage student to walk or bike, encourage staff
                    to reduce the use of cars, etc.). Explore as part of this program a
                    transportation safety program (i.e. request Davis High School to
                    reduce the need and desirability for students to leave campus at
                    lunch time, etc.).
SAFETY AND NOISE
GOAL MOB 6. Increase safety of and decrease noise and air pollution from
transportation throughout the city.
          Policy MOB 6.1 Safety and noise concerns should take priority over traffic
                    flow in roadway planning.
          Standards
          a.        Design street patterns to minimize emergency vehicle response
                    times.
          Actions
          b.        Use traffic calming devices and speed limits as appropriate
                    throughout the city to meet the twin goals of safety and noise
                    reduction.
          c.        Improve signage and/or cautionary signals denoting reduced speed
                    limits.
          d.        Respond to requests for neighborhood-specific traffic-calming and
                    safety-enhancing measures which are proposed and backed by
                    neighborhood residents.
          e.        Create a standing subcommittee of the “Safety Advisory
                    Committee” to promote bicycle and pedestrian safety and
                    convenience.
                                             148

Davis General Plan                                                  Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                         Chapter 2: Mobility
         Policy MOB 6.2 Cooperate with the school district in promoting safe and
         convenient student bicycle/pedestrian routes between school and home.
         Actions
         a.        Request the DJUSD to work with the Safety Advisory Committee
                   (SAC), City staff and neighborhood committees on student
                   transportation issues.
         b.        Request each school do an annual school commute survey of their
                   students to identify the major routes and modes of travel, the
                   greatest safety hazards (e.g., street crossings, underpasses, drop-off
                   areas), and recommend actions to the Safety Advisory Commission.
         c.        Strongly encourage DJUSD to work with City staff and the SAC
                   when designing new schools, modifying attendance boundaries or
                   making other changes that affect student trip patterns.
         d.        Strongly encourage the DJUSD to maintain active membership in
                   the Yolo Transportation Management Association (TMA).
         e.        Encourage the DJUSD to work with the City on safe routes to
                   school and traffic mitigation, especially related to student commutes
                   and arrival and departure times at school sites.
TRANSPORTATION POLICY MAKING
GOAL MOB 7. Address transportation policy-making in a balanced,
objective way.
         Policy MOB 7.1 Create a City government structure regarding
                   transportation that addresses all modes in a balanced, integrated
                   fashion.
         Actions
         a.        Restructure City department responsibilities regarding traffic so that
                   all modes of transportation receive equal consideration.
         Policy MOB 7.2 Gather in-depth quantitative and qualitative information
                   on the travel behavior of Davis residents to provide a reliable
                   empirical foundation to plan solutions to transportation-related
                   problems, and to monitor the effectiveness of transportation
                   programs and policies and their effects on residents' mobility.
                                             149
Section IV: Community Form                                                   Davis General Plan
Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Standards
          a.      Predictions of traffic impacts of new development shall be based on
                  traffic trends observed over the previous three to five years.
          b.      Bicycle and pedestrian flow, air pollution and vehicle fuel
                  consumption shall be considered when analyzing and setting traffic
                  lights and designing transportation systems.
          Actions
          c.      Gather comprehensive travel data regarding Davis residents on a
                  regular basis.
          Policy MOB 7.3 Develop a system of trails at the periphery of the city and
                  within the city for recreational use and to allow walkers and
                  bicyclists to reach open space and natural areas.
          Standards
          a.      The creation of an urban periphery loop trail is a low priority.
                  However, the City recognizes that some portions of such a trail
                  already exist, and should take advantage of opportunities for further
                  acquisition and construction as they present themselves.
          b.      Trails should be developed in roadway rights-of-way wherever
                  possible to minimize conflicts with surrounding rural landowners,
                  but should be separated from the roadway itself by a planting strip.
          c.      Tree planting between roads and roadside trails is encouraged, but
                  should not interfere with roadway visibility.
          Actions
          d.      Develop destination-oriented trails.
          e.      Work with the counties, other cities and the general public to
                  minimize conflicts with land uses such as agriculture and wildlife
                  habitat when developing a trails network.
          f.      Install additional landscaping along Old Highway 40/I-80 and
                  Second Street.
                  See also Policy POS 3.3 for additional specific projects.
                                              150
                      Chapter 3. Urban Design,
                     Neighborhood Preservation
            and Community Forest Management
BACKGROUND
Urban Form
Davis’ urban form is generally characterized as that of a small-scale, university city
situated within a larger agricultural area. The city is surrounded by agricultural lands,
which are dissected by streams, flood control channels, and canals. The fields are
most often open to expansive views across fields planted with low-growing grain
and row crops.
The city can be divided into several distinct segments:
    • The Downtown has a compact, grid street pattern. It is the center of
        commercial activity in Davis, and its design reflects its central role.
    • Cohesive residential neighborhoods bounded by tree lined streets
        surround the Downtown. These neighborhoods are distinguished by the
        decade in which they were developed. The neighborhoods differ in their
        street pattern, lot sizes, conventional versus cluster arrangements, and linear
        greenways.
    • The UC Davis campus is a dominant organizing element in the Davis area.
        With a few exceptions, however, the visual linkages between the campus and
        the city are generally weak, without defining structures or open spaces
        signifying major entrances, gateways and edges.
Major Views
Views from the agricultural fields are enclosed on the west by the Coast Range hills.
Views to other directions are open to the horizon, although the Sierra Nevada
Mountains, Sutter Buttes, and Mount Diablo can be seen on clear days. Davis is not
highly visible from distant views due to an absence of natural or built vertical
elements distinguished from the surrounding agricultural lands. The water towers
on the campus and the Alumni Center are the distinguishing features in views north
from Interstate 80.
                                            151

Section IV: Community Form                                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Greenstreets
The City has a system of "Greenstreets", which consists of most of the existing and
planned major arterial, minor arterial and collector streets in the City. Greenstreets
are intended to provide convenient and attractive circulation routes for bicyclists and
pedestrians, as well as cars. In July 1992, the City Council approved a General Plan
policy interpretation which included guidelines for how Greenstreets should be
designed in new developments.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GOAL UD 1. Encourage community design throughout the City that helps to
build community, encourage human interaction and support non-automobile
transportation.
          Policy UD 1.1 Promote urban/community design which is human-scaled,
                   comfortable, safe and conducive to pedestrian use.
          Standards
          a.       New neighborhoods shall be designed so that daily shopping
                   errands and trips to community facilities can generally be completed
                   within easy walking and biking distances.
          b.       New development shall incorporate a balanced circulation network
                   that provides multi-route access for vehicles, bicycles and
                   pedestrians to neighborhood centers, greenbelts, other parts of the
                   neighborhood and adjacent districts and circulation routes.
          c.       Garages on new single-family, duplex and split lot homes should be
                   subordinate in visual importance to the house itself, especially the
                   entry. Desirable and undesirable garage designs are shown in Figure
                   24.
          d.       Where possible, commercial buildings should abut the street or
                   other public accessway, with parking located behind.
                                               152
Davis General Plan                                               Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007 Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation
Figure 24: Garage Design Concepts
                                        153
Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation   May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          e.       Pedestrian walkways and/or building pass-throughs should be
                   located to provide access from sidewalks into individual projects
                   separate from major vehicular driveways and circulation.
          f.       New cul-de-sacs shall have bicycle/pedestrian passages through
                   them that connect to other streets, greenbelts or publicly accessible
                   corridors.
          g.       Designs that are urban in character are encouraged around the core
                   area and at neighborhood activity nodes. Such designs include, but
                   are not limited to, buildings that extend to the front and side
                   property lines, buildings which provide a feeling of permanence and
                   durability, and buildings with outdoor cafes and plazas. Desired
                   character for the Core is illustrated in Figure 25.
          h.       Pedestrian-oriented design is encouraged in the allocation of space,
                   building size and placement, site enhancement, open space design,
                   connection to pedestrian/bikeways and site amenities.
          i.       New development should include pedestrian-attracting public spaces
                   that provide informal areas for people of all ages to interact with
                   one another and with nature.
          j.       New buildings should be integrated with open space to enhance
                   living and working areas.
          k.       In commercial and light industrial areas, buildings and their entries
                   should be designed to minimize distance to public transit.
          l.       Commercial and light industrial areas should have access
                   connections at regular intervals along the perimeter of the project
                   area to adjacent bike and pedestrian pathways and easily-accessible,
                   landscaped pedestrian and bicycle access between various areas.
          m.       Walled and gated neighborhoods are discouraged.
          n.       Create opportunities for interesting visual focal points and vistas
                   throughout creative street layouts, as illustrated in Figure 26.
                                               154
Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007   Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation
Note: This figure is intended to illustrate the desired general scale and character
         of the core area, and examples of streetscape elements. This figure is not
         intended to illustrate specific examples of desired architecture.
Figure 25: Core Area Character
                                          155
Section IV: Community Form                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Figure 26: Creative Street Design Concepts
                                               156
Davis General Plan                                                         Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007          Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation
         Actions
         o.        Develop flexible street design standards that provide adequate
                   bicycle and pedestrian safety, emergency vehicle access, and strong
                   aesthetic qualities in rights-of-way that are as narrow as possible.
         p.        Install accent planting at neighborhood entry points.
         q.        Install tree-shaded benches throughout Davis.
         r.        Utilize on-street parking to provide a physical and visual barrier
                   between autos and pedestrians, where appropriate.
GOAL UD 2. Maintain an aesthetically pleasing environment and manage a
sustainable community forest to optimize environmental, aesthetic, social
and economic benefits.
         Policy UD 2.1 Preserve and protect scenic resources and elements in and
                   around Davis, including natural habitat and scenery and resources
                   reflective of place and history.
         Actions
         a.        Undertake a program to inventory and describe Davis' existing
                   scenic resources and elements reflective of place and history.
         b.        Develop, adopt and implement policies and actions to protect and
                   preserve identified scenic resources and elements reflective of place
                   and history.
                   Also see the goals, policies and actions related to historic buildings and districts
                   in Chapter 16, Historic and Archaeological Resources.
         Policy UD 2.2 Maintain and increase the amount of greenery, especially
                   street trees, in Davis, both for aesthetic reasons and to provide
                   shade, cooling, habitat, air quality benefits, and visual continuity.
                                                  157
Section IV: Community Form                                                    Davis General Plan
Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Standards
          a.       New local streets in residential areas, collector streets and arterial
                   streets should have landscaped strips with trees between sidewalks
                   and streets.
          b.       Arterial and collection streets in new developments should have
                   planted medians, but with widths sized to accommodate tree and
                   shrub plantings. Medians on collector streets should be limited to
                   locations where the median contributes to a specific purpose or
                   solves a specific problem, such as enhancing a neighborhood entry,
                   calming traffic, or providing a needed pedestrian refuge at
                   intersections. Removal of street trees to accommodate an increase
                   in vehicular traffic shall occur only as a last resort, after review by
                   appropriate boards and commissions.
          c.       Streets that are planted in the future are expected to have wide
                   canopies, sufficient to eventually provide, at maturity, at least 50
                   percent shade coverage of the pavement area of local streets and 30
                   percent shade coverage of the pavement area of collector and
                   arterial streets.
          d.       New developments should include Greenstreets, where appropriate.
          e.       Existing arterial and collector streets should be converted to
                   Greenstreets where appropriate and existing local streets should be
                   evaluated for adequate tree canopies..
          f.       Removal of street trees to accommodate increased vehicular traffic
                   shall occur only as a last resort.
          Actions
          g.       Maintain existing street trees and implement a program of
                   replacement street tree planting using large canopy deciduous trees
                   where appropriate.
          h.       In redevelopment or new development areas, plant trees and other
                   vegetation to the greatest extent possible, with a minimum of
                   pavement.
          i.       Develop a street tree master plan that specifies the species of trees
                   to be planted on each roadway segment in Davis and provides a
                   strategy for funding, maintenance and replacement.
                                               158
Davis General Plan                                                   Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007      Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation
         j.        Evaluate existing street trees for adequate canopies, and consider
                   streets found to be lacking sufficient canopy for street tree
                   improvement programs.
         k.        Complete, implement, evaluate and revise the City-wide tree
                   planting, preservation and protection ordinance.
         l.        Establish a tree gift program which encourages the use of potted
                   trees or plants to be donated to the City for planting (i.e. Christmas
                   trees).
         m.        Continue to work with community groups such as Tree Davis to
                   organize tree planting and maintenance activities.
         n.        Implement a program to replace trees in a timely fashion on streets
                   with significant existing trees that could be expected to die soon.
         o.        Develop a Community Forest Management Plan for the City of
                   Davis.
         Policy UD 2.3 Require an architectural "fit" with Davis' existing scale for
                   new development projects.
         Standards
         a.        There should be a scale transition between intensified land uses and
                   adjoining lower intensity land uses.
         b.        Taller buildings should be stepped back at upper levels in areas with
                   a relatively smaller-scale character.
         c.        Buildings should be varied in size, density and design.
         Policy UD 2.4 Create affordable and multi-family residential areas that
                   include innovative designs and on-site open space amenities that are
                   linked with public bicycle/pedestrian ways, neighborhood centers
                   and transit stops.
         Standards
         a.        Multi-family buildings should provide easy pedestrian access to the
                   nearest transit stop and/or neighborhood center.
         b.        Multi-family development design should be compatible with
                   adjoining single family areas.
                                              159
Section IV: Community Form                                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          c.       High density housing should be organized around usable common
                   space.
          d.       Multi-family housing complexes should be designed, constructed
                   and managed in projects of no more than 150 units, not including
                   any density bonus.
          Policy UD 2.5 Ensure attractive and functional signs.
          Actions
          a.       Update and maintain design guidelines for regulation of signs.
          b.       Update and maintain sign regulations as part of the City's zoning
                   ordinance.
          c.       Work with Yolo County and the California Department of
                   Transportation to minimize the number and size of off-site
                   advertising along the freeways in the Planning Area.
          Policy UD 2.6 Require high-quality design standards for manufacturing,
                   assembly, research and development, warehousing, and distribution
                   type land uses.
          Standards
          a.       Stored materials, goods, parts or equipment should be screened
                   from adjacent public streets or highways.
          b.       Loading facilities should be designed as an integral part of the
                   building(s) which they serve and should be located in an
                   inconspicuous manner.
          c.       Extension of loading facilities, including incidental parking and
                   maneuvering areas, into required minimum setback areas is
                   prohibited.
          d.       Roof mounted equipment should be screened from view of any
                   ground level area accessible to the general public.
          e.       Trash enclosures, noise generating equipment, and other nuisances
                   shall be adequately screened or located away from any adjacent
                   residential use.
                                               160
Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
GOAL UD 3. Use good design as a means to promote human safety.
          Policy UD 3.1 Use good design to promote safety for residents, employees,
                   and visitors to the City.
          Standards
          a.       Parks, shopping centers, schools and other institutional uses should
                   be located on prominent, central sites where they will "belong" to
                   the neighborhood they serve with strong pedestrian connections to
                   these central sites.
          Policy UD 3.2 Provide exterior lighting that enhances safety and night use
                   in public spaces, but minimizes impacts on surrounding land uses.
          Standards
          a.       Outdoor lighting should not unreasonably interfere with the use and
                   enjoyment of dark-sky activities and near-by residences.
          Actions
          b.       Establish a hierarchy for lighting fixture intensity, height and
                   character based on its intended purpose.
          c.       Consider a retrofit program for light fixtures which are not
                   appropriately shielded, including city lighting.
GOAL UD 4. Create an urban design framework that would strengthen the
physical form of the city.
          Policy UD 4.1 Develop an urban design framework plan to consolidate and
                   clarify the relevant design concepts in this chapter and other
                   chapters to promote a positive and memorable image for the city
                   and to reinforce the functional systems of the city such as land use,
                   circulation, and open space.
          Actions
          a.       Develop an urban design framework plan which includes the
                   elements of districts, edges, paths, entries, centers, nodes and focal
                   points. The framework plan would be implemented through the
                   design of public and private projects.
                                               161
Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          b.       Consider the framework plan in the development of design
                   guidelines and in the review of individual public and private
                   projects.
GOAL UD 5. Create and enforce clear and reasonable design guidelines that
operationalize the relevant goals, policies and actions of this general plan.
          Policy UD 5.1 Develop and implement new design guidelines which are
                   reviewed periodically.
          Actions
          a.       Replace the City's "Architectural and Landscape Architectural
                   Standards," approved in 1976, with updated design review guidelines
                   that implement the relevant goals, policies and actions of this
                   general plan. Consider some form of citizen oversight in the update
                   of the design review guidelines.
          b.       Use community image surveys to provide a basis for the updated
                   design guidelines.
          c.       Ensure that new design guidelines are realistic and can be
                   implemented by the public and private sector(s), and are compatible
                   with nearby residential areas.
          d.       Vest primary responsibility for design review with City staff, and
                   include appropriate public notice appeal procedures.
          e.       Develop site design standards for new single-family residential
                   development that create variability of lot sizes, FARs, setbacks,
                   building heights, floor plans, and architectural styles/treatments
                   within each new development area. The Community Development
                   Department shall take the lead in developing these standards with
                   input from various community groups and local professionals.
GOAL UD 6. Strengthen the city’s neighborhoods to retain desirable
characteristics while allowing for change and evolution, promoting public
and private investments, and encouraging citizen involvement in
neighborhood planning.
          Policy UD 6.1 Recognize the existence of individual neighborhoods with
                   general boundaries and facilitate the development of neighborhood
                   strategies in partnership with residents and property owners. The
                                               162

Davis General Plan                                                  Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007     Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation
                   strategies should recognize the unique characteristics of the
                   individual neighborhood and the potential for change, within the
                   context of a well-planned city. The strategies should be directed
                   toward solving unique neighborhood problems and implementing
                   neighborhood priorities and enhancing livability.
         Actions
         a.        Develop a “community partnership” program to provide
                   information and facilitate the involvement of neighborhood
                   residents and property owners in neighborhood planning and
                   problem solving.
         b.        Identify and explore funding possibilities for physical improvements
                   which would address neighborhood problems and priorities and
                   improve livability.
         c.        Revise city codes to remove regulatory barriers to neighborhood
                   improvements and livability, particularly in older neighborhoods.
                   Such revisions could be related to development standards and home
                   occupation standards in the zoning ordinance
         d.        Study revisions to the current building plan check, inspection and
                   permit process to reduce barriers to infill projects and to residential
                   and commercial remodels of existing buildings.
                                            163

Section IV: Community Form                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 3: Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                               164
                               Chapter 4. Housing
This chapter contains the City's Housing Element “Goal, Policies, and Actions”, as
amended by City Council on July 20, 2004, Resolution No. 04-173. The full text of
the Housing Element and more specific information on the policies are contained in
the full Housing Element, available at the Community Development Department.
BACKGROUND
Population Estimates and Projections
Figure 27 and Table 9 provide population estimates and projections over time for
the City of Davis, Davis area, and the County of Yolo. UC Davis enrollments are
also provided for comparison because of the similar growth of UC Davis enrollment
and the City's population. The State Department of Finance estimates that in
January 1996 the population of the City of Davis was 52,600.
The Sacramento Area Council of Governments projects that the population of the
City of Davis will be 65,615 in the year 2010.1
Age Distribution
Table 10 shows the age distribution of the population in Davis and Yolo County in
1990. Over one quarter of the Davis population is aged 20-24, while the County
proportion in the same age range is less than one-sixth. College students in Davis
account for this difference. The City's share of persons over age 60 is significantly
lower than elsewhere in the County, although it has increased from 6.2 percent in
1980 to 8.4 percent in 1990. Age distribution is important in the planning of
services and housing types.
Household Population and Composition
The estimated average persons per household in Davis has decreased slightly over
the last five years, as follows, based on estimates by the California Department of
Finance:
      1992         2.53 (average number of persons per household)
      1993         2.50
      1994         2.44
         1
           Source: Sacramento Area Council of Governments, March 2001.
                                                   165

Section IV: Community Form                                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                 May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
      1995         2.45
      1996         2.47
Table 10 shows the composition of households of the population in Davis and Yolo
County in 1990. A "family" is defined as a household of two or more persons in a
blood or marriage relationship. Because of the UC Davis students, Davis has a
lower proportion of "families" than the remainder of Yolo County.
Household Income
Table 10 shows the incomes of households in Davis and Yolo County in 1990. The
median household income in 1990 was $29,044 and the mean family income was
$47,262. The significant difference between household incomes and family incomes
reflects the relatively low incomes of students and other non-family households.
Very-low-income households are defined as earning a gross income of less than 50
percent of the median income of Yolo County (as determined by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development). Low-income households are
defined as earning a gross income of more than 50 percent and less than 80 percent
of the median income for Yolo County. Moderate income households are defined
as earning a gross income of more than 80 percent and less than 121 percent of the
median income for Yolo County.
                                          166
Davis General Plan                            Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                   Chapter 4: Housing
Figure 27: City Population and UC Davis Enrollment
                                       167
Section IV: Community Form                                                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                                  Table 9
                  POPULATION ESTIMATES AND PROJECTIONS
                                                                                       U.C. Davis
                  City of Davis            Davis Area         Yolo County
                                                                                         Campus
                   Population              Population          Population
                                                                                       Enrollment
                      8,910                                       65,727                  2,422
  1960
                     Census                                       Census             UCD ('59-60)
                     23,488                                       91,788                 12,320
  1970               Census                                       Census             UCD ('69-70)
                     36,640                                      113,374                 16,532
  1980
                     Census                                       Census             UCD ('79-80)
                     42,500                   50,529             129,000                 19,314
  1988
                    SACOG                   Gen. Plan              CP                UCD ('87-88)
                     46,322                   54,013             141,092                 20,961
  1990
                     Census                  SACOG                Census             UCD ('89-90)
                     51,500                   60,463             162,808                 22,372
  1995
                     CDOF                    SACOG               SACOG               UCD ('94-95)
                     52,600                                                              22,339
  1996
                     CDOF                                                            UCD (-95-96)
                     57,800                   64,522             183,736                 23,803
  2000
                    SACOG                    SACOG               SACOG               Interpolation*
                     62,700                   68,318             208,362                 26,000
  2005
                    SACOG                    SACOG               SACOG               LRDP (‘05-06)
                     65,600                  74,725**            239,068             Not Projected
  2010
                 1987 Gen. Plan          1987 Gen. Plan          SACOG              At This Time***
Sources of estimates and projections:
Census =     U.S. Bureau of Census
SACOG =      Sacramento Area Council of Governments
CDOF =       California Department of Finance
Survey =     Land Use Survey by City of Davis Community Development Department, population
             estimated by assuming 2.492 persons per residential unit.
Gen. Plan = City of Davis General Plan as adopted in 1987.
UCD =        U.C. Davis Office of Planning and Budget, 3 term average on-campus enrollment (does not
             include off-campus facilities such as UCD Medical Center in Sacramento).
LRDP =       U.C. Davis Long Range Development Plan, 1994.
*     An interpolation between the figures of 22,339 in 1995 and 26,000 in 2005-06.
**    Not including population in residential living groups.
***   A letter from Chancellor Larry Vanderhoef dated June 30, 1997 states that the U.C. Regents are not
      currently prepared to go forward with a new long-term enrollment plan and that a 31,000 enrollment
      figure previously considered as an optimum ultimate size probably would happen over a longer
      period than the 2010 horizon.
                                                     168

Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                        Chapter 4: Housing
                                               Table 10
                         POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS, 1990
                                                        City of Davis      County of Yolo
                                                         #         %          #           %
 Age Distribution
  0-19                                                    10,838     23.4      41,702      29.6
  20-24                                                   11,819     25.6      18,774      13.3
  25-39                                                   11,969     25.9      35,779      25.4
  40-59                                                    7,709     16.7      26,770      19.0
  60 and over                                              3,874      8.4      18,067      12.8
  Total                                                   46,209              141,092
  Median Age                                                25.5        -        28.9          -
 Household Composition
  Living Alone                                             4,352     24.3      11,795      23.1
  Non-family Household - More than 1 person                5,069     28.3       6,993      13.7
  Family - No Related Children                             4,222     23.6      14,828      29.1
  Family - Married Couple with children                    3,225     18.0      12,608      24.7
  Family - Unmarried Householder with Children             1,058      5.9       4,748       9.3
  Total                                                   17,926               50,972
 Annual Household Income
  Less than $10,000                                        3,179     17.7       8,106      15.9
  $10,000 to 19,999                                        3,465     19.3       9,666      18.9
  $20,000 to 29,999                                        2,537     14.1       8,593      16.8
  $30,000 to 39,999                                        1,937     10.8       6,613      12.9
  $40,000 to 49,999                                        1,910     10.6       5,789      11.3
  $50,000 to 74,999                                        2,596     14.4       7,474      14.6
  $75,000 and over                                         2,344     13.0       4,878       9.5
  Median Household Income                                 29,044        -      28,866          -
  Median Family Income                                    47,262        -      36,866          -
 Persons Below Poverty Status by Age
 (Percentages shown are of total population)
  Under 18 years                                             562      1.2       5,774       4.1
  18 – 34                                                 10,118     22.0      13,849      10.2
  35 – 39                                                    419      0.9       2,593       1.8
  60 and over                                                123      0.3       1,153       0.8
  Total Persons Below Poverty Status                      11,222     24.4      23,369      16.6
Source: 1990 U.S. Census
                                                 169

Section IV: Community Form                                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                 May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Housing Growth
Figure 28 shows the number of building permits issued during the last six fiscal years
for residential units in the City. An annual average of 445 permits were issued, with
a high in the year 1991-92 and a low in the year 1988-89.
Housing Composition
Table 11 shows the composition of housing units in the City and in the Planning
Area as of 1990, which is the most recent year for which data is available. In that
year, the City's housing units consisted of approximately 65 percent single family
units and 35 percent multi-family units. Group living quarters are not included in
this calculation. The Planning Area had a higher proportion of multi-family units
because of the inclusion of the apartments and residence halls on the UC Davis
campus.
Housing Age and Condition
Table 11 shows the age of the City's housing stock built through March 1990. The
period with the greatest percentage of housing built was 1970-1979 (36 percent),
followed by 1980-1988 (25 percent) and 1960-1969 (22 percent).
In April 1993, City staff conducted an exterior housing conditions survey of the entire
Planning Area and found that only eight housing units need rehabilitation. The survey
was based on a commonly used point system to evaluate condition in terms of
foundation, roof, siding, windows and doors. The amount of housing units in poor
condition would probably remain extremely low even if more intensive surveys and
interior inspections were conducted.
The housing stock is generally in good condition primarily because it is relatively new.
Another factor is the City's ongoing Resale/Retrofit program, which requires that
housing units be inspected on resale and brought up to standards.
Housing Tenure
Table 11 shows that in 1990, 58.1 percent of the City's housing units were occupied
by renters, 40 percent were occupied by owners, and 1.9 percent were vacant.
Renter-occupied homes include apartments as well as single-family houses; owner-
occupied units include houses, condominiums, and mobile homes.
                                          170
Davis General Plan                                           Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                 Chapter 4: Housing
Figure 28: Residential Construction Permits Issued 1987-1996
                                                                                ___
                                                  171
Section IV: Community Form                                                       Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                        May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                            Table 11
                        HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS - 1990
                                                                              #           %
  Composition of Housing Units - City of Davis and Planning Area
  City of Davis
   Single Family                                                             11,807         64.6
   Multi-Family                                                               6,475         35.4
   Total                                                                     18,282
  Planning Area
   Single Family                                                             12,718         55.5
   Multi-Family                                                              10,214         44.6
   Total                                                                     22,932
  Age of Housing Units - City of Davis
   1939 or Earlier                                                              514             3
   1940 to 1949                                                                 390             2
   1950 to 1959                                                               2,108            12
   1960 to 1969                                                               3,991            22
   1970 to 1979                                                               6,488            36
   1980 to 1988                                                               4,622            25
   1989 to March 1990                                                           169             0
   Total Units Above                                                         18,282
  Housing Units by Occupancy - City of Davis
   Owner Occupancy                                                            7,309         40.0
   Renter Occupied                                                           10,617         58.1
   Total Occupied                                                            17,926         98.1
   Total Vacant                                                                 356           1.9
   Total Units                                                               18,282
  Overpayment for Housing - City of Davis
  (Very Low and Low Income Households Paying More than 25% of
  Household Income for Housing)
  Renters
     Very Low Income                                                          4,851            47
     Low Income                                                               1,402            14
     Total Very Low and Low Income Households Overpaying                      6,253            61
   Owners
     Very Low Income                                                            345           5.3
     Low Income                                                                 379           5.8
     Total Very Low and Low Income Households Overpaying                        724         11.0
Source: Housing Element, Table 10, Based on 1990 Census and 1987 Housing Element
                                              172
Davis General Plan                                               Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                      Chapter 4: Housing
Vacancy Rates
The vacancy rate of rental units from 1981 to 1992 fluctuated, ranging from a low of
0.75 in 1981 to 8.7 percent in 1992.
Housing Costs and Affordability
Housing purchase prices are generally higher than in the rest of the region.
From 1987 to 1991, the average selling price for a single family home increased
by approximately 67 percent. The average resale price in 1987 was $129,588 and
the average resale price in 1991 was $221,822. The average increase was 18.7
percent per year. This rate of increase has slowed in the 1990's, but housing
prices remain high. Recent changes in the housing market have resulted in the
stabilization or reduction in the prices of ownership units. These changes
include the national and state economic recessions and lay-offs at UC Davis.
Reductions in mortgage interest rates have also increased affordability of home
purchases, although probably not to the level necessary for low-income
households to buy. Analyses in the Housing Element show that the only type of
housing that moderate income household with children can afford is
condominiums and split-lot duplexes and that lower income households cannot
afford to purchase even these types of units.
The rental market in Davis primarily consists of apartments, but also includes
condominiums and houses. As of January 1992, 2,305 houses (29 percent of single-
family homes) were rented. In 1994, the average monthly rents for apartments were
$428 for a studio apartment; $510 for a one-bedroom apartment; $659 for a two-
bedroom apartment; $936 for a three-bedroom apartment; and $1,257 for a four-
bedroom apartment.
Affordable rental housing payments are approximately 30 percent of gross monthly
income, less utilities and adjusted for family size. Analyses in the Housing Element
show that small, very-low-income households have difficulty finding affordable
unassisted housing. Two-person low-income households could not afford an
average-priced one- or two-bedroom apartment. Low-income families of four
persons could afford only a median-priced two-bedroom apartment. Larger
households find rental costs for larger apartments too high and cramped housing is
usually all that they can afford. In general, the rents of larger single-family rentals
are generally not affordable to low income households and even some moderate-
income households.
Affordable Housing Programs
Assistance to housing projects is provided through federal, state, and local housing
programs. All have limited resources.
                                          173
Section IV: Community Form                                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Most existing below-market-rate housing in Davis is rental housing, primarily
apartments. Many developments were built with federal and state financing in the
1960s and 1970s, while recent affordable housing has been built through the City's
inclusionary program.
Since June 1991, 297 affordable rental units have been built. These units have
controls assuring long-term or permanent affordability. Additionally, 241 for-sale
and self-help affordable housing units have also been built. Sixty are permanently
affordable condominiums; the others do not have affordability restrictions upon
resale.
City of Davis Affordable Housing Ordinance
The City's existing affordable housing ordinance establishes requirements for the
development of both for-sale and rental housing projects. The developer of
residential for-sale units must make the equivalent of 25 percent of the units
affordable to very low, low and moderate income households. The standard method
of meeting this requirement includes a mix of the construction of for-sale affordable
units; the dedication of land suitable for the purpose of developing affordable units;
and the provision of lots to allow for the construction of self-help housing.
The developer of a multi-family rental development must make at least 25 percent of
the units affordable to low-income households and at least 10 percent of the units
affordable by very low income households. As an alternative to requirements, a
developer may submit for approval a project individualized plan which generates the
same or more affordable housing units.
Middle Income Housing Ordinance
The City’s middle income housing ordinance establishes requirements for ownership
housing projects. This ordinance implements: housing policy 1.1 and related
actions to provide a variety of housing types and prices to meet Davis housing
needs; and housing policy 1.7 and related actions to promote housing for the local
workforce.
Middle income households are defined in the middle income housing ordinance and
consist of households earning a gross income of no greater than 180 percent of the
median income for Yolo County adjusted for household size. The developer of 50
or more ownership units must make 20 percent of the units affordable to middle
income households. The developer of 36 to 49 ownership units must make 15
percent of the units affordable to middle income households. The developer of 26
to 35 ownership units must make 10 percent of the units affordable to middle
income households. Units built under the middle income requirement must be
made affordable to households with gross incomes of 120 percent to 180 percent of
the median income for Yolo County, with an average affordability for households at
140 percent of the median income for Yolo County.
                                          174

Davis General Plan                                               Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                      Chapter 4: Housing
Housing action 1.7a to explore housing programs to assist public employees may
include the possibility of developing public-owned sites and encouraging land
dedication sites in large development projects. Public-owned sites could also
provide for other critical housing needs in the community.
Incentive System for the Local Workforce
The City uses a lottery system to provide an incentive for members of the local
workforce in the sale and re-sale of new affordable ownership units. This system
implements housing policy 1.7 and related actions to promote housing for the local
workforce.
The system assigns the highest number of lottery tickets to households with a
member of the local workforce. Lower numbers of lottery tickets are assigned to
other income eligible households including seniors, persons with disabilities, and the
general public.
Mix of Housing Types
Housing policy 1.1 and Land Use policies A.2 and A.3 and related actions call for a
variety of housing types, unit sizes, densities, prices and rents, and designs. New
housing shall meet minimum densities and have a limited number of overly-large
homes. A percentage of small residential lots and structures shall be consider as a
requirement in new large housing developments to contribute to the supply of
affordable housing and to avoid overbuilding of lots.
The intent is to provide a mix of housing types and prices which will serve a variety
of households and lifestyles, particularly the needs of local employees. A new
development is expected to provide the greatest mix of housing types, prices and
designs that are feasible (that is, capable of being accomplished in a successful
manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account environmental,
economic and social factors). In addition to providing required affordable units, it is
recognized that the ability of a developer to provide a diverse mix of housing types
is affected by the project size, location, infrastructure requirements, and other
economic factors. In recognition of these differences in projects, a developer should
justify how the proposed housing mix constitutes the greatest range that is feasible
in a specific project.
The “Planned Development” district of the City’s Zoning Ordinance implements
the housing mix policies by encouraging a variety of well designed dwelling types.
                                           175

Section IV: Community Form                                                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                         May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Housing Needs
The key indicators of immediate housing need are overpayment and overcrowding.
Overpayment for housing (defined as paying more than 30 percent of gross
household income) in 1990, which is the most recent year for which data is available,
was similar to 1980. Overpaying very-low-income households consisted of 88
percent of renter- and 86 percent of owner-occupied units. Overpaying low-income
households consisted of 76 percent of renter- and 70 percent of owner-occupied
units.
Overcrowding is the number of housing units with 1.01 or more persons per room.
Overcrowding in Davis is related to the large numbers of student renters. In 1990,
987 housing units (5.5 percent of the total) were occupied by more than one person
per room. In 1980, 2.4 percent of the units were overcrowded.
Groups with special housing needs include seniors, large households, households
with children, low-income households, students, and persons with disabilities.
These needs are analyzed in detail in the Housing Element.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS (As Amended July 20, 2004)
GOAL HOUSING 1. Promote an adequate supply of housing for people of
all ages, income, lifestyles and types of households consistent with General
Plan policies and goals.
          Policy HOUSING 1.1 Encourage a variety of housing types that meet the
                   housing needs of an economically and socially diverse Davis.
          Standards
          a.       Housing, including affordable housing, should include a range of
                   unit sizes appropriate to meet Davis housing needs.
                   See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Ratio of
                   Housing, Mix of Residential Types and Integration of Affordable Housing
                   Units".
                   The Update does not include a policy regarding the ratio of single family to
                   multi-family housing.
          b.       Each new development area should include a mix of housing types,
                   densities, prices and rents, and designs.
                                              176
Davis General Plan                                                      Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                             Chapter 4: Housing
                   See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Ratio of
                   Housing, Mix of Residential Types and Integration of Affordable Housing
                   Units".
         c.        All new housing construction shall meet minimum densities and will
                   have limited number of overly-large homes.
         Actions
         d.        As a vehicle for long range planning, establish guidelines for
                   allocation processes including development agreements that include
                   adequate citizens’ participation and City Council oversight in the
                   planning implementation of the allocation processes.
         e.        Analyze the mechanism whereby existing and future mobile home
                   sites can be made permanently affordable.
         f.        As part of proposed large housing developments, consider requiring
                   a percentage of small residential lots and structures with related
                   floor area ratio standards to contribute to the supply of affordable
                   housing and to avoid overbuilding of lots.
         g.        Encourage increased densities in Davis in order to facilitate greater
                   affordability without sprawl. Study such dwellings as row houses,
                   town houses, second story apartments over businesses, and second
                   dwelling units. At a minimum, the study parameters should
                   included analysis of the cost of construction impact on local
                   infrastructure, impact to the city General Fund, affordability,
                   proximity to shopping and services and consistency with
                   neighborhood preservations standards as they relate to adaptive
                   reuse, privacy open space, building mass and scale and parking
                   impact issues.
         h.        Strive to provide owner-occupied townhouses and condominiums in
                   and near the core area and the neighborhood shopping centers
                   geared to empty nesters and singles and couples without children, in
                   order to limit sprawl and provide lifestyle alternatives for those who
                   do not need large suburban houses.
         Policy HOUSING 1.2 Strive to maintain an adequate supply of rental
                   housing in Davis to meet the needs of all renters, including students.
         Policy HOUSING 1.3 Encourage the construction of housing to meet the
                   needs of single persons and households with children with
                   extremely low, very low, and low incomes.
                                              177

Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          a.       Explore mechanisms for encouraging and financing the construction
                   of housing to meet the needs of single persons with low and very
                   low incomes.
          b.       Adopt zoning provisions allowing housing to meet the special
                   housing needs of single persons or small households with low and
                   very low incomes. Allow such housing, subject to discretionary
                   review, in appropriate residential and commercial areas.
          Policy HOUSING 1.4 Encourage a variety of housing types and care
                   choices for disabled persons.
          Standards
          a.       Units appropriate for disabled persons shall be included in all
                   housing developments with 5 or more units, as required by state and
                   federal law.
          b.       Housing for disabled persons should be located near neighborhood
                   centers in order to facilitate disabled persons’ maximum
                   participation in community life.
          Actions
          c.       Facilitate the process for reasonable accommodations in land use,
                   zoning, funding, devilment and use of housing for persons with
                   disabilities and adopt an ordinance that specifies procedures and
                   standards for granting reasonable accommodation for persons with
                   disabilities. Consistent with policies that ensure a fair and equitable
                   dispersal of group homes throughout the city. Provide incentives to
                   encourage the establishment of group-home facilities for physically
                   and mentally disabled individuals.
          d.       Complete a review of land use and zoning standards to promote
                   housing for people with disabilities.
          e.       Create incentives to encourage the establishment of fully accessible
                   housing for people with disabilities in addition to requirements for
                   accessible units otherwise mandated by federal and state law,
                   including providing density bonuses for additional units that
                   incorporate universal design or other similar design principles.
                                            178

Davis General Plan                                                Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                       Chapter 4: Housing
         f.        Consider adopting an ordinance requiring basic access (visitability)
                   features for 25 percent of newly constructed sing-family residences
                   (that are in new subdivisions), and in all multi-family residential units
                   with a ground-floor entrance, including, at a minimum: an accessible
                   route through hallways and passageways on the first floor, at least
                   one adaptable bathroom on the first floor with wall reinforcements,
                   and accessible light switches, thermostats and other environmental
                   controls on the first floor. Part of this consideration should be a
                   cost analysis for the required reasonable accommodation,
                   accessibility and visitability improvements.
         Policy HOUSING 1.5 Work with UC Davis to revise UC Davis/City
                   agreement to develop plans, procedures and priorities that will
                   ensure the development of maximum student housing on campus.
         Actions
         a.        Continue to work with UC Davis to provide housing for students.
         b.        Support the provisions in the Memorandum of Understanding
                   entered into by and between the City of Davis and U.C. Davis in
                   1989, including but not limited to the following:
                   1.       The goal and intention of U.C. Davis to provide on-campus
                            housing for 25% of the current (1988-89) base student
                            population of 21,000 and for 35% of the new student
                            population; and
                   2.       The agreement that U.C. Davis’ maximum and optimum
                            three-term student population on the Davis campus is
                            26,000.
                   In addition, rely upon the University to provide on-campus student
                   housing to provide for accelerated enrollment beyond 24,000
                   students by the year 2000-01 and 26,000 students by the year 2005-
                   06. Seek an update of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
                   including the percentage of student housing to be provided on
                   campus.
         c.        Urge the University to provide on-campus housing for living
                   groups.
         d.        Investigate as a strategy City, RDA and UC Davis joint sponsorship
                   of targeted student and faculty staff housing within the City limits.
                                            179

Section IV: Community Form                                                   Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          e.       Consider the proximity to campus, transit routes, and bike paths
                   when siting student housing projects.
          f.       Recognize the City's commitment to housing students by pursuing
                   policies and actions which will facilitate the availability of housing
                   which is compatible with existing neighborhoods and is easily
                   accessible by public transit and bicycle.
          Policy HOUSING 1.6 Include students from low-income families within
                   the target population for affordable housing opportunities.
          Action
          a.       Encourage the construction of student cooperatives as permanently
                   affordable housing opportunities for students.
          Policy HOUSING 1.7 Analyze the models and options to promote
                   housing for local employees.
          Actions
          a.       Explore programs to assist City staff, UC Davis staff and faculty,
                   Yolo County staff, and school district staff to live in Davis.
          b.       Create incentives to provide local housing for local employees.
          Policy HOUSING 1.8 Encourage a variety of housing types and care
                   choices, as well as housing innovation, for seniors.
          Actions
          a.       Periodically conduct demographic studies to predict the need for
                   housing and care of senior citizens and other special needs
                   populations. These studies should include statistics on age, gender,
                   income levels, marital status, state of health, and supportive services
                   required.
          b.       Develop design guidelines and site criteria for senior housing and
                   care.
          c.       Provide incentives to builders to provide housing and care choices
                   for seniors of all income levels.
                                           180
Davis General Plan                                                Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                       Chapter 4: Housing
         Policy HOUSING 1.9 Encourage construction of housing to meet the
                   needs of farm workers.
         Actions
         a.        Support efforts by the Farmers Home Administration and Yolo
                   County Housing Authority to provide housing for farm workers and
                   their families.
         b.        Encourage developers to seek funding from sources such as
                   Farmers Home Administration for construction of additional units
                   of permanent housing for farm workers in Davis.
         c.        Work with Yolo County Housing Authority and housing developers
                   to explore and provide housing in new developments for farm
                   workers and their families.
         d.        As part of funding and targeting decisions for subsidized rental
                   projects, explore the feasibility of developing units for households at
                   or below 35% of area median income (extremely–very-low-income
                   households.)
GOAL HOUSING 2. Provide housing that is affordable for residents with
low paying jobs, fixed incomes and pensions.
         Policy HOUSING 2.1 Strive to meet the identified current and projected
                   local need for housing and for housing affordable to extremely low,
                   very low, low, and moderate income households including provision
                   of Davis' five-year fair share of regional housing needs.
         Standards
         a.        Limited-equity cooperative units affordable to moderate-income
                   households (120 percent of median income or less) are exempt from
                   restrictions on the rate of new construction.
         b.        Units affordable by extremely low, very low, and low-income
                   households, farm workers, or supportive housing are excluded from
                   the housing allocation system if they are subject to provisions to
                   ensure affordability to such households throughout the life of the
                   units.
         c.        Density bonuses and density bonus credits shall be given for the
                   provision of affordable housing, subject to State law and standards
                   developed by the City. There shall be a 1:1 density bonus for units
                                            181

Section IV: Community Form                                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                   required under the Affordable Housing Ordinance. The density
                   bonus credits may be earned for land dedication and applied to
                   other housing developments.
          d.       As a means to maximize the development of affordable units on
                   dedicated land, a portion of the affordable housing requirement on
                   dedicated land may be constructed as multi-family, limited-equity
                   cooperative, or mutual housing association units in areas designated
                   low-density in the General Plan (pursuant to Section 65589.8 of the
                   Government Code and the applicable specific plan). The maximum
                   area that may be used to construct affordable multi-family units shall
                   not exceed the greater of the acreage of the required dedicated land
                   or three (3) net acres unless a General Plan amendment is approved.
          Actions
          a.       Encourage use of the Federal Tax Credits and other federal and
                   state subsidy programs for production of low-income housing.
          b.       Encourage the use of all available affordable housing incentive
                   programs available to Davis residents for both new and existing
                   housing, for example delayed fees for homebuyers, shared equity
                   programs and mortgage-credit certificates.
          c.       Pursue means of securing additional housing affordable to low-
                   income households and land for such housing including, but not
                   limited to, land dedication, land exaction, and other private funding
                   opportunities.
          d.       Create incentives to the development of affordable housing through
                   measures such as flexible development standards that are compatible
                   with and protective of the surrounding neighborhood.
          e.       Revise the existing program to provide loans or grants to very low-
                   income households for the purpose of making deposits on rental
                   housing.
          f.       If new lands are added to the City's General Plan Area, identify and
                   zone affordable housing sites early in the planning process.
          g.       Work to maintain continued affordability of existing affordable
                   housing with expiring federal, state, or local subsidy programs.
          h.       Assist residents who are displaced from subsidized housing in
                   finding comparable accommodations.
                                            182
Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                        Chapter 4: Housing
         i.        Establish a referral service to assist very low and low income
                   households in identifying affordable housing in Davis and
                   surrounding areas.
         j.        Compile and maintain a list of vacant sites in Davis which are
                   suitable for affordable housing development.
         k.        Monitor creation and availability of affordable housing on an annual
                   basis.
         l.        If monitoring shows that the percentage of affordable units available
                   does not meet identified affordable housing needs, take further
                   actions to encourage construction of affordable housing, such as
                   increasing allowed densities or restructuring the Affordable Housing
                   Ordinance.
         m.        Encourage and seek funding for shared housing for residents with
                   low-incomes, fixed incomes and pensions.
         n.        Maintain standards for the regulation of condominium conversion
                   applications so that low-income households receive appropriate
                   displacement protection or benefits.
         o.        Provide written handouts and work with developers to provide signs
                   to disclose the locations of sites approved for future affordable
                   housing development to low and moderate income persons. In
                   written materials, disclose that affordable housing sites may be
                   developed with affordable housing as envisioned in the General
                   Plan.
         p.        The City shall review the Housing Element beginning in January
                   2005 to determine (1) its progress toward meeting the goals of the
                   Housing Element and any further actions needed to meet them
                   before the end of the current housing Element planning period; and
                   (2) whether adequate sites will be available to meet the prospective
                   identified needs for the next planning period and, if not, any actions
                   needed during the remainder of the current planning period to make
                   them available.
         q.        The City shall petition our state and national representative for more
                   affordable housing resources.
         r.        Amend the Affordable Housing Ordinance to establish a more
                   precise timeline for transfer of dedicated land and the award of
                   dedicated land for development by non-profits to promote
                   neighborhood acceptance.
                                            183
Section IV: Community Form                                                     Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                       May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
GOAL HOUSING 3. Increase Equal Housing opportunities for all persons
and household in Davis.
          Policy HOUSING 3.1 Affirmatively further fair housing opportunities for
                   all persons regardless of race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
                   familial status, disability, age, marital status, sexual orientation,
                   source of income, and receipt of Section 8 or other subsidized rental
                   program.
          Actions
          a.       Continue to monitor daily number of persons seeking emergency
                   shelter in Davis and Yolo County. Evaluate the resulting data to
                   determine what facilities and social services are needed in Davis to
                   cooperatively address the overall county needs of the identified
                   population.
          b.       Continue to participate in an interagency county homeless task
                   force.
          Policy HOUSING 3.2 Strive to ensure that required affordable housing is
                   occupied by those of the greatest need.
          Actions
          a.       Permanently maintain the affordability of required affordable rental
                   units for very low, low, or moderate income households.
          b.       Establish a process to alert the city in the event of sharp rental
                   increases or evictions of groups of tenants; by landlords of rental
                   properties with 40 or more units. Special attention shall be given to
                   projects with potential for large-scale gentrification or displacement
                   of Section 8 residents without appropriate relocation to other similar
                   affordable units.
          c.       Strive to create and maintain an adequate supply of rental and
                   ownership housing that is affordable to extremely-low, very-low,
                   low, and moderate income households.
          d.       Consider offering incentives to homeowners and developers to
                   reserve spaces on upper floors of retail commercial buildings,
                   downtown and elsewhere, for housing.
          e.       As a last resort and as authorized by law, use the city’s power of
                   eminent domain to buy affordable hosing and keep it affordable.
                                              184

Davis General Plan                                                Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                       Chapter 4: Housing
         Policy HOUSING 3.3 Change the name of the Social Services
                   Commission to the Social Services and Affordable Housing
                   Commission.
         Actions
         a.        Designate the Social Services and Affordable Housing Commission
                   to monitor affordable housing programs supported by CDBG,
                   HOME, Housing Trust Fund and Redevelopment Fund identified
                   for affordable housing. Currently produced annual reports will be
                   amended to included information about the Housing Trust Fund
                   and Redevelopment Fund, including expenditures and income.
         b.        In 2003, the City Council will expand the mission of the Social
                   Services and Affordable Housing Commission to include review and
                   recommendations affordable housing units provided pursuant to the
                   Affordable Hosing Ordinance to the Planning Commission.
         c.        The Social Services and Affordable Housing Commission shall
                   regularly review current needs for continuing targeting of resources
                   to moderate, low and very-low income households.
         d.        The commission and its staff, the Community Services Department
                   in coordination with Yolo County Housing Authority, shall work
                   cooperatively and proactively with Section 8 rental property owners
                   to encourage them to remain in the program with Section 8 tenants
                   to educate them on their legal rights.
         e.        Establish reciprocal communication with the Yolo County Housing
                   Authority when either agency is made aware of the filing of opt-out
                   notices by Section 8 rental property owners and/or receipt of
                   notices by Section 8 tenants.
         f.        Forward all existing and new opt-out notices to Legal Services of
                   Northern California in Woodland.
         Policy HOUSING 3.4 Strive to assure that all new subsidized affordable
                   housing and the land on which it is located remain affordable
                   permanently. In a case in which that is infeasible, assure
                   affordability for the longest feasible time and recapture of the local
                   subsidies. Also, should economic circumstances, or state and
                   federal subsidies dictate that permanent affordability requirement be
                   released for a specific development project, then appropriate
                   recapture mechanisms for the subsidies and owner occupancy for
                   the longest period feasible shall be imposed. Specific findings for
                                            185
Section IV: Community Form                                                   Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                       May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                   release for the permanent affordability requirement shall be
                   established in the Affordable Housing Ordinance.
                   Definition – As used in this policy and the actions under it “new
                   subsidized affordable housing” means affordable housing built,
                   acquired, or preserved with subsidies including city or city-
                   controlled funds, land, or other resources pursuant to the City
                   Affordable Hosing Ordinance, after the effective date of this policy.
          Actions
          a.       In all cases of new subsidized affordable for-sale housing, except
                   those cases in which the City determines that permanent
                   affordability is infeasible, the housing shall be in or under the
                   control of a housing land trust, a limited equity cooperative, fee
                   simple ownership with permanent affordability requirements and
                   significant city oversight, or other permanent affordability
                   arrangements and significant city oversight, or other permanent
                   affordability arrangements with significant city oversight. Also
                   should economic circumstances, or state and federal subsidies
                   dictate that permanent affordability requirement be released for a
                   specific development project, then appropriate recapture
                   mechanisms for the subsidies and owner occupancy for the longest
                   period feasible shall be imposed. Specific findings for release of the
                   permanent affordability requirement shall be established in the
                   Affordable Housing Ordinance.
          b.       In all cases of new subsidized affordable rental housing, except in
                   those cases in which the City Council determines that permanent
                   affordability is infeasible, the city shall develop appropriate
                   mechanisms to assure permanent affordability.
          c.       In all cases of new subsidized affordable housing, whether for-sale
                   or rental, in which the city determines that permanent affordability
                   is infeasible, the city shall develop appropriate mechanisms to assure
                   recapture of the subsidies and its appreciated value upon resale, or
                   refinance, or termination of affordability restrictions. Also, should
                   economic circumstances, or estate and federal subsidies dictate that
                   permanent affordability requirement be released for a specific
                   development project, then appropriate recapture mechanisms for
                   the subsidies and owner occupancy for the longest period feasible
                   shall be imposed. Specific findings for release o the permanent
                   affordability requirement shall be established in the Affordable
                   Housing Ordinance.
                                             186

Davis General Plan                                                Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                       Chapter 4: Housing
         d.        In all cases of new subsidized affordable housing, whether for-sale
                   or rental, and whether or not the City Council determines that
                   permanent affordability is infeasible, the housing and the land on
                   which it is located shall be subject to easements or deed restrictions
                   to assure compliance with Actions a, b, or c. whichever applies.
         e.        If the Common-Law Rule Against Perpetuities or any other
                   provision of state law proves to be an obstacle to implementation of
                   this policy and these actions, the City Council shall seek state
                   legislation to amend or waive the provisions that is the obstacle.
GOAL HOUSING 4. Disperse affordable and rental housing fairly
throughout the City.
         Policy HOUSING 4.1 Maintain and periodically review the Affordable
                   Housing Ordinance to require the inclusion of affordable housing in
                   all new development areas to the extent feasible.
         Standards
         a.        Twenty-five percent of all proposed new for-sale residential units
                   should be affordable to very low, low and moderate income
                   households. The units should be as affordable rental or ownership.
         b.        Continue to administer an affordable housing ordinance which
                   accomplishes the following:
                   Rental housing developments containing between 5 and 19 units
                   inclusive shall provide, to the maximum extent feasible, 15 percent
                   of the units to be affordable to low-income households (50-80% of
                   the median income) and 10 percent of the units to be affordable to
                   very low income households (less than 50% percent of median
                   income) for a total requirement of 25 percent.
                   Rental housing developments containing 20 or more units shall
                   provide, to the maximum extent feasible, 10 percent of the units to
                   be affordable to low-income households and 25 percent of the units
                   to be affordable to very-low-income households for a total
                   requirement of 35 percent.
                   The city shall review the ordinance at least every five years to
                   confirm its effectiveness.
         c.        Project conditions of approval shall require that affordable housing
                   shares be produced before or contemporaneously with the related
                                            187
Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                   market-rate housing. Exemptions shall be granted by the City only
                   under extreme circumstances.
          d.       The affordable housing obligation may be met by land dedication to
                   the City or to a non-profit developer selected by the City.
          e.       A developer who builds more than the required share of affordable
                   housing may designate a recipient of credit for the number of units
                   exceeding the minimum.
          f.       Fees in lieu of any required affordable on-site units may be accepted
                   by the City on a discretionary basis for parcels less than ten acres in
                   size and fewer than 30 units. In-lieu fees shall be set to reflect the
                   true costs of affordable housing subsidization.
          g.       To the extent feasible, the location of any nearby affordable housing
                   sites shall be disclosed to purchasers of lots or residential units in
                   new development areas.
          h.       Offer incentives to homeowners to add granny flats and second
                   units. Examples of these incentive might be by offering workshops
                   on procedures, costs and design and establishing a revolving fund
                   with low cost loans to allow homeowners to make necessary
                   structure changes; reduced interest for loans used for Section 8
                   tenants.
          Actions
          i.       Evaluate the credit given for land dedication in light of General Plan
                   densities and the likely parcel sizes.
          j.       Consider revising the developer impacts fee structure for housing
                   units so that smaller units pay lower fees than larger units by
                   considering unit square footage, or other legally acceptable criteria
                   such as the number of bathrooms, or the number of rooms that
                   potentially could be occupied as a bedroom.
          k.       Consider a more equitable tax structure for future proposed city
                   parcel tax by basing tax on unit square footage so that smaller units
                   pay proportionally lower tax.
          l.       Study the structure of storm-water quality fees and sewer fees for
                   housing units so that smaller units pay lower fees than larger units
                   by considering unit square footage, or other legally acceptable
                   criteria such as the number of bathrooms, or the number of rooms
                   that potentially could be occupied as a bedroom.
                                            188
Davis General Plan                                                  Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                         Chapter 4: Housing
         m.        Provide financial incentives to rental property owners on the
                   condition of making individual units permanently affordable.
                   Options for incentives include but are not limited to market-rat
                   rehabilitation loans and fee waivers.
         n.        Increase resources for Affordable Housing. Study a variety of
                   mechanisms to increase financial resources to increase the supply of
                   affordable housing.
         o.        Provide financial incentives to landlords on the condition of making
                   the properties permanently affordable. Options for incentives,
                   include below market-rate rehabilitation loans, fee waivers for
                   rehabilitation permits, and others to be negotiated by the Social
                   Services and Affordable Housing Commission.
         Policy HOUSING 4.2 Provide housing opportunities for the local
                   workforce in the Davis area.
         Standards
         a.        A development with 26 or more residential units for purchase shall
                   provide units that are affordable to middle income households.
                   Middle income households consist of households earning a gross
                   income of no greater than 180 percent of the median income for
                   Yolo County adjusted for household size. The number of middle
                   income units shall be equivalent to 10% for projects totaling 26 to
                   35 ownership units, 15% for projects totaling 30 to 49 ownership
                   units, and 20% for projects totaling 50 or more ownership units.
         b.        Units built under the middle income requirement shall be made
                   affordable to households with gross incomes of 120 percent to 180
                   percent of the median income for Yolo County, with an average
                   affordability for households at 140 percent of the median income
                   for Yolo County.
         c.        No density bonus shall be granted for middle income units.
         Policy HOUSING 4.3 Promote a linkage between new ownership housing
                   and the local workforce.
         Actions
         a.        Implement an incentive system for the local workforce, such as a
                   lottery, as part of the city’s buyer selection process for
                   low/moderate income and middle income affordable ownership
                   units. The system shall provide the highest number of lottery
                                             189

Section IV: Community Form                                                   Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                   tickets to households with a member of the local workforce.
          Policy HOUSING 4.4 Encourage senior housing in all parts of Davis and
                   near neighborhood centers, shopping centers, public transportation,
                   and/or parks and greenbelts where compatible with existing uses.
          Policy HOUSING 4.5 Encourage housing for special needs to be
                   dispersed throughout the community to avoid an over-
                   concentration in one area and to be located near neighborhood
                   services and facilities. Special needs housing may include, but is not
                   limited to, housing for physically and mentally disabled individuals,
                   affordable low income housing for single persons, emergency
                   shelters and transitional housing.
          Policy HOUSING 4.6 The City will develop procedures and criteria to
                   clarify the types of modifications or changes that are and are not
                   subject to additional voter approval. The procedures and criteria
                   will be consistent with the general parameters contained in Measure
                   J. The procedures will establish an expeditious process for changing
                   or establishing project components such that any project and/or
                   land use entitlement implementing the Measure J approval does not
                   have to undergo additional approval by the local electorate.
                   Features of such projects not subject to additional voter approval
                   will likely include, but are not limited to, building setbacks and
                   height; building facade design including materials, colors and roof
                   pitch; on-site landscaping layout, and on-site parking and internal
                   circulation designs.
GOAL HOUSING 5. Maintain Davis' housing stock in good condition.
      Policy HOUSING 5.1 Ensure that existing housing stock is maintained in
            sound condition and up to code requirements.
      Actions
      a.    Periodically conduct a survey of the condition of residential structures in
            Davis to identify any need for rehabilitation or replacement.
      b.    Continue to require maintenance and preservation of the existing housing
            stock through the existing Resale/Retrofit inspection program and by
            requiring inspection of houses on resale.
                                             190
Davis General Plan                                              Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                     Chapter 4: Housing
      c.    Encourage landlords to maintain all rental units in sound condition
            through city information, the resale program, and technical assistance and
            support.
      d.    Continue to support the existing program at the Senior Center which
            assists senior home owners in maintaining their homes by providing
            arrangements for volunteers to perform home maintenance services.
      e.    Develop a program to assist low-income homeowners and owners of
            affordable rental housing in the upkeep of their residential units, as
            needed.
                                          191
Section IV: Community Form                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 4: Housing             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                           192
              Chapter 5. Economic and Business
                                      Development
BACKGROUND
This section broadly addresses economic conditions and trends identified for the
State, region and City. It is not an exhaustive discussion of economic factors, but
rather a brief sampling of key facts and figures.
State and Regional Context
For much of the last three decades, the four-county Sacramento region, including
Yolo, El Dorado, Placer and Sacramento, seemed immune from downward
economic cycles as it grew primarily in agriculture, transportation, military,
education, and federal, state and local government.
Troubles in the State economy became evident, however, in 1989 when large
defense contractors in Southern California and their suppliers began laying off their
workers. In the next four years, about 800,000 jobs were lost in California. Three
military bases were slated for closure in the Sacramento region alone. The defense
cutbacks hit other industries, including retail and banking. Manufacturers began
moving to other states who offered tax breaks and free land, they cited business
taxes, regulations and workers' compensation costs as factors. The value of real
estate began to decline.
The State's economic downturn hit the Sacramento region in mid-1990. Real estate
sales, construction, financial services and retail slowed and manufacturers announced
layoffs. By 1992, the State's budget deficits swelled. The region's economic
vulnerability was evident. Economists pointed to a need for diversification and
growth in the private sector to balance the government oriented economy.
Despite the recent downturn, the region continues to have positive attributes: a well
educated work force; a strategic location with access to all Western markets;
affordable real estate (compared to other parts of the state); a relatively close
distance to the San Francisco bay area; and an excellent quality of life.
The latest economic conditions and trends of the four-county region, as outlined by
the Sacramento Business Journal2, include the following:
         2
           “All About Business in Sacramento, A 1996 Almanac of the Regional Economy”, May, 1996.
                                                 193

Section IV: Community Form                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development          May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
•    Government's share of employment remains the greatest at 35% of all jobs,
     compared to services (30%), retail (25%) and manufacturing (20%). The
     services sector is closing in on government as having the greatest share of
     employment and may exceed government by the year 2000.
•    The State of California employs more people than the next ten employers
     combined. Other government entities (including universities and school
     districts) account for ten of the region's 25 largest employers. The region's ten
     largest employers are:
       1. State of California, 70,700;
       2. U.C. Davis, 14,910;
       3. Sacramento County, 11,790;
       4. Sutter Health, 5,975;
       5. Kaiser Permanente, 5,130;
       6. Sacramento City Unified School District, 5,000;
       7. Raley's, 4,900;
       8. Pacific Bell, 4,440;
       9. Mercy Healthcare Sacramento, 4,370; and
       10. City of Sacramento, 4,000.
•    The Sacramento economy shows signs of recovery. In 1995, about 22,300 net new
     jobs were added in the four-county region, a 32.8 percent increase over the previous
     year. The private sector, not the public sector, led in job growth.
•    Electronics, biotechnology and medical technology are currently the hottest
     industries for job growth.
•    In 2001, McClellan Air Force Base, which once employed 16,000 people, will
     become the third Sacramento military base to be closed in a decade. The
     Clinton administration promises that as many jobs as possible would be
     "privatized". Many of the base's 10,000 civilian employees are trying to bid on
     the work.
•    The other two facility closures were Mather Field in 1993 and Sacramento Army
     Depot. Some new uses have been found, some with financial incentives from
     the city of Sacramento, and other uses continue to be sought. Mather Field and
     McClellan Air Force Base are both expected to become important and
     expanding industrial centers.
•    Yolo County is the region's top agricultural county in value of crops and ranks
     19th out of the state's 58 counties.
                                             194

Davis General Plan                                               Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007           Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development
Economic Impact of UC Davis
U.C. Davis is the third largest U.C. campus in enrollment and budget and is the
northernmost and largest in terms of campus area. Table 2 in Section II shows the
enrollment and employment at U.C. Davis since 1987-88. The city's population has
remained approximately twice the university's enrollment.
U.C. Davis is an acknowledged international leader in agricultural, biological,
biotechnical and environmental sciences and stands 22nd in research funding among
U.S. universities. The university and the city are collaborating increasingly in
attracting new business to the region and retaining existing business. U.C. Davis has
been ranked among the nation's top 10 public universities (U.S. News and World
Report). The faculty were judged 16th in quality among comprehensive public
universities nationwide, according to a study by the National Research Council.
U.C. Davis revenues have increased from $951.8 million in 1990-91 to $1,145.2
million in 1994-95. Expenditures have increased from $893.9 in 1990-91 to $1,047.0
in 1994-95 (U.C. Davis, 1994-95 Annual Report). It must be recognized, however,
that less of the university's funding is coming from the state, requiring the university
to explore more private sector partnerships.
A report by the U.C. Davis Graduate School of Management (Dean Robert Smiley,
June 26, 1992) described the economic impacts of U.C. Davis on the six-county
region consisting of the counties of Yolo, El Dorado, Placer, Sacramento, Solano
and Sutter.
U.C. Davis directly infuses approximately $290 million into the Yolo County
economy and $1.13 billion into the six-county region annually through wages and
benefits, and expenditures by students and visitors.
Assuming an economic multiplier effect of at least two dollars of output for each
dollar spent, the impact of U.C. Davis in Yolo County alone is more than $580
million per year and the impact in the region is more than $2 billion. In addition, 33
jobs are created for each million dollars spent. In the last decade, half of U.C. Davis
employees lived in the city and this amount appears to be dropping slightly.
Local Economic Profile
A useful indicator of the type of economic activity in an area is the pattern of
existing and projected employment. The 1990 Census showed that the total number
of employed persons in the City 16 years and older was 42,765 (including full and
part-time jobs). Most were employed in various "professional and service sector"
jobs (58 percent), particularly in "educational services" (33 percent) and other
professional services (10.5 percent).
                                           195
Section IV: Community Form                                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development           May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Table 12 shows the ten largest employers in the Davis area, and clearly the
University heads the list.
Basic industries, as opposed to local-serving industries, produce goods or services
consumed mainly by persons whose residence is outside the Planning Area. Only
about six percent of the full-time jobs in Davis are in basic industries other than
U.C. Davis. Some of the leading basic industries are Hunt-Wesson and Calgene.
Another economic indicator for a local area is the amount of taxable retail sales a
city provides. The City of Davis makes up approximately one-third of Yolo
County's population, but the city's taxable retail sales are only about one fourth of
the total taxable retail sales in the County. Excluding the grocery stores and
automotive sectors, the total Davis area retail demand in 1995 was $245 million but
total sales was only $133 million, resulting in a retail leakage of $112 million.
Figure 29 shows the actual building permits issued for commercial development
since fiscal year 1987-88. During this period, commercial permits were issued for an
annual average of 140,500 square feet of commercial uses, with a high in 1988-89
and a low in 1990-91. In this instance, "commercial" uses include all types of retail,
office, industrial, light industrial, business parks, and research development uses.
Commercial development has significantly lagged behind the projections in the 1987
General Plan. This lack of commercial construction has led the city to initiate a
variety of economic development efforts.
                                             196
Davis General Plan                                                           Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                      Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development
                                                  Table 12
                    MAJOR EMPLOYERS IN THE DAVIS AREA
                                                                                              Remain-
                                                                    Total      Full-Time
             Employer                    Product or Service                                      ing
                                                                 Employees    Employees
                                                                                             Employees
 UC Davis                               Education and
                                                                    15,293        9,944        Students
 (Davis Campus Only)                    research
 Davis Joint Unified School
                                        Education                   1,125          752         Part-time
 District
 Hunt-Wesson Foods                      Tomato canning          300 to 1,050       50          Seasonal
 City of Davis                          Government                   724           357       Temporary
                                                                                               Part-time
 Sutter Davis Hospital                  Health services              414           201
                                                                                             and on-call
                                        Engineering and
 Teichert Construction                                             103-303         53          Seasonal
                                        construction
                                                                                               Part-time
 Pacific Gas and Electric               Utilities                    190           180
                                                                                              and temp.
                                        Plant Genetics
 Calgene                                                             125           120         Part-time
                                        Research
                                        Conservation and
 United States Department
                                        agriculture                  117           113         Part-time
 of Agriculture
                                        research
 Safeway (West Covell)                  Groceries                    115          N/A
 Albertsons Food Center                 Groceries                    101          N/A
                                                                                               Part-time
 US Post Office                         Postal Services              100           50
                                                                                             and on-call
Note: All employers listed are within the City of Davis except for UC Davis and Teichert Construction.
Source: Telephone Survey, May 1996.
                                                     197
Section IV: Community Form                                                      Davis General Plan
Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development                May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Figure 29: Commercial Construction Permits Issued 1987-1996
                                                       198
Davis General Plan                                                Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007            Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development
Economic Development Task Force
In 1991, the Davis City Council appointed the Economic Development Task Force
to examine the need for business and economic development in Davis. In October
1992, the Economic Development Task Force submitted a report, "Business
Development in Davis".
The Task Force determined that the City must increase its sales tax revenue through
expansion of local business. This was considered especially crucial because of the
effects of State budget cuts on local governments and the shifting of property taxes
from cities to school districts.
The Task Force developed a series of recommendations, including:
•   Increase the number of businesses operating in Davis in order to generate more
    sales tax, hotel tax, business license fees, and business real and personal property
    tax;
•   Foster a better business climate by developing communication among the
    business community, City Council and City administration;
•   Develop the downtown into a regional tourist destination, featuring arts,
    entertainment, specialty stores, and related services;
•   Develop a tourism marketing campaign to entice people from all over northern
    California;
•   Target potential businesses and commit City resources for recruitment;
•   Market Davis to residents and businesses; and
•   Develop incentives for business retention and expansion.
In November 1999, the City Council proceeded with the implementation of a Visitor
Attraction Program. The Council determined that the program should be oriented
to "visitors" (coming to Davis for events and conferences) rather than "tourists."
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
CORE AREA
GOAL ED 1. Maintain and enhance the Core Area as a vibrant, healthy
downtown that serves as the city’s social, cultural and entertainment center
and primary, but not exclusive, retail and business district.
                                            199

Section IV: Community Form                                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Policy ED 1.1 Increase attractions and amenities that bring people to the
                  Core, including local shopping, services, modest tourism, specialty
                  retail, restaurants, festivals/special events, farmers' market and
                  entertainment.
          Actions
          a.      Use media, publications and technology to encourage retailers and
                  entrepreneurs to locate and build in downtown.
          b.      Recruit specialty stores to the Core to create a critical mass of retail
                  in the downtown.
          c.      Monitor the share of ground floor space occupied by different
                  categories of uses. Pedestrian and customer intensive retail uses are
                  preferred at ground level in the downtown core (retail stores) area,
                  although non-retail uses are not prohibited.
          d.      Promote special events in the downtown developed by the City,
                  Farmer's Market, DDBA, Chamber of Commerce and other
                  community groups.
          e.      Accommodate and encourage special festivals and events (art and
                  jazz), and public art in the Core.
          Policy ED 1.2 Promote Downtown Davis as a place to shop.
          Actions
          a.      Promote downtown Davis to current residents and the region as a
                  shopping destination.
VISITOR ATTRACTION
GOAL ED 2. Attract visitors to Davis.
          Policy ED 2.1 Promote Davis as a destination for visitors with interests in
                  eco-tourism, university/academic events and conferences, athletic
                  events, culture and arts, and downtown shopping.
                                              200
Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007             Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development
         Actions
         a.        Create a Culture and Tourism program through the Davis
                   Conference and Visitors Bureau (DCVB).
         b.        Work with DCVB to develop a marketing campaign that will
                   encourage people to visit Davis.
BUSINESS RETENTION AND EXPANSION
GOAL ED 3. Retain existing businesses and encourage new ones as means
to increase higher paying jobs, create greater job diversification, and create a
more balanced economy for all economic segments of the community, while
also maintaining the City's fiscal and environmental integrity.
         Policy ED 3.1 Adopt policies that make Davis a more business-friendly
                   community and eliminate unnecessary barrier to business.
         Actions
         a.        Create an on-going economic development advisory committee.
         b.        Maintain the position of Economic Development Coordinator
                   within the City.
         c.        Evaluate Davis' competitive strengths and weaknesses within the
                   trade area.
         d.        Develop a business retention program by strengthening the current
                   business "care and feeding" program.
         e.        Maintain a revolving Redevelopment Agency loan program to
                   encourage the retention of existing businesses by supporting
                   businesses in temporary financial difficulty.
         f.        Maintain regular contact with the Chamber of Commerce, the
                   Downtown Business Association and other business groups to
                   ascertain what types of support businesses need from the City.
         Policy ED 3.2 Encourage new businesses to locate in Davis, targeting
                   business which improve the city’s fiscal base, are consistent with the
                   City's values and identity, and match the employment skills of the
                   population, such as those in the emerging technology and
                   knowledge-based industries.
                                             201

Section IV: Community Form                                                   Davis General Plan
Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          a.      The city should establish fees at levels which are competitive with
                  surrounding jurisdictions. In addition, in special circumstances (that
                  is, job generation, business retention or the city’s fiscal base) the city
                  should consider providing fee and other incentives to targeted
                  businesses that are considering locating in Davis in order to be
                  competitive with surrounding jurisdictions.
          b.      Develop an industrial land use strategy that targets technology-
                  oriented industrial and light industrial uses that contribute to the
                  creation of jobs and the economic health of the community.
          c.      Recruit a task force of University and private sector contacts to
                  define methods for attracting high technology firms.
          d.      Market the Davis community and its assets, such as Davis' high
                  educational standards, to targeted businesses.
          e.      Explore the establishment of a specialized zone or incubator
                  facilities to target specific industries, for example, a high technology
                  or life science zone.
          f.      Study opportunities to designate lands for “green” technology, high
                  technology and University related research uses within or adjacent to
                  the City. Work closely with the local business community,
                  community leaders and U.C. Davis officials in determining when
                  and where such uses can best be accommodated in addition to the
                  25-acre enterprise site planned on the UC Davis campus.
                  Preference should be given to sites that are viable economically and
                  consistent with compact City form principles. As part of this study:
                  •     Consider re-designating or rezoning land(s) within the City
                        limits (as of January 1, 2001) from Industrial, Business Park or
                        General Commercial to research-oriented Business Park uses
                        (that is, uses which allow a wider range of high technology,
                        research and development uses than a URRP and which are
                        complementary to UC Davis);
                  •     Encourage second floor and underground building construction
                        to maximize the space available to accommodate URRP needs
                        within the City limits;
                  •     Key considerations in such re-designation or rezoning shall
                        include the timing of these potential development(s) and
                        impacts and demands caused by these potential developments
                        on the City and the Davis community. Impacts to address
                        include, but are not limited to: traffic, water, housing (for
                                              202

Davis General Plan                                                 Section IV: Community Form
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007             Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development
                        example, growth demand), schools, effects on neighborhoods,
                        and economics (for example, cost benefits and cost generation
                        to the City); and
                   •    Designation of a peripherally sited URRP shall only occur after:
                         a) It is determined that lands within the City limits would not
                              meet the needs for “research-oriented” Business Park uses.
                         b) Specific guidelines for development projects on the
                              periphery of the City are adopted.
         g.        Maintain a database of available land for commercial and light
                   industrial development.
         h.        Maintain "packaged parcels" ready for issuance of building permits
                   to targeted enterprises. These packaged parcels shall be zoned and
                   have undergone environmental review, thereby streamlining the
                   approval process and enabling Davis to compete with other
                   locations for targeted enterprises.
         i.        Clarify and simplify regulations and processing of development
                   applications.
         j.        Set major facility fees charged to businesses so that they reflect a fair
                   share of the costs of providing infrastructure while remaining
                   competitive with other cities.
         k.        Develop, implement and manage a comprehensive and coordinated
                   program to communicate the city’s economic development efforts
                   and to promote the improved business opportunities in the
                   community.
         l.        Continue to implement an attraction program aimed at targeted
                   retail stores and other businesses.
         m.        Investigate and promote the use of the existing rail lines in the city
                   as a resource for industry.
         n.        Work as a member of local and regional economic development
                   corporations on cooperative projects that will encourage business
                   expansion and attraction in Davis.
         Policy ED 3.3 Work with other organizations to identify needs and develop
                   work force and training opportunities in areas identified as needed
                   by the Davis business community.
                                             203

Section IV: Community Form                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 5: Economic and Business Development          May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          a.      Provide information to businesses about existing job training and
                  employer resources.
          b.      Work with local community college districts to provide technical
                  training programs for employers and employees.
          c.      Encourage programmatic links between Davis high schools,
                  community colleges and UC Davis, especially in the area of
                  technology.
          d.      Develop programmatic links between Davis high schools,
                  community colleges and UC Davis, especially in the area of
                  technology.
          e.      Publicize existing job training resources.
          Policy ED 3.4 Continue to support the marketing efforts and expansion
                  needs of the existing automobile dealers in the “Davis Auto
                  Center”.
          a.      Work to find sites for new auto dealers in Davis.
          b.      Support efforts of the current auto dealers to enhance their visibility
                  along Interstate 80.
          c.      Conduct a feasibility analysis of the current land zoned “Auto
                  Center” to determine current and long range development
                  implications and needs.
          d.      Develop specific strategies to attract new dealerships and encourage
                  the expansion of current auto dealers.
          e.      Work with the auto dealers to improve community signage to assist
                  in better visibility.
          f.      Maintain regular communication with the auto dealers on potential
                  issues affecting their businesses and operations.
                                             204

     SECTION V.
COMMUNITY FACILITIES
   AND SERVICES

                             Chapter 6. Water
BACKGROUND
Water Supply
The City's Public Works Department maintains the water supply and distribution
system for the City. The system consists of twenty-one water supply wells, one
elevated water storage tank with a 200,000 gallon capacity, and over 145 miles of
water distribution piping ranging in size from 6" through 14". The supply system
produces an average of 11 million gallons per day. The production capacity is
considered adequate to supply the current demand with sufficient reserve to meet
peak demand and fire demand requirements. The City is proceeding with plans to
construct a 4 million gallon water storage tank by 1998, followed by a second tank
projected for 2000. Twenty of the wells are operated by electric motors, and one
well is operated by a natural gas engine. Two portable generators are currently
available for stand-by power.
The City water system supplies water to areas within the city limits, to the El Macero
County service area, and to a number of individual customers with whom special
arrangements have been made and authorized by the City Council. The City also has
one service connection installed to provide water to a mobile home park outside the
city, and has two connections to the UC Davis water system, which can be opened
for mutual aid during emergency situations. The remainder of the Planning Area is
served by either private water wells or County Service Areas.
Groundwater studies are currently in progress by the State Department of Water
Resources and are planned to be conducted throughout the County in cooperation
with other water agencies and districts. These studies will be used extensively in the
overall regional and city water planning and water management programs.
The water supply and distribution system is being expanded as the city grows. New
development is required to pay for all water system improvements required as a
result of development. Any major surface water projects with high costs, if
considered, would require more broad-based financing mechanisms.
In accordance with the Yolo County Water Plan endorsed by the Board of
Supervisors in 1984 and updated in 1992, the City of Davis has developed specific
water management programs to protect existing supplies while exploring alternative
sources to augment current supplies. A study entitled "Supplemental Surface Water
Supply Development Program" recommends several surface supply options.
                                          205
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 6: Water                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
In 1996, the City adopted a Water Supply Master Plan, which outlines a series of
actions for the City to take in responding to meeting future water quantity and
quality needs. The City also recently completed a study entitled "Future Water
Supply Study (Phase II)" that projects future water demand and identifies supply
options for meeting future water needs.
Water Demand
Assuming buildout of this General Plan, water demand for the city in 2010 has been
projected to be 15, 531 acre-feet (af).1 This would require a projected average day
water production of 13.9 million gallons per day or 9,628 gallons per minute. For
comparative purposes, the average water production for the City of Davis in 1996
was 11.2 million gallons per day.
Water systems are generally designed to accommodate a peak water demand that
would occur when maximum water usage is taking place. As part of the 1993 City of
Davis water system hydraulic model, a maximum day peaking factor of 1.70 and a
peak hour factor of 2.42 were developed. When applied to the 2010 projections,
this would result in a maximum day water production of 23.57 million gallons per
day (mgd) and a peak hour water production of 23,299 gpm.
Water Conservation
As required by State law, an Urban Water Management Plan was completed in
January, 1990 to guide efficient water use in the City. This plan includes new
construction requirements, the water meter retrofit project, a water shortage
contingency plan, customer rebate programs, upgrading of irrigation systems and
new practices for city facilities to ensure efficient use of water.
In 1991, during a multi-year drought, Davis residents reduced per capita water
consumption by about 10 percent as compared to the historic average. The City has
established a water conservation goal of twenty percent, which is to result from the
water meter retrofit project, the metered rate program and the annual Summer Use
Reduction Effort (SURE) program. The 1995 Urban Water Management Plan
updates these activities, and will be submitted to the California Department of Water
Resources by December 1996.
Water Quality
The taste, odor and hardness characteristics of the tap water in Davis are often
debated. In general, groundwater in the vicinity of Davis is very hard and high in
dissolved solids. Samples from 19 of the 21 City wells tested through 1995 were
          1 Future Water Supply Study (Phase II).
                                                  206
Davis General Plan                                 Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                       Chapter 6: Water
classified as “very hard,” causing over half of the single family homes in the city to
use water softeners. Overall groundwater quality in Davis is of fair quality when
measures against current drinking water regulations, but may exceed acceptable
standards for certain contaminants in the future.
Long-term development of deep wells over 1,500 feet deep is planned to improve
the aesthetic characteristics of Davis’ water and to meet drinking water regulations.
A secondary benefit of deep wells is improved quality that helps the City comply
with its NPDES permit for operating its wastewater treatment plant.
The City will continue toward the use of deep aquifers unless there are quality or
quantity reasons to not use these aquifers. Deep aquifers are being studied by the
City and UC Davis and initial testing is to be completed in the Summer of 1998.
Wastewater Collection and Treatment
The City's Public Works Department provides sewer service to the City and portions
of the unincorporated areas of the Planning Area. The City's wastewater treatment
plant is located in the northeast portion of the Planning Area.
In 1992, the average daily flow to the City's sewer system was 4.3 million gallons per
day (MGD). The average daily flow for 1993 through July was 4.7 MGD. The
capacity is currently 5.3 MGD. Improvements planned for 1995-96, will expand the
capacity to 7.5 MGD. The capacity of the plant will need to be increased to 7.5
MGD to accommodate the growth in the current General Plan by the year 2010.
Planned sewage collection improvements include a repair of the 48" sewer trunk line
located near County Roads 105 and 30. New development is required to pay for
trunk and all other lines needed to accommodate new development, so that the only
cost borne by the City will be for maintenance of the lines.
The City is constructing a 396-acre "wetlands demonstration project" at the Yolo
Basin Wetlands Davis Site immediately east of the wastewater treatment plant. The
intent of the project is to combine treated wastewater with storm water runoff, in
order to create a restored wetlands and wildlife habitat and improve the wastewater
treatment process prior to discharging into the environment.
Background information on the city’s drainage system to prevent flooding is
provided in Chapter 19, Hazards.
                                          207

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                            Davis General Plan
Chapter 6: Water                                    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
WATER CONSERVATION
GOAL WATER 1. Minimize increases in water use. Reduce per capita water
consumption by 20 percent as compared to historic use through programs
encouraging water conservation.
          Policy WATER 1.1 Give priority to demand reduction and conservation
                 over additional water resource development.
          Standards
          a.     Water-conserving plumbing is required in all new residential
                 construction as required per state legislation.
          b.     Implement a water meter-based billing system.
          c.     Water usage meter rates shall include economic disincentives for
                 excessive usage, without penalties for average water users.
          Actions
          d.     Determine specific water use requirements for all proposed projects
                 and programs within the City.
          e.     Continue to enforce and support water conservation ordinances.
          f.     Explore incentives to retrofit water conserving plumbing in existing
                 residences and businesses.
          g.     Complete the residential water meter retrofit program by 1996.
          h.     Continue to expand the public-information program for citizens on
                 water-conserving practices, including landscaping.
          i.     Develop an education program to inform residents of their typical
                 water usage, so that voluntary conservation practices are
                 encouraged.
          j.     Show a comparison of the current period’s water usage, the usage
                 during the same period in the previous year and the average Davis
                 usage on each utility bill.
          k.     Develop a program to encourage appropriate, cost-effective and
                 environmentally sound reuse of treated wastewater, gray water and
                 other suitable drainage water.
                                             208

Davis General Plan                                   Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                         Chapter 6: Water
                   Identify specific opportunity reuse and incorporate them into City's
                   Urban Water Management Plan.
         l.        Develop an education program regarding water quality and
                   conservation.
         m.        Continue to implement water conservation programs and best
                   management practices as detailed in the Urban Water Management
                   Plan and other adopted water plans.
         Policy WATER 1.2 Require water conserving landscaping.
         Standards
         a.        City projects shall include water-conserving landscaping and
                   irrigation practices.
         b.        Developers and builders shall install water-conserving landscaping
                   and irrigation systems in accordance with the City's water
                   conservation in landscaping requirements. Provide homeowners
                   information on water conserving landscaping and irrigation systems,
                   if not provided in construction.
         Actions
         c.        Continue to enforce requirements for water-conserving landscaping
                   and encourage developers and property owners to exceed these
                   basic requirements.
         d.        Continue the best management practices and policies related to
                   water conserving landscaping as detailed in the Urban Water
                   Management Plan and other adopted water plans. Review and
                   update the Urban Water Management Plan every five years.
         e.        Implement in the public sector and promote, through the Urban
                   Water Management Plan, the implementation in the private sector
                   of Demand-Side Management methods that are proven and cost
                   effective. For instance, programs or ordinances from the Plan could
                   advance improved irrigation distributional uniformity, use of the
                   California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) in
                   irrigation scheduling, and inclusion of Xeriscape principles in
                   landscaping planning, installation and management.
         Policy WATER 1.3 Do not approve future development within the City
                   unless an adequate supply of quality water is available or will be
                   developed prior to occupancy.
                                             209
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 6: Water                                     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY
GOAL WATER 2. Ensure sufficient supply of high quality water for the
Davis Planning Area.
          Policy WATER 2.1 Provide for the current and long-range water needs of
                 the Davis Planning Area, and for protection of the quality and
                 quantity of groundwater resources.
          Actions
          a.     Study the full costs and benefits (including point-of-origin costs) of
                 importing surface water as a supplemental source for municipal use
                 for the purpose of improving water quality or preserving the
                 integrity of the water supply.
          b.     Periodically update the Water Supply Master Plan.
          c.     Periodically review and update the Urban Water Management plan
                 as established by the California Urban Water Management Planning
                 Act. This plan chronicles the City's past/current/projected water
                 supply and water use as well as detailing the conservation programs
                 and best management practices adopted by the City.
          d.     When opportunities arise, plan and design water demand uses to be
                 matched with appropriate water supply qualities. For example,
                 larger areas of landscape or some non-residential uses may be able
                 to use water from lower quality supplies which would reduce
                 demand on higher quality supplies needed for other urban uses.
          Policy WATER 2.2 Manage groundwater resources so as to preserve both
                 quantity and quality.
          Actions
          a.     Continue to monitor the quality of water produced by City wells and
                 take corrective actions as needed to maintain or improve
                 groundwater quality.
          b.     Continue to distribute to residents the results of water quality testing
                 and compliance with State and Federal standards.
          c.     Develop a Groundwater Management Ordinance to ensure
                 maintenance of groundwater quality.
          d.     Identify the primary areas of groundwater recharge for the City.
                                             210
Davis General Plan                                    Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                          Chapter 6: Water
         e.        Support efforts to implement conjunctive water use (coordinated
                   surface and groundwater uses) to stabilize long-term groundwater
                   levels and improve water quality in the Davis Planning Area.
         f.        Where feasible and consistent with General Plan land-use policies,
                   locate stormwater-retention ponds in areas where soil is suitable for
                   groundwater recharge.
         g.        Study the impact of injection wells.
         h.        Prohibit use of injection wells as a means of waste disposal.
         Policy WATER 2.3 Maintain surface water quality.
         Actions
         a.        Continue to implement best management practices and policies
                   incorporated in the Urban Water Management Plan and other
                   adopted plans.
         b.        Continue to monitor and enforce, at the local level, provisions to
                   control non-point source water pollution contained in the United
                   State Environmental Protection Agency NPDES program.
         c.        Continue to enforce provisions to control erosion and sediment
                   from construction sites.
DRAINAGE
GOAL WATER 3. Design stormwater drainage and detention facilities to
maximize recreational, habitat and aesthetic benefits.
         Policy WATER 3.1 Coordinate and integrate development of storm ponds
                   and channels City-wide, to maximize recreational, habitat and
                   aesthetic benefits.
         Standards
         a.        Flood retention and detention facilities should be integrated with
                   parks, athletic fields and natural areas.
         Actions
         b.        Prepare management plans for storm drains and channels that stress
                   recreation, long-term landscape maintenance and wildlife habitat.
                                             211
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 6: Water                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Policy WATER 3.2 Coordinate and integrate design, construction, and
                 operation of proposed stormwater retention and detention facilities
                 City-wide, to minimize flood damage potential and improve water
                 quality.
          Standards
          a.     All new development shall include drainage facilities that are
                 designed to accommodate a minimum of a 10-year recurrence
                 design flow. In addition, all new development shall route the 100-
                 year recurrence event and appropriately mitigate for both the
                 increase in flows from the site due to development, and for runoff
                 volumes which have historically occurred on the site.
                 Storm drainage facilities with open, naturalistic channels are
                 encouraged, where feasible. Such facilities can minimize impacts on
                 the city’s system, add to the water table, and provide an open space
                 amenity, although long term maintenance costs must be considered.
                 In addition, properly designed plantings within and adjacent to
                 drainage facilities can serve to treat urban runoff, reducing
                 downstream impacts.
          b.     New development’s detention and retention facilities shall be
                 designed so as not to cause significant negative impact to other
                 drainage facilities in the watershed.
          Actions
          c.     Implement on-site storm drainage treatment facilities in City
                 projects wherever feasible.
          d.     Operate City storm drainage treatment facilities as demonstration
                 projects, and include long term water quality monitoring.
REGIONAL COORDINATION
GOAL WATER 4. Monitor issues in the region that affect quality and
quantity of water in the Davis Planning Area.
          Policy WATER 4.1 Research, monitor and participate in issues in Yolo
                 County and the area of origin of the City's groundwater that affect
                 the quality and quantity of water.
          Policy WATER 4.2 Maintain contact with other appropriate State, Federal
                 and local agencies.
                                             212

Davis General Plan                                  Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                        Chapter 6: Water
         Actions
         a.        Continue to work cooperatively with UC Davis, Yolo County, the
                   Flood Control District and other cities through the Water Resources
                   Association (WRA) and other means to address regional water
                   issues.
         b.        Continue to take a leadership role in the region regarding
                   appropriate management of water resources in Yolo County.
         c.        Continue participation with other agencies and landowners to
                   evaluate conjunctive water use alternatives in the Davis Planning
                   Area.
         d.        Coordinate with Yolo County to explore a regional water policy that
                   discourages permanent out-of-area transfers and sales of
                   groundwater.
         e.        Establish cooperative agreements with public entities having
                   jurisdiction over Davis' groundwater recharge areas. These
                   agreements should protect and preserve the city's groundwater.
WASTEWATER
GOAL WATER 5. Remain within the capacity of the City wastewater
treatment plant.
         Policy WATER 5.1 Evaluate the wastewater production of new large scale
                   development prior to approval to ensure that it will fall within the
                   capacity of the plant.
         Policy WATER 5.2 Provided that the existing plant capacity is not
                   exceeded, require new large scale development to pay its fair share
                   of the cost of extending sewer service to the site.
         Action
         a.        Require new large scale development to include a funding
                   mechanism for the installation and maintenance of sewer service to
                   the site.
                                            213
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 6: Water                                 May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             214
 Chapter 7. Materials, Solid Waste and Recycling
BACKGROUND
Solid waste collection, recycling services, yard material collection and street sweeping
are provided by Davis Waste Removal, under contract to the City. All non-
recyclable waste generated by the City is disposed at the Yolo County Central
Landfill, in the northeast portion of the Planning Area. The landfill site consists of
770 acres and has remaining capacity for 20 to 30 years, depending on the amount of
garbage received. The landfill currently receives approximately 700 tons per day of
solid waste.
Pursuant to State Assembly Bill 939, all cities and counties in the state had to divert
25 percent of their solid waste from landfills by 1995, and will be required to divert
50 percent by 2000. The City's recycling program has the distinction of being one of
the oldest and most comprehensive in California, with programs for homes,
apartments and businesses. In 1989, the city diverted 18.7 percent of the waste it
generated; in 1990 almost 26 percent; and in 1995 over 37 percent. Materials
recycled include mixed paper, corrugated cardboard, glass, aluminum and steel cans,
some kinds of plastic and yard material. Used motor oil and some scrap metals are
also accepted at Davis Waste Removal. Household hazardous wastes may be turned
in at periodic collection events. Eligible businesses can participate in a small
quantity generator program for hazardous waste disposal at reduced costs.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GOAL MAT 1. Enhance the quality of the environment by conserving
resources and minimizing waste by reducing, reusing, recycling, and re-
buying.
         Policy MAT 1.1 Promote reduced consumption of non-renewable
                  resources.
         Standards
         a.       Coordinate with Yolo County Central Landfill to encourage the
                  reuse of materials deposited at the land fill.
         b.       Encourage reuse of refillable bottles.
                                           215
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 7: Materials, Solid Waste and Recycling           May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          c.         Continue to support the city-wide recycling system including service
                     to apartments and businesses, and strive for annual reductions in
                     commercial and industrial waste disposal.
          d.         Provide attractive well-designed trash receptacles with provision for
                     recyclable materials in appropriate areas in public areas.
          e.         Implement State laws on solid waste reduction and recycling.
                     Where feasible take action to further recycling efforts that are not
                     included in state law.
          f.         Encourage the development of businesses which buy and sell re-
                     used materials, including a materials exchange center.
          g.         Revise yard waste collection policies so that lawn clippings are no
                     longer placed in plastic bags.
          h.         Continue to implement the City-wide recycling/composting
                     program for yard debris and plant materials.
          i.         Encourage and support recycling awareness with city information
                     and activity days.
          j.         Support a school curriculum on waste, waste reduction and
                     recycling.
          k.         Encourage the continuation of field trips to the DWR recycling
                     center.
          l.         Encourage the School District to support recycling at school sites
                     with easily accessible recycling bins.
          m.         Assist businesses in their waste reduction efforts by conducting
                     waste audits.
          n.         Study the feasibility of expanding the plastic recycling program.
          o.         Study the feasibility of variable can rates for garbage collection.
          p.         Develop a list of stores selling recycled products for distribution to
                     City residents.
          q.         Continue to implement the Source Reduction and Recycling
                     Element and the Household Hazardous Waste Element.
                                                216
Davis General Plan                                    Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007                Chapter 7: Materials, Solid Waste and Recycling
         r.        Purchase recycled products whenever sufficient quantities are readily
                   available and meet City specifications.
         s.        Encourage U.C. Davis and the Davis Joint Unified School District
                   to use recycled products.
GOAL MAT 2. Provide adequate waste disposal capacity for Davis.
         Policy MAT 2.1 Plan for the long-term waste disposal needs of Davis.
         Actions
         a.        Discourage, where feasible, the import of waste materials into the
                   city or county. Work with Yolo County to evaluate the advantages
                   and disadvantages of accepting waste materials from outside of the
                   county at the county land fill.
         b.        Track capacity at existing landfills.
         c.        Coordinate with the County to identify new landfill sites as needed.
         d.        Study the feasibility of creating a joint powers authority for waste
                   disposal.
                                             217
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                           Davis General Plan
Chapter 7: Materials, Solid Waste and Recycling     May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                                                218
 Chapter 8. Computers and Telecommunications
BACKGROUND
In 1990, the Davis City Council created a task force to investigate the use of
advanced telecommunications technologies as a means to reduce traffic
(telecommuting and telework), strengthen existing business and attract potential
high-tech businesses (economic development), and increase citizen participation in
local government (electronic democracy) and improve overall quality of life and
opportunity for all. The final report of the task force recommended that the City
develop a long-term strategic plan for “information infrastructure and services.”
In 1994, building on the work of the task force, the City hired a new Information
Technology Administrator who was charged with developing a long term strategic
plan. In 1996, the City of Davis joined with the Davis Community Network, UC
Davis, the City of West Sacramento, the City of Winters, the City of Woodland, the
County of Yolo, Yolo County Library, Yolo County Superintendent of Schools,
Davis Joint Unified School District, Davis Community Television and other public
and private sector partners in forming the Yolo Area Regional Network (YARN).
YARN serves to promote and coordinate the development of regional information
infrastructure and services in a manner that most fully benefits the residents of the
Yolo County area.
Additional advocates for inclusion of this element in the General Plan included
representatives from the City’s Davis Community Computer Network and
Economic Development task forces and the general public.
Telecommunication infrastructure and services have been identified as important
community resources, which are likely to be as important to the continuing
economic development of the community as basic infrastructure such as water,
sewer and road systems. The recommendations in this chapter represent an
important step in telecommunications planning for the City.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GOAL C&T 1. Encourage development of infrastructure and service to allow
all who live, work and study in Davis to utilize new technologies to
                                          219

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 8: Computers and Telecommunications           May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
communicate with individuals and institutions locally, regionally, nationally
and globally.
          Policy C&T 1.1 Implement a program of technology, planning, installation
                  and education.
          Standards
          a.      New residential and commercial development projects should
                  include the infrastructure components necessary to support modern
                  communication technologies such as conduit space within joint
                  utility trenches for future high speed data equipment and flexible
                  telephone conduit to allow for easy retrofit for high speed data
                  systems.
           b.     Davis should develop a telecommunications infrastructure that is
                  not dependent on any single medium, but incorporates a variety of
                  media such as wireless and fiber optics as appropriate.
          Actions
          c.      Designate a formal Technology Coordination function within the
                  City of Davis staff to oversee community-wide information
                  technology development.
          d.      Train City staff, appointed officials and elected officials in the use of
                  electronic communications tools, applications, and modern
                  information technologies.
          e.      Provide public access computer terminals at convenient sites
                  throughout the city, including non-City sites such as the library, as
                  well as City-owned sites.
          f.      Monitor information technology development and city
                  infrastructure issues (both planning and enforcement) at the same
                  level as current monitoring of other building and construction
                  standards.
          g.      Promote Davis and the Davis Community Network (DCN) as a site
                  for research and development of new communications technologies
                  and as a testing ground for pilot projects exploring and applying
                  innovative communication services.
                                             220
Davis General Plan                                    Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007              Chapter 8: Computers and Telecommunications
         h.        Work with other agencies, such as the County of Yolo and
                   neighboring cities, to integrate telecommunication infrastructure
                   planning on a regional basis.
         i.        Use city right of way as a resource to foster development of a
                   "public utility" telecommunications networking infrastructure to
                   provide high-speed networking throughout the community, and to
                   make the community attractive to information-based businesses.
         j.        Review any proposed city construction projects involving trenching
                   for opportunities to extend the networking infrastructure.
         k.        Investigate ways to increase telecommuting possibilities for all
                   residents, including those with low and moderate incomes and
                   diverse cultural needs.
         Policy C&T 1.2 Make information regarding city government and decision-
                   making, local services and opportunities to participate in city
                   governance available to Davis citizens in electronic form.
         Actions
         a.        Make appropriate City documents and information regarding City
                   services available for immediate retrieval by means of electronic
                   access and transfer technologies.
         b.        Take a proactive role in working with other community and
                   governmental agencies on behalf of Davis citizens to encourage
                   providing public information on-line.
         c.        Provide computer access points, training and print capability to low
                   income and access-limited residents at service sites, City Hall,
                   libraries, the senior center and other public sites.
         d.        Establish e-mail addresses for all elected and appointed city officials
                   and city agencies.
         e.        Use electronic communication in citizen input procedures such as
                   electronic mail, websites and news groups.
         f.        Develop procedures to allow electronic mail and other
                   electronically-submitted documents to be accorded the same status
                                             221
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 8: Computers and Telecommunications          May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                  as written materials, except in those cases in which written
                  documents are specifically required by law.
          g.      Work with other agencies and organizations to modify the Brown
                  Public Meeting Act to promote the development and
                  implementation of law and policy that allows open, public electronic
                  discussion and serial electronic communication.
          Policy C&T 1.3 Encourage educational opportunities regarding science,
                  computers and technology for Davis residents.
          Actions
          a.      Evaluate grant opportunities for defense and military worker
                  retraining, and work with the local educational institutions,
                  nonprofit organizations and private sector and businesses to pursue
                  such funding opportunities.
          b.      Support the creation of culture/science awareness days or events.
          c.      Assist and encourage the display of science & technology projects in
                  publicly accessible spaces.
GOAL C&T 2. Pursue telecommunications as a means to reduce
transportation impacts that can improve air quality and personal convenience
and reduce dependency on non-renewable resources.
          Policy C&T 2.1 Encourage telecommuting for the City government and
                  the community.
          Actions
          a.      When appropriate, provide connectivity services, training and
                  portable computing equipment to City staff who wish to
                  telecommute.
          Policy C&T 2.2 Encourage major employers in the City to allow
                  telecommuting.
                                             222
Davis General Plan                                    Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007             Chapter 8: Computers and Telecommunications
         Standards
         a.        Employers who aggressively and effectively implement
                   telecommuting are eligible to receive appropriate incentives such as
                   reduction of parking requirements.
         Actions
         b.        Work with the local Transportation Management Agency to
                   encourage use of telecommuting and alternate forms of
                   transportation (rideshare, public transit).
         c.        Encourage the State Department of Personnel Administration to
                   give appropriate recognition and encouragement to telecommuting
                   in collective bargaining policies.
GOAL C&T 3. Develop an awareness that Davis is a city that understands
and supports high technology communications.
         Policy C&T 3.1 Convey through the City's promotional documents that
                   the city government and community understand and use modern
                   communication technologies.
         Actions
         a.        Refer to current innovative technology projects in print publications
                   and online.
         b.        Use electronic media in city publications and communications.
                                             223
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 8: Computers and Telecommunications      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             224
    Chapter 9. Parks, Recreation and Open Space
BACKGROUND
Existing Park, Open Space and Recreation Facilities and Programs
According to the Davis Parks and Recreation Facilities Master Plan (approved by the City
Council in December, 1998), Davis has more than 30 parks and recreation facilities,
which include 9 mini-parks, 18 neighborhood parks, 6 community parks, the golf
course, Central Park and two playing field facilities. Existing open space resources
consist of wildlife habitat areas in the County, neighborhood greenbelts, drainage
ponds and channels in the City, and various open spaces on the UC Davis campus.
Figure 30 shows the location of existing parks and schools, while Figure 31 shows
Davis’ open space system. Table 13 shows the acreages of existing and proposed
parks and recreation facilities.
Parks provide facilities for athletic, community and arts events. These facilities
include amphitheaters, softball diamonds, a golf course, and BBQ grills and picnic
areas which can accommodate groups as large as 300 people. Play equipment and
“Tot Lots” are located in almost every City park, and four community aquatic
facilities are also maintained by the City.
The Parks and General Services, and Community Services Departments also
provides or facilitates a variety of activities and programs which serve the needs of
citizens of all ages in the city. Child care services include child care referrals,
provider assistance, and parenting information and workshops. Programs for youth
include dance, gymnastics and martial arts instruction, and activities such as
basketball and ultimate frisbee leagues. Adult programs also include organized
sports leagues, as well as fitness and dance instruction, and workshops which
address issues such as parent-teen relationships. Senior citizens may participate in a
variety of arts, exercise and sports activities at the City’s Senior Center, or may
choose to make use of City-supported legal, medical, and financial counseling or
workshops.
Table 14 shows the existing ratio of parkland and open space per 1,000 persons. As
shown in this table, the City is currently short of parkland in three planning
categories.
                                             225

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                       May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Policy Background
In 1988, a concept called the Davis Greenway was proposed to link all parks and
urban and rural open space areas with a network of Greenbelts, Greenstreets and
trail corridors (Mark Francis, Stan Jones and Kerry Dawson, "The Davis Greenway
Plan," UC Davis Center for Design Research, 1987). This concept, together with
park area and siting standards and land conservation concepts, formed the basis for
the 1990 General Plan Open Space Element (OSE). Many of the concepts in the
1990 OSE are retained in this General Plan, particularly with regard to conservation
of land and creation of a network of linked parks and open spaces. Over the last ten
years, the City has made progress on a number of these concepts such as
neighborhood greenbelts and habitat enhancement areas.
Many of the concepts and policies contained in the 1990 OSE are woven into other
chapters of this General Plan besides this one. Other relevant chapters include
Chapter 1 (Land Use and Growth Management), Chapter 2 (Mobility), Chapter 3
(Urban Design and Neighborhood Preservation), Chapter 14 (Habitat and Natural
Areas), Chapter 15 (Agriculture, Soils and Minerals), Chapter 19 (Hazards) and
Section VIII (Plan Implementation).
TYPES AND STANDARDS FOR
PARKS, OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION PROGRAMS
Parks
The City's parks, open space and recreation system shall include the following types
of parks. Figure 30 shows the locations of existing and planned parks.
Table 14 shows the City's goals for acres of parkland per 1,000 residents. The City
will attempt to meet these goals in future park planning.
Community Parks should be a minimum of 15 net acres; 25 net acres is the
preferred size. They are designed and maintained to meet the needs of the entire
Davis community, and to meet specialized needs. Amenities may include regulation
facilities for organized individual and team sports, including multi-use turf areas for
field sports such as softball, baseball, and soccer; aquatic facilities for recreation,
fitness and competitive water sports; and tennis courts. Natural/landscaped areas
and facilities for city-wide use such as community centers, amphitheaters, or
gymnasiums may also be included. Outdoor lighting, when included, should be
designed for minimum interference with adjacent residences. Accessible public
phones, adequate restrooms, storage rooms, group picnic areas, and children's
playgrounds are required. Community parks should be located on arterial or
collector streets, and have at least two major street frontages. Adequate off-street
parking shall be provided. There should be a community park within 1½ miles of all
                                             226

Davis General Plan                                   Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                          Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
dwelling units. Park location and design should minimize impacts to surrounding
land uses.
Neighborhood Parks should be a minimum of five net acres. They are designed
and maintained primarily to meet the needs of the neighborhood. Amenities may
include children playgrounds, picnic facilities, natural/landscaped areas, and multi-
use open fields. All neighborhood parks should have accessible restrooms and public
phones. There should be a neighborhood park within 3/8 mile of all dwelling units.
Mini Parks are less than five acres. They are designed and maintained to provide
recreation and aesthetic benefit, primarily in areas of high population density or
commercial areas with high pedestrian use. Amenities may include children's
playgrounds, plazas, turf, picnic areas, and special features.
Other Parks are not defined by size. They are designed and maintained in response
to specific needs or desires for specialized facilities or landscapes. At this time, the
Other Parks category includes the existing Central Park. Future active parks and
recreation areas, athletic fields, regional park or some other facilities, could also be
included.
Central Park is a 5-acre park located in the Core Area. It acts as the social and
recreational heart of the City. It includes a fountain, a tot lot, a play lot, a picnic area,
a carousel, a teen center, the Hattie Weber Museum and the site of the bi-weekly
Farmers' Market.
Special Use Parks are not defined by size. They are designed and maintained to
meet designated community needs. Park amenities may be specialized. Park location
and design should minimize impacts to surrounding land uses. The City currently
has three special use parks: the municipal golf course, the Civic Center Fields and
Little League Park.
Open Space
Open space is a general category that includes all undeveloped land whose fee title
or development rights are owned by the City, another public agency, or an open
space trust or organization, and which is set aside for passive recreation, habitat
preservation, buffering of the City from surrounding uses, and/or agriculture (see
Figure 31a, Open Space and Figure 31 b, Open Space City Area Enlargement).
Open space also includes agricultural lands whose fee title or development rights are
privately owned when such private land is contained within the Urban Agricultural
Transition Area (UATA). Some examples of open space include the UATA (which
could be publicly or privately owned), lands secured through the Farmland
Preservation Ordinance, and the South Fork Preserve. As of 1999, the City has
secured ownership or conservation easements on nearly 2,500 acres within the
Planning Area.
                                             227
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
The land within one mile of the landfill and sewage treatment facilities is designated
“Open Space for Public Health and Safety.” The intent is that residential
development is prohibited within this area due to public health concerns including
vectors and odors. In addition, this area poses a hazard to aircraft because of the
large number of birds that congregate in the vicinity of the landfill.
Historically, there have not been quantified objectives for city open space provision
and this General Plan does not include quantified open space objectives. Despite
the lack of such objectives, substantial progress has been made in providing open
space, as presented graphically in Figures 31a and b. Examples include the
combined use of drainage facilities as habitat areas; the promotion of native
vegetation and integrated pest management in urban landscaping; the Davis
Wetlands and South Fork Preserve projects; the farmland preservation ordinance;
and the neighborhood greenbelt network. Support of other efforts, such as the Yolo
Basin Wildlife Area, is also reflective of the progress.
Neighborhood Greenbelts are linear parcels inside of development areas that are
undeveloped and landscaped, and which are used for recreation and non-motorized
transportation.
Recreation Programs
A broad range of recreation programs and facilities should be provided to meet the
needs of all city residents. City recreation programs should emphasize programs that
are not offered by local organizations or the private sector.
                                             228

Davis General Plan                                Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                       Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
                                       Table 13
                       EXISTING AND PLANNED PARKS
                                              Existing       Planned         Total Future
 Type of Park/Recreation Area                 Acreage        Additions         Acreage
 COMMUNITY PARKS
       Arroyo                                        3.5           12.0                 15.5
       Community                                    28.0             0.0                28.0
       Mace Ranch                                    5.0            19.0                24.0
       Playfields                                   16.5             0.0                16.5
       Walnut                                        3.5            12.5                16.0
 Sub-Total                                          56.5            43.5              100.0
 NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS
       Chestnut                                      6.1             0.0                 6.1
       Covell                                        5.2             0.0                 5.2
       La Playa                                      5.0             0.0                 5.0
       Northstar                                    13.5             0.0                13.5
       Oak Grove                                     2.5             0.0                 2.5
       Oxford Circle                                 3.9             0.0                 3.9
       Pioneer                                       5.8             0.0                 5.8
       Redwood                                       3.4             0.0                 3.4
       Slide Hill                                   12.0             0.0                12.0
       Sycamore                                      5.5             0.0                 5.5
       West Manor                                    4.0             0.0                 4.0
       Westwood                                      5.8             0.0                 5.8
       Willow Creek                                  5.0             0.0                 5.0
       Mace Ranch                                    6.9             0.0                 6.9
       Sandy Motley                                  0.0             5.0                 5.0
       Robert Arneson                                0.0             5.0                 5.0
 Sub-Total                                          84.6            10.0                94.6
                                         229
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                       May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                                 Existing      Planned      Total Future
  Type of Park/Recreation Area                   Acreage      Additions       Acreage
  MINIPARKS
        Cedar (K Street)                                0.6           0.0               0.6
        College                                         0.9           0.0               0.9
        Hacienda                                        1.0           0.0               1.0
        N Street                                        0.2           0.0               0.2
        Northstar                                       1.0           0.0               1.0
        Putah Creek                                     1.8           0.0               1.8
        Village                                         0.8           0.0               0.8
        Whaleback                                       1.5           0.0               1.5
        Wildhorse                                       0.0           1.0               1.0
  Sub-Total                                             7.8           1.0               8.8
  OTHER PARKS
        Central Park                                    5.8           0.0               5.8
  Sub-Total                                             5.8           0.0               5.8
  SPECIAL USE PARKS
        Davis Municipal Golf Course                    80.0          25.0            105.0
        Civic Center Fields                             4.0           0.0               4.0
        Little League Park                              4.0           0.0               4.0
  Sub-Total                                            88.0          25.0            113.0
  STUDY AREAS
        Central Landfill Site                           0.0          68.0             68.0
        Golf Course Expansion                           0.0        148.8             148.8
   Sub-Total                                            0.0        216.8             216.8
  TOTAL                                               242.7        296.3             539.0
                                             230
Davis General Plan                         Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
                                                                                  ____
                                       231
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             232
Davis General Plan                         Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
                                                                                  ____
                                       233
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             234
Davis General Plan                         Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
                                                                                  ____
                                       235
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             236
Davis General Plan                                                 Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                          Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
                                                   Table 14
                          PARK ACREAGE PER 1,000 PERSONS
                                              1995                           Future
                                                                                                          Acres
                                             Ratio           Future          Ratio       Standard
                                                                                                         Needed
                               1995         (Acres/          (2010)         (Acres/       (Acres/
                                                                                                            to
                               Park          1,000            Park           1,000         1,000
                                                                                                         Achieve
       Park Type             Acreage        Persons)        Acreage        Persons)      Persons)
                                                                                                         Standard
  Assumed
  Population                       1995: 52,200                 2010: 62,182***
  STANDARD RECREATION
      Community                 56.5           1.1           100.0             1.6           1.8           12.0
      Parks
      Neighborhood              77.7           1.5            94.6             1.5           1.8           17.4
      Parks
      Mini Parks                7.8            0.2             8.8             0.1           0.2            3.6
      Other Parks *             5.8            0.1             5.8             0.1           1.2           68.8
  Sub-Total                    147.8           2.8           209.2             3.4           5.0           101.7
  SPECIAL USE
      Special Use               88.0           1.7           329.8             5.3         None            N/A
      Parks, Study
      Areas (see
      Table 13)
      Greenbelts               151.8           2.9            151.8**          2.4         None            N/A
  Sub-Total                    239.8           4.5           481.6             7.7         None            N/A
  TOTAL                        387.6           7.4           690.8            11.1         N/A             N/A
Note: Some numbers do not sum due to rounding.
*     This category includes the existing Central Park (5.8 acres) and other future active parks and
      recreation areas, including the possibility of athletic fields, regional park or other facilities.
**    No projection for greenbelts is available. This does not necessarily mean that new greenbelts will not
      be developed.
***   The 2010 population projection is based on land use determinations by City Council in the General
      Plan update. A population assumption of 64,300 was used in the Final Park and Recreation Facilities
      Master Plan approved by City Council on December 9, 1998.
                                                      237
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                          May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GOAL POS 1. Provide ample, diverse, safe, affordable and accessible parks,
open spaces and recreation facilities and programs to meet the current and
future needs of Davis' various age and interest groups and to promote a sense
of community, pride, family and cross-age interaction.
          Policy POS 1.1 Use systematic and comprehensive planning to guide the
                    development, operation and allocation of resources for all City
                    parks, facilities, and recreation programs.
          Actions
          a.        Emphasize joint planning and cooperation with all public agencies
                    as the preferred approach to meeting the parks, open space and
                    program needs of Davis residents.
          b.        Develop and implement a parks and recreation facilities master plan.
          c.        Establish design guidelines for the physical development of parks
                    and open space areas.
          d.        Develop standards for night-time activities and facility uses in parks
                    and recreation areas.
          e.        Seek a variety of sources to establish multi-sport facilities to meet
                    citywide needs. Study potential sites located within the City and
                    near the City to accommodate the needs.
          Policy POS 1.2 Provide informal areas for people of all ages to interact
                    with natural landscapes, and preserve open space between urban and
                    agricultural uses to provide a physical and visual edge to the City.
          Standards
          a.        The City's park and open space system shall include opportunities
                    for active and passive recreation.
          Actions
          b.        Develop some form of managed public access within all open space
                    areas under the City's maintenance responsibility . Plan for public
                    access only with the permission of the private landowner in Natural
                    Habitat Areas and conservation easement lands which are not
                    owned in fee by the City or other public entity.
                                               238
Davis General Plan                                     Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                            Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
         c.        Work with Yolo County to develop a public campground within the
                   Davis planning area to provide a rustic alternative to hotels and
                   motels for short-term overnight accommodations.
         d.        Incorporate existing habitat areas, including Putah Creek, Dry
                   Slough, and Willow Slough, into the open space network, while
                   maintaining the emphasis on wildlife and habitat preservation in
                   these areas.
         e.        Within urban open space areas, provide habitat elements (e.g.
                   roosting trees, nesting trees, etc.) for birds, such as songbirds,
                   hawks, owls, and for other wildlife as appropriate.
         f.        Develop criteria regarding the types of locations where the City
                   would like to establish new resource preservation, education and
                   recreation areas and programs.
         g.        Establish criteria for location and design of natural habitat areas
                   accessible to the public, including criteria for natural habitat areas
                   that can complement and accommodate other open space uses such
                   as viable wildlife habitat.
         h.        Set policies and criteria for the establishment of trails and picnic
                   areas in natural open space areas.
         Policy POS 1.3 Involve individuals and citizen groups reflecting a cross
                   section of Davis citizens (including youth and adults) in the
                   planning, design and maintenance of parks, recreation facilities and
                   recreation programs.
         Actions
         a.        Maintain a Recreation and Park Commission, appointed by the City
                   Council, to advise the Council on all matters related to parks and
                   recreation.
         b.        Appoint neighborhood park planning committees, which include
                   neighborhood representatives, city-wide user representatives, and
                   representatives from other ad-hoc groups, to help plan and design
                   neighborhood parks and other facilities.
         c.        Summarize the parks and recreation facilities master plan and
                   distribute it widely.
                                              239
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                           May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          d.        Conduct a survey or other formal process to solicit community
                    input on existing and planned recreation programs at least once
                    every five years.
          e.        Develop methods to include children in planning for local parks.
          f.        Where possible, include Davis residents, especially youths, in the
                    construction of park and recreation sites.
          g.        Involve citizens, especially youths, in maintaining park areas through
                    participation in park watches, citizen based graffiti watch and
                    cleanup and repair.
          Policy POS 1.4 Make all parks, greenbelts, open space areas and recreation
                    facilities attractive, safe and easy to maintain.
          Standards
          a.        Park design and planning should incorporate short- and long-
                    distance views as appropriate.
          b.        Wherever possible, new parks should include natural habitat and
                    other “unimproved” areas.
          c.        Parks, greenbelts and recreation facilities should be designed to
                    eliminate hidden and difficult-access areas where security problems
                    would be likely to occur.
          d.        Parks, greenbelts, open space areas and recreation facilities should
                    allow emergency and police vehicles access for routine patrol or
                    medical response.
          e.        Children's play areas and other appropriate park areas should have
                    adequate shade and wind protection provided through landscaping
                    and constructed elements.
          f.        The park system should include multi-functional spaces and facilities
                    to provide for cultural events.
          g.        New parks should be designed and located to minimize noise and
                    activity conflicts with residential areas.
          h.         Open space in rural areas, intended for public access, should be
                    acquired in large blocks in order to maximize management
                    advantages, although linear corridor open space goals also apply to
                    the acquisition of open space areas.
                                                 240

Davis General Plan                                     Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                            Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
         Actions
         i.        Include art features designed by local artists in parks where possible.
         j.        Require the review of all projects constructed as part of the Davis
                   open space system by appropriate City departments to ensure that
                   public safety concerns are met.
         Policy POS 1.5 Attempt to provide all city residents with convenient access
                   to parks and recreation programs and facilities.
         Standards
         a.        Parks, recreation facilities and open space areas should be located
                   to be easily accessible by various transportation modes including car,
                   bus, and bicycle.
         b.        Recreation programs and access to facilities should be provided at
                   reasonable costs.
         Policy POS 1.6 Develop golf courses in Davis only as appropriate to meet
                   local residents’ needs.
         Standards
         a.        Future golf courses shall be limited to the proposed municipal
                   expansion and the Wildhorse project.
         b.        All future golf course projects should be designed, constructed and
                   maintained with environmental sensitivity. Golf course projects
                   shall include such measures as:
                    •   provision of a buffer between urban development and
                         ecologically sensitive areas; preservation of the site’s unique
                         features;
                    •   avoidance and/or mitigation of wildlife impacts;
                    •   maintenance of corridors for wildlife movement and promotion
                         of wildlife habitat;
                    •   minimization of tree loss and use of turf areas;
                    •   use of native plants and plants with low water requirements;
                    •   avoidance and/or minimization of the need for chemicals;
                    •   multi-functional use of water features as wetlands, habitat and
                         stormwater drainage; and
                                              241

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                         May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                     •   use of efficient irrigation methods and practices.
          c.        Golf courses shall not be credited as required park dedication land
                    or greenbelts.
          Policy POS 1.7 Use all available mechanisms for preservation of open
                    space.
          Actions
          a.        Use regulatory means to the extent feasible to preserve targeted
                    open space areas within the City’s jurisdiction.
          b.        Identify additional funding sources for implementation of identified
                    open space preservation projects.
          c.        Analyze lands adjacent to the Yolo Bypass, an important site on the
                    Pacific Flyway for migratory waterfowl and other bird species, for
                    the preservation and restoration of wildlife habitat and wetlands
                    while maintaining compatible agriculture.
          d.        Develop an open space acquisition plan utilizing a geographic
                    information system for a scientific-based analysis of open space
                    lands. The plan will be used to set land acquisition priorities and
                    evaluate priorities. This plan shall also provide guidance on the
                    restoration, maintenance and monitoring of open space acquired by
                    the City. This plan should also include a policy regarding the process
                    and timeline as to when adjacent land owners will be made aware of
                    the fact that the City is pursuing a project (acquisition or
                    development) next to them.
          e.        Pursue open space acquisitions only where a willing seller is
                    available. Open space may be acquired as part of a new urban
                    development by a willing provider (not a willing seller in this case).
          f.        Utilize revenues generated for the acquisition (fee title or easement)
                    maintenance, and improvement of open space lands that are
                    managed for the natural resource values of agricultural productivity
                    and / or habitat. Funding from this source may also be used, where
                    appropriate, to provide for public access and nature activities that
                    complement and are compatible with, and do not negatively affect,
                    the open space value of a property. The funds from this measure
                    shall not be used for the acquisition, operations, maintenance or
                    improvement of lands for use as active sports facilities, golf courses,
                                               242

Davis General Plan                                    Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                           Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
                   neighborhood greenbelts or other intensive uses not related to
                   natural resource values of the land.
         Policy POS 1.8 Support regional and state-wide efforts that encourage
                   open space preservation.
         Actions
         a.        Seek coordination of open space goals in the Davis General Plan
                   with UC Davis; neighboring cities including Woodland, Winters,
                   Dixon and West Sacramento; and with Yolo, Sacramento and
                   Solano Counties and the Yolo County Habitat Conservation
                   Program.
         b.        The City of Davis should continue and expand programs with the
                   cities of Woodland and Dixon and the counties of Yolo and Solano
                   to establish permanent agricultural and open space areas that buffer
                   communities from continuous urbanization and promote efficient
                   growth patterns. The City should focus its efforts to establish
                   Community Separators on lands subject to the highest development
                   pressures. Lands facing high development pressures generally
                   include, but are not limited to, areas adjacent to existing urban
                   development and freeway interchanges.
         c.        Support tax and economic incentives that enhance the economic
                   competitiveness of agriculture and foster wildlife habitat restoration.
         d.        Encourage voluntary restriction of development through dedication
                   of conservation easements in addition to required agricultural
                   mitigation.
         e.        Support activities of non-profit land trusts and conservation
                   organizations in acquiring development rights to open-space lands
                   by gift or purchase of easements or fee simple.
GOAL POS 2. Develop an Urban Agricultural Transition Area around Davis,
as shown on the Land Use Map in the Land Use and Growth Management
Chapter and according to the concepts illustrated in Figure 32.
         Policy POS 2.1 Develop the Urban Agricultural Transition Area to have
                   segments which vary in overall size and configuration, level of
                   development, and type of intended activity.
                                             243
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                        May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Standards
          a.        Property lines should be followed where feasible when establishing
                    the boundaries of Transition Areas.
          b.        Transition Areas that harbor special status species should include
                    landscaping and use restrictions that support these species.
          c.        Individual areas preserved as Urban Agricultural Transition Area
                    should be linked to each other wherever possible.
                                             244
Davis General Plan                          Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                 Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
                 Figure 32: Urban Agricultural Transition Area
                                       245
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                       Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
GOAL POS 3. Identify and develop linkages, corridors and other connectors
to provide an aesthetically pleasing and functional network of parks, open
space areas, greenbelts and bike paths throughout the City.
          Policy POS 3.1 Require creation of neighborhood greenbelts by project
                    developers in all residential projects, in accordance with Policy LU
                    A.5.
          Standards
          a.        Ten percent of the area in new residential development areas shall
                    be greenbelt. The City may find developments to be in
                    conformance with this requirement if they provide dedicated open
                    space in keeping with Standard POS 6.2a, or in-lieu fees to be used
                    for greenbelt acquisition or improvement.
                    See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Residential
                    Density Yields and Neighborhood Greenbelts".
          b.        New residential development areas should be oriented around the
                    greenbelt system.
          c.        The location and design of greenbelts may be used to provide a
                    buffer between disparate land uses.
          d.        Greenbelts should serve as a visually unifying landscape element.
          e.        Greenbelts should provide view corridors to points of orientation
                    throughout the City; both for local, short range views to local
                    landmarks, and long range views such as views to the Vaca Hills,
                    Sutter Buttes and Sierra Nevada range.
          f.        Greenbelts should be sited where feasible and appropriate to
                    incorporate existing riparian or other wildlife or botanical habitat
                    areas.
          g.        Greenbelts should be located and designed to accommodate the
                    management of stormwater drainage.
          h.        Greenbelts should vary from a minimum width of 35 feet to an
                    average width of 100 feet.
          i.        Some areas in greenbelts should be located in close proximity to the
                    highest density residential development in an area, when possible.
          j.        Provide convenient greenbelt access points in all new development.
                                                246
Davis General Plan                                     Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                            Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
         k.        New greenbelt links should be created in places where access to the
                   existing greenbelt/bikeway system is currently lacking.
         l.        Greenbelt requirements should be calculated separately from park
                   acreage dedication or in-lieu fee payment requirements that are
                   specifically authorized by the Quimby Act (Gov. Code 66477).
         m.        Up to 20 percent of a project’s greenbelt requirements may be used
                   towards increasing the size of parks or other open-space within a
                   development.
         Actions
         n.        Develop, adopt and enforce greenbelt design guidelines for new
                   subdivisions.
         o.        Allow flexibility in design of greenbelt/park/open space areas
                   within new development as long as non-auto, internal circulation
                   corridors (for school children, bicycles, pedestrians, etc) are
                   provided and the overall dedication requirement for greenbelt and
                   park facilities is met.
         p.        Encourage provision of open space in excess of minimum
                   neighborhood greenbelt and open space requirements through
                   regulatory concessions.
         Policy POS 3.2 Develop a system of greenbelts and accessways in new
                   non-residential development areas.
         Actions
         a.        Establish standards for greenbelts and accessways in non-residential
                   areas, with bicycle access as the key design goal.
         Policy POS 3.3 Implement specific projects to augment the existing
                   greenbelt/open space system.
         Actions
         a.         Develop, maintain and improve a trail, and or other greenbelt type
                   amenities, if possible, in the corridor of the railroad right-of-way/F
                   Street/H Street, with design flexibility to provide habitat. The goal
                   of this project is to connect the Northstar Pond area to the
                   downtown core area.
                                              247

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                  Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                          May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          b.        Develop, maintain and improve a trail, and other greenbelt type
                    amenities, if possible, in the Second Street/I-80 Corridor.
                    See also Policy MOB 3.5 for additional specific projects.
GOAL POS 4. Distribute parks, open spaces and recreation programs and
facilities throughout the City.
          Policy POS 4.1 Preserve existing parks, greenbelts and open space areas.
          Standards
          a.        All feasible alternatives shall be considered prior to converting
                    parkland to other uses.
          b.        The City shall preserve current ratios of open space to developed
                    space within Central and Community Parks.
          Policy POS 4.2 Construct new parks and recreation facilities.
          Standards
          a.        The equitable location of school sites, greenbelts, bike paths and
                    open spaces throughout the community shall be considered in
                    prioritizing construction of new parks.
          b.        All new shopping centers, research, business or industrial parks, and
                    apartment complexes should include open areas to serve as
                    mini/pocket-parks that may include picnic tables, shade and
                    recreation amenities.
          c.        Each new neighborhood park should be located near the center of
                    the neighborhood that it will serve.
          Actions
          d.        Develop and follow a prioritized list of planned parks in the parks
                    and recreation facilities Master Plan.
          e.        Study potential development of new parks focusing on underutilized
                    land or existing City-owned land with attention given to the
                    potential impacts on wildlife and other resources.
          f.        Acquire and develop park land to meet the standards for
                    neighborhood and community parks outlined above, with the
                                               248
Davis General Plan                                   Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                          Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
                   highest priority for park development in those areas that do not
                   currently meet the distance-from-dwelling standard.
         g.        Seek a variety of sources to establish multi-sport facilities to meet
                   city-wide needs.
          Policy POS 4.3 Hold City recreation programs in locations allowing the
                   greatest possible access by members of the community.
         Standards
         a.        Recreation programs held at multiple sites (i.e. Rainbow Summer,
                   swimming lessons) should be dispersed in geographically balanced
                   locations whenever possible.
         b.        Recreation programs that are offered at only one site should be
                   located to be accessible by mass transit and bike as well as private
                   vehicle.
GOAL POS 5. Respect natural habitat areas and agricultural land in planning
and maintaining the City's park system.
         Policy POS 5.1 Protect and retain wildlife habitat, agricultural land and
                   open space when planning and maintaining City park lands.
         Standards
         a.        Existing natural habitat and other “unimproved” areas should be
                   protected and preserved within parks, in keeping with the master
                   plan approved for each park.
         b.        An agricultural buffer should be provided between publicly-
                   accessible parks/open spaces bordering agricultural lands.
GOAL POS 6. Encourage local organizations, the Davis Joint Unified School
District, UC Davis, and the private sector to provide, develop and maintain
needed parks, open space, recreation facilities, programs, activities and
special events to the greatest extent possible.
         Policy POS 6.1 Give local organizations, the School District, UC Davis,
                   and the private sector opportunities and support for devising and
                   implementing creative solutions for meeting recreation program and
                   facility needs.
                                             249

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                          May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          a.        Encourage local groups to identify recreation facility needs.
          b.        Cooperate with local groups in the planning and construction of
                    recreation facilities (models include Rainbow City and the
                    Community Pool building in Community Park).
          c.        Work with coalitions of sports organizations to define mutually
                    compatible facility needs and mechanisms for the development,
                    construction, operation and maintenance of these facilities.
          d.        Develop and maintain joint use recreation facilities with the School
                    District.
          e.        Coordinate open space, recreation and child care programs and
                    facilities with other City or school district programs.
          f.        Encourage and support the development and maintenance of
                    recreation and park facilities by the private sector.
          g.        Assist private non-profit organizations that provide appropriate and
                    needed recreation programs and services to Davis residents in
                    meeting their facility needs.
          h.        Investigate and evaluate the potential savings of using private
                    contractors in the operation and maintenance of recreation facilities.
          i.        Investigate the feasibility of establishing a non-profit foundation to
                    seek and receive funds for the support of Parks and Recreation
                    programs and facilities.
           j.       Seek funding for specific programs and facilities from all appropriate
                    outside sources.
          Policy POS 6.2 Require dedication of land and/or payment of an in-lieu
                    fee for park and recreational purposes as a condition of approval for
                    subdivisions, as allowed by the Quimby Act (Government Code
                    66477).
          Standards
          a.        Land that is not suitable for recreation or wildlife habitat may not be
                    counted toward fulfilling parkland dedication requirements.
                                               250
Davis General Plan                                    Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                           Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space
         Actions
         b.        Continue to require development project impact fees for residential
                   and commercial projects to finance park and recreation projects.
         c.        Revise the subdivision ordinance to include standards that regulate
                   the location and area of private open space that can be credited
                   against a Quimby Act dedication.
GOAL POS 7. Reflect a balance between preservation, education, recreation
and public health and safety in park and open space planning.
         Policy POS 7.1 Proceed with park and open space planning in a balanced
                   fashion, pursuing all the varying and sometimes competing uses of
                   Open Space as opportunities are identified. These competing uses
                   include resource conservation (farm land and groundwater
                   recharge), wildlife and habitat needs, buffering of the agricultural
                   and urban interface, alternative transportation corridors and active
                   and passive recreation uses.
         Actions
         a.        Maintain the Open Space Commission to monitor open space
                   issues and facilitate implementation of open space plans.
         b.        Seek funding from all potential sources for parks and open space.
                   Establish funding for open space separate from urban parks or
                   parks for active recreation.
         c.        Monitor the use of open space areas periodically and adjust
                   management strategies appropriately.
                                             251
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 9: Parks and Open Space                  May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             252
                Chapter 10. Youth and Education
BACKGROUND
Schools
The Davis Joint Unified School District is the major provider of educational services
for the City of Davis. The District covers an area of 126 square miles. The
District's total enrollment is 7,896 students, including special education students in
the 1998/99 school year.
The existing District schools and enrollments in the 1998/99 school year are:
   • Eight elementary schools (Birch Lane, Cesar Chavez, North Davis, Patwin,
      Pioneer, Robert Willett, Valley Oak, and the Fairfield School in the
      unincorporated County area west of Davis), with a total enrollment of 4,050.
      These schools serve grades kindergarten through six. The oldest of these
      facilities was constructed in 1953, while the newest was added in 1992. The
      average size for these elementary school sites is eight acres.
   • Two junior high schools (Ralph Waldo Emerson and Oliver Wendell Holmes),
      with a total enrollment of 1,847. These schools, built in 1979 and 1966, serve
      grades seven through nine. They are located on 26.4 and 19.5 acre sites,
      respectively.
   • One high school (Davis Senior), with an enrollment of 1,631. Built in 1960 on
      a 45.5 acre site, it serves grades ten through twelve. In addition, the Martin
      Luther King Continuation High School in central Davis has an enrollment of
      53.
•     K-12 Independent Study Program with enrollment of 192.
The DJUSD also has an interest in four additional sites in Davis. The District owns
sites in Mace Ranch Park and Oakshade and is prepared to use the sites in the future
as elementary schools if necessary. The District owns the Wildhorse site in North
Davis and the site will be used for interim soccer fields for seven years. The District
owns the “Grande” site in North Davis, although a variety of alternative uses are
under consideration for this site.
The District's policy for desired school size is:
    • Elementary, 600 enrollment and 10 net acres site. Two of the existing seven
       elementary schools meet this size standard.
                                             253

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                            Davis General Plan
Chapter 10: Youth and Education                                 May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
    • Junior high, 1,200 enrollment and 22 net acres site. One of the two junior
        high schools meets this size standard.
    • High school, no existing policy although a 40 net acre site meets the State
        Department of Education standard for 2,000 students. Davis Senior High
        School meets this standard.
Student yield averages for a single family residential unit are 0.26 for elementary;
0.13 for junior high; 0.12 for high school; and 0.51 total. Student yield averages for a
multi-family unit are: 0.08 for elementary; 0.02 for junior high; 0.02 for high school;
and 0.12 total. Yield estimates for new construction are higher than these city-wide
averages. Student yield averages for new construction are 0.69 total for a single
family unit and 0.44 total for a multi-family unit. A multi-family unit targeted
toward low-income families is likely to have a yield factor of 0.80 to 1.40 rather than
the average of 0.35.2
Private schools in Davis are Davis Waldorf School (K-8), St. James School (K-8),
Montesori-Portage Bay (K-3), and Merryhill Country Day School (K-8).
Child Care and Youth Services
Child care in Davis is provided through family day care homes, nursery schools, day
care centers, baby-sitting co-ops, license-exempt child care, and facilities at
elementary and intermediate school sites (grades 4-6) before and after school. Every
elementary and intermediate school has before and after school child care on or near
the school site. In 1993, all of these facilities had a capacity for approximately 1,910
children, excluding part-day preschool programs.
The City of Davis Community Services Department provides the following types of
services for child care: referrals; subsidies for qualifying families; technical assistance
on how to start up and operate a child care program; support services for family day
care providers; parenting workshops and information; a book and toy lending
library; and a bi-monthly newsletter.
The City of Davis also supports services for youth through Community
Development Block Grants. Some of the youth services provided include pediatric
emergency care and dental care through the Community Clinic, child care through
the International House Mother-Child Learning Center, runaway counseling and
emergency housing through the Allied Services for Kids program, and youth and
family counseling through the Yolo Family Services Agency.
2 Davis Joint Unified School District Student Yield Factor Study. Shilts Consultants. April, 1998.
                                                    254

Davis General Plan                                    Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007                            Chapter 10: Youth and Education
GOALS, POLICES AND ACTIONS
GOAL Y&E 1. Ensure that high quality formal and informal learning
opportunities exist for youth and adults.
         Policy Y&E 1.1 Develop and participate in collaborative consortiums that
                   will bring educational and recreational program providers together.
         Actions
         a.        Organize a consortium of educational and recreational program
                   providers and users to provide a forum for assessment of current
                   formal and informal learning opportunities, and planning and
                   possible partnerships for future programs.
         b.        Hold a joint City Council and DJUSD Board annual round-table
                   meeting to allow presentation and general discussion of current
                   statewide and nationwide K-14 and adult, formal and informal,
                   academic and vocational, educational issues and concerns.
         c.        Develop collaborative programming with DJUSD and other
                   educational and recreational program providers that will offer
                   opportunities for quality formal and informal learning for youth and
                   adults, including the interests of those individuals with special needs.
         d.        Cooperate with DJUSD and other educational and recreational
                   program providers in applying for grants and other funding for
                   collaborative programming.
         e.        Support with human and financial resources learning activities in
                   practical and academic areas offered to youth by local libraries,
                   museums, youth groups and learning centers.
         f.        Provide funding assistance as available to local libraries, museums
                   and learning centers for after-school and vacation youth activities.
         g.        Continue to provide information about the formation and
                   maintenance of formally organized clubs for youth.
         h.        Cooperate with UC Davis and DJUSD to develop a mentor system
                   whereby junior high, high school and college students educate
                   younger students.
                                             255
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 10: Youth and Education                          May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
          Policy Y&E 1.2 Provide a supportive environment for diverse forms and
                   styles of learning.
          Actions
          a.       Utilize educational technology and methods in City youth programs
                   that support different styles of learning.
          b.       Continue to provide educational information to parents regarding
                   different styles of learning through child care educational programs.
          c.       Continue to provide inclusive recreation to ensure the participation
                   of individuals with disabilities in city programs.
          d.       Maintain and, if possible, increase the City's competitive fund which
                   annually supports arts activities and increase the fund income so that
                   the types of eligible activities can be increased by allowing a wider
                   range of activities including science events or activities to be eligible
                   for funding.
GOAL Y&E 2. Address social and recreational needs of youth, with an
emphasis on youth experiencing at-risk situations, in energetic, innovative
and caring ways.
          Policy Y&E 2.1 Provide a comprehensive range of services to serve youth
                   with an emphasis on youth experiencing at-risk situations.
          Actions
          a.       Develop a city-wide master plan for delivering youth and family
                   services after-school and over the summers.
          b.       Encourage businesses, agencies and organizations to develop
                   thoughtful and responsive policies and programs that address the
                   unmet needs of youth. Programs could include interest-based clubs,
                   self-care and self reliance courses, drop-in activities, paid employ-
                   ment, and volunteer opportunities such as working with younger
                   children.
          c.       Offer programs at times and places convenient to youth.
          d.       Hire staff for youth programs that is racially and culturally
                   compatible with and recruited from the community served.
                                              256
Davis General Plan                                   Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007                           Chapter 10: Youth and Education
         e.        Provide training in parenting skills that includes concepts such as
                   parents and their children signing a contract that spells out mutual
                   responsibilities and provides guidelines of dress and conduct.
         f.        Provide opportunities for summer youth employment and encour-
                   age the business community to provide additional employment.
         g.        Identify and advertise opportunities for students to work with
                   planners to set up and build parks (e.g., picking out foliage, planting,
                   constructing play sites, etc).
         h.        Continue to integrate work on community projects into the
                   sentencing and diversion of juvenile offenders.
         i.        Continue to offer free or low cost transit passes for preteens to
                   facilitate participation in community activities.
         Policy Y&E 2.2 Involve youth and family members together in recreational
                   and social programs offered by the City.
         Actions
         a.        Involve parents in an individualized Education Plan for Inclusive
                   Recreation participation.
GOAL Y&E 3. Encourage participation by youth in a variety of community
service and public policy activities.
         Policy Y&E 3.1 Bring youth into the process of making and implementing
                   public policy and program decisions.
         a.        Create a Youth Commission comprised primarily of youth to
                   provide City Council guidance on the issues that affect youths.
         b.        Include youth on City commissions and committees, as appropriate.
         c.        Conduct periodic City Council "youth sessions." The sessions
                   should be oriented at both parents and youth to address issues
                   related to youth and spotlight on-going City programs available to
                   youth.
         d.        Develop a program to allow teachers in area schools to bring
                   students into city hall and have council members and City staff visit
                   the classroom.
                                              257
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 10: Youth and Education                        May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
          e.       Establish mini-internships on the City Council staff and key City
                   departments for junior high and high school students.
          f.       With DJUSD, develop a community service curriculum for youths
                   which identifies city-wide service projects to meet community needs,
                   adds a community service requirement for high school graduation
                   and/or forms a community service course that gives high school
                   graduation credit.
          Policy Y&E 3.2 Draw upon youth as a source of innovation and pride.
          Actions
          a.       Encourage Davis businesses to provide window space to advertise
                   school and youth events.
          b.       Involve youth in the planning and set-up of community events.
          c.       Encourage the Farmer's Market to feature an area school club each
                   Saturday (eg. band, choir, cheerleaders, drama, etc.).
GOAL Y&E 4. Recognize and celebrate youth and their accomplishments.
          Policy Y&E 4.1 Recognize and celebrate the accomplishments of youth
                   developed in a wide array of educational settings.
          Actions
          a.       Sponsor a "Youth Awareness (or Appreciation) Day".
          b.       Institute an annual Mayor's Award for Service to Youth in the area
                   of "informal education".
          c.       Publicize the City's educational programs and acknowledge
                   educational achievements in City information brochures prepared
                   for distribution to the community.
GOAL Y&E 5. Promote, encourage and support environmental education
with a special focus on youth involvement.
          Policy Y&E 5.1 Support educational programs that address the role of
                   people in shaping the natural environment and their relationship to
                   the environment.
                                             258
Davis General Plan                                   Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007                           Chapter 10: Youth and Education
         Actions
         a.        Establish an annual City-wide environmental awareness day.
         b.        Support private, non-profit environmental education programs.
         c.        Provide information to schools regarding City environmental impact
                   reports for use in school curriculum.
GOAL Y&E 6. Provide a broad range of vocational and career opportunities
to meet the needs of all Davis residents and to ensure a diverse and
appropriately trained work force.
         Policy Y&E 6.1 Establish a program of vocational and career education.
         Actions
         a.        Work with the School District to continue to offer youth career
                   exploration through the “Shadow” program or similar programs.
         b.        Work with businesses and non-profit entities to create a program to
                   allow community members to explore work in various job locations.
         c.        Continue to work with businesses, non-profit entities, DJUSD and
                   UC Davis to create a vocational training program.
         d.        Make available the resource guide of work exploration experiences,
                   job shadows, and job training mentorship resources available in the
                   community that is prepared by the Yolo County Employment
                   Program.
GOAL Y&E 7. Work with the Davis Joint Unified School District and private
school operators to provide for public schools and educational facilities that
serve as neighborhood focal points and maintain a quality learning and
recreational environment.
         Policy Y&E 7.1 It shall be the policy of the City to integrate public schools
                   physically and functionally as focal points of their surrounding
                   neighborhoods.
                                            259

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 10: Youth and Education                              May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
          Standards
          a.       Annexation proposals, General Plan Amendments, Specific Plans
                   and Master Plans shall identify all existing and planned school sites
                   and reflect General Plan policies regarding school site location and
                   designs.
          Actions
          b.       Continue to review proposed school sites for consistency with the
                   General Plan, and require the reservation or dedication of school
                   sites in proposed projects consistent with the General Plan.
          c.       Continue to forward at the earliest possible stage all development
                   proposals including annexations, General Plan amendments,
                   Specific Plans, pre-zoning or re-zoning to the School District for
                   review and response regarding the impacts of such development on
                   School District facilities, school capacity and potential school sites.
          d.       Consult with the School District during the creation or update of
                   any development proposals including annexations, General Plan
                   amendments, Specific Plans, pre-zoning or re-zoning.
          e.       Develop guidelines for the provision of school sites in new
                   development areas. The guidelines shall include site size,
                   configuration, and location in relation to streets and commercial
                   land uses.
          f.       Urge the DJUSD to consider transportation issues in deciding
                   whether to expand the existing high school or create a second one.
          g.       Develop and maintain joint use recreation facilities with the School
                   District.
GOAL Y&E 8. Plan for the costs of new school facilities when planning for
specific new residential development.
          Policy Y&E 8.1 It shall be the policy of the city to require to the extent
                   legally permissible the full mitigation of school impacts resulting
                   from new residential development within the boundaries of the city.
                   Note: Senate Bill 50 enacted in 1998 affects a local agency’s ability to mitigate
                   school facility impacts above statutory “base” fees and to deny a project based on
                   inadequate school facilities. This law will be subject to interpretation. In any
                   event, an environmental impact report with an alternatives discussion is required
                                                 260

Davis General Plan                                        Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007                                 Chapter 10: Youth and Education
                   where there are significant and unavoidable impacts. In addition, a voluntary
                   mitigation agreement with a developer is a possible solution to a mitigation
                   problem.
         Standards
         a.        Land dedications or reservations for schools shall meet School
                   District guidelines for school site size. Where more than one owner
                   or development project is involved, the City shall, to the extent
                   feasible, impose appropriate conditions and/or require written
                   agreements in order to assure that the requisite school site acreage
                   can and will be assembled to meet facility site requirements.
         b.        General Plan amendments, Specific Plans, pre-zoning or re-zoning
                   shall only be made after the City, following consultation with the
                   School District, determines that provisions for dedication or
                   reservation of school sites are adequate to meet the needs of the
                   School District.
         c.        Any project set forth in any proposed General Plan amendment,
                   specific plan, pre-zoning or re-zoning shall show the location of
                   future school sites to serve such project based upon adopted School
                   District plans and criteria and General Plan criteria. Such a project
                   shall include provisions for adequate funding for site acquisition and
                   facility construction including compliance with any City imposed
                   mitigation measures (subject to further policy level discussion
                   regarding applicability) to the extent legally permissible.
         d.        Future elementary and junior high schools should be:
                   •         Centrally located within or adjacent to residential
                             neighborhoods and within the projected attendance area to
                             minimize walking distances.
                   •         Located to minimize the number of students who would
                             have to cross a major street to reach the school.
                   •         Located with direct access to an existing or planned
                             collector or minor arterial street, as well as to a second road.
                   •         Conveniently and safely accessible to pedestrians and
                             bicyclists.
                                                 261

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 10: Youth and Education                          May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
                   •         Planned adjacent to neighborhood and community parks
                             and designed to promote joint use of appropriate facilities.
          e.       Future high school facilities should be sited though close
                   cooperation of the city and the Davis Joint Unified School District.
          f.       The City shall require the following minimum usable areas for
                   school sites:
                   •         Elementary acres: 10-11 net acres.
                   •         Junior high schools: 22-25 net acres.
                   •         High schools: 40-50 net acres.
                   •         Alternative school facilities: 8 net acres.
                   The larger site sizes are needed when a class size reduction program
                   is implemented. A different acreage may be required if planned
                   student enrollment is smaller or larger than normal. The size of
                   alternative school facilities depends on the program.
          g.       Schools sites should be level and rectangular in shape, with average
                   dimensions of 3 to 5 width to length ratio and a minimum depth of
                   150 feet.
          h.       Development projects shall provide school sites with access to all
                   basic utilities and services in a timely manner.
          i.       To the extent feasible, construction of new residential projects
                   should be phased to match the timing of school construction based
                   on school district standards for new schools. Development should
                   be allowed in only one area of town at a time to facilitate timely
                   provision of school facilities.
          Actions
          j.       Request that the School District report on a regular basis to the City
                   on the status of adequacy of school facilities to be provided for by
                   future annexations, General Plan amendments, Specific Plans, pre-
                   zoning or re-zoning.
          k.       Work jointly with the School District to develop procedures to
                   incorporate school site location and acquisition as part of the
                   planning process for all annexations, General Plan amendments,
                   Specific Plans, pre-zoning or re-zoning.
                                              262

Davis General Plan                                    Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/Amended Through January 2007                            Chapter 10: Youth and Education
         l.        Provide for the dedication or reservation of school sites meeting the
                   standards provided for herein, at the earliest possible stage, in all
                   subdivision and parcel maps or in the alternative, find that other
                   suitable sites are available.
         m.        Establish supplemental mitigation fees or other mitigation measures
                   as requirements of development projects if the City Council
                   determines that such fees or other measures are legally permissible
                   and necessary to meet the facility funding needs of the School
                   District and that other methods of school financing are not
                   adequate. Such determination shall be based on School District
                   supplied data establishing a nexus for such measures.
         n.        Do not issue a building permit until the applicant has complied with
                   all applicable school mitigation measures including the payment of
                   any mitigation fees and has received certification from the School
                   District that such requirement for fees or other measures has been
                   complied with.
GOAL Y&E 9. Construct new public schools to meet the needs of residential
growth.
         Policy Y&E 9.1 It shall be the policy of the City to take all legally
                   permissible steps to ensure the full mitigation of impacts of new
                   development on school facilities.
         Actions
         a.        Require that development projects make provisions for reservation
                   or dedication of school sites meeting School District site standards
                   and construction of new school facilities adequate to meet the
                   facility needs of the School District.
         b.        Require that development projects which include school sites
                   provide the site with access to all basic utilities and services in a
                   timely manner.
         c.        To the extent feasible, phase development consistent with capacity
                   needs of existing and new school facilities.
         d.        Prior to approving a new residential project, make a finding as to the
                   project's impact on school facilities and the measures taken to
                   address the impact.
                                              263
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 10: Youth and Education                         May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
          e.       Cooperate with the School District to the extent authorized by law
                   in establishing school funding mechanisms for new subdivisions and
                   in-fill development to ensure that the impacts of such development
                   on school facilities are fully mitigated.
          f.       Facilitate the coordination of City and School District efforts to
                   monitor the impact on schools of residential development projects,
                   to project developments' effects on school attendance, to use
                   consistent approaches to school impact analysis, and to effectively
                   convey information between the City and the School District.
                                              264
                   Chapter 11. Human Services
BACKGROUND
Health and social services are available from public and private agencies in the Davis
area.
The Davis area is currently served by the existing private Sutter-Davis Hospital near
Highway 113 and Covell Boulevard and the Woodland Memorial Hospital in
Woodland.
Other health services include Davis Urgent Care; Davis Community Clinic; the Yolo
Hospice; Citizens Who Care; Yolo County Medical Health Department; Youth
Outreach; The Mental Health Association of Yolo County; and the Sexual Assault
and Domestic Violence Center.
Social services available to Davis residents through Yolo County Department of
Social Services in Woodland include: Aid to Families With Dependent Children;
Food Stamps; Medi-Cal; General Assistance; Special Circumstances; Information
and Referral; Emergency Response Program; Family Maintenance Program; Family
Reunification Program; Permanent Placement Program; Out-of-Home Care Services
for Adults; In-Home Supportive Services; Protective Services for Adults; Family Day
Care and Foster Family Licensing; Food Stamp Employment and Training; Greater
Avenues to Independence; Welfare Fraud Investigation; Youth and Family Services
(optional program); and Veterans Services (optional program). Other social services
are available through the California State Employment Development Department in
Woodland; the Yolo County Community Partnership Agency in Woodland; and the
Yolo County Housing Authority in Woodland.
The City’s Community Development Block Grant Program also funds social
services in Davis, including health, nutrition, emergency shelter, housing and other
services provided by non-profit organizations such as Davis Community Meals,
Short Term Emergency Aid Committee, Community Housing Opportunities
Corporations and the Sexual Assault and Domestic Violence Center.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
HEALTH
GOAL HS 1. Provide adequate health services to people of all incomes and
all age groups.
                                           265

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 11: Human Services                             May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
          Policy HS 1.1 Promote accessible, available, affordable and acceptable
                 health care programs for all Davis residents.
          Actions
          a.     Participate in regional, statewide and other health promotion and
                 disease prevention activities.
          b.     Apply for and receive a Healthy Cities designation.
          c.     Working with community groups, participate in the Healthy
                 Communities 2000 project.
          d.     Support qualified local applications for Healthy Start funding.
          e.     Assist in the development of local health promotion activities.
          f.     Apply for funding for tobacco use prevention funds for city and
                 community activities.
          g.     Assist in the immunization of all children pre-school age, excluding
                 children at risk of serious illness through immunization.
          h.     Promote accident prevention, health and safety among residents.
          i.     Encourage the University to augment existing health services and to
                 include the Community Clinic as a required clinical rotation in
                 primary care programs.
          j.     As possible, offer City facilities for mobile and temporary health
                 services.
          k.     Formulate co-sponsorships and partnerships to improve
                 transportation to health services.
          l.     Expand and develop new co-sponsored health promotion activities
                 with local health organizations for all age groups.
          m.     Develop partnerships with the school district to assure that health
                 services are provided to students and that health information is
                 included in adult education and ESL programs.
          n.     Work with appropriate groups and organizations to meet unmet
                 needs in the areas of dental services for Davis residents in need,
                                             266
Davis General Plan                                   Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                             Chapter 11: Human Services
                   mental health services for Davis residents in need, and mental health
                   services for children.
         o.        Maintain and expand funding if feasible for crisis intervention and
                   follow-up services to the Davis community.
         Policy HS 1.2 Encourage all businesses to provide health benefits to all
                   employees.
         Actions
         a.        Consider the provision of employee health care and other benefits
                   by businesses as a positive factor when offering incentives in
                   business recruitment efforts.
         Policy HS 1.3 Approach the prevention of violence as a community health
                   problem by promoting a joint effort between human services, law
                   enforcement, the schools, and neighborhood groups.
         Policy HS 1.4 Work to increase safety from guns.
         Actions
         a.        Adopt controls on gun ownership and use to the extent allowed by
                   State and federal law.
         b.        Support zero-tolerance gun and drug policies in city, school and
                   community services programs.
         c.        Support reasonable legislative efforts aimed at tightening gun
                   control legislation.
         Policy HS 1.5 Maintain and expand access to alcohol and drug prevention
                   services.
         Actions
         a.        Ensure that Yolo County alcohol and drug activities are
                   implemented in Davis.
         b.        Ask the County to include Davis community organizations in
                   County mental health meetings.
         c.        Encourage the adoption of zero tolerance ordinances for substance
                   use and abuse at all Davis schools.
                                            267
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 11: Human Services                           May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
          d.     Continue coordination of enforcement activities with federal, state,
                 regional, county, and other activities.
          e.     Aggressively enforce substance use and abuse laws.
          f.     Assist in the expansion of community drug and alcohol treatment
                 activities for Davis residents.
BASIC SUPPORT SERVICES
GOAL HS 2. Meet the basic needs for food and shelter of all Davis residents.
          Policy HS 2.1 Work to provide food and nutrition for the hungry.
          Actions
          a.     Cooperate with State and County Departments of Social Services to
                 utilize food subsidy resources to meet the needs of Davis residents.
          b.     Continue support for local providers of food and nutrition services.
          Policy HS 2.2 Provide a continuum of services for the homeless and those
                 who are at-risk of becoming homeless, with recognition of special
                 needs of youths.
          Actions
          a.     Continue to monitor the daily average number of persons seeking
                 emergency shelter or transitional housing. Evaluate the resulting
                 data to determine what facilities are needed to satisfy the needs of
                 the identified population.
          b.     Support services which provide homeless shelters and other
                 resources for the homeless such as referrals for shelter and aid
                 programs, showers, laundry and telephone services.
          c.     Study the feasibility of providing free passes to all transit users.
          d.     Continue support for the resource center for homeless and low-
                 income residents.
                                             268
Davis General Plan                                   Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                              Chapter 11: Human Services
         e.        Continue to support transitional housing programs which provide
                   supportive services to assist families and individuals toward
                   independent living.
         f.        Support "safe house" programs that offer care for latchkey and
                   other neighborhood children.
         g.        Minimize constraints to siting human services in Davis'
                   neighborhoods, including such issues as zoning regulations.
DEPENDENT CARE
GOAL HS 3. Meet the needs of Davis residents for dependent care and
respite care services.
         Policy HS 3.1 Work to provide dependent care and respite care services.
         Actions
         a.        Encourage business involvement in and support of dependent care.
         b.        Continue to provide respite care for families with special needs
                   dependents.
         c.        Continue coordinated efforts with government, business, health
                   providers and child care providers to develop mildly ill child care
                   options.
         d.        Maintain and expand City family-friendly work policies.
         e.        Seek state and federal funding sources for dependent care services
                   for Davis residents.
         f.        Continue to provide training and technical assistance for child care
                   providers.
         g.        Continue to assist child care providers in meeting licensing
                   requirements.
         h.        Maintain existing City dependent care benefits.
                                            269
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 11: Human Services                            May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
SENIORS
GOAL HS 4. Create and maintain a social and service environment
supportive of seniors.
          Policy HS 4.1 Provide programs which promote the physical and mental
                 well-being of seniors.
          Actions
          a.     Maintain no fee and low cost transit passes for seniors.
          b.     Support the development of a senior care continuum facility in
                 Davis.
          c.     Maintain and expand if feasible current senior programs and funding
                 for the senior center as a focal point of program activities and
                 services. Study options to expand the senior center facility in order
                 to accommodate expanded programming needs.
          d.     Provide retirement/life-planning programs emphasizing financial,
                 health and leisure choices.
          e.     Maintain and expand, if feasible, recreational opportunities
                 responsive to seniors and athletic facilities accessible to seniors.
          f.     Develop, if feasible, lifelong learning opportunities in areas including
                 language and computer skills.
          g.     Maintain and develop, if feasible, intergenerational programs with
                 emphasis on senior center/Davis Joint Unified School District
                 involvement.
          Policy HS 4.2 Provide services which enable seniors to remain as
                 independent as possible.
          Actions
          a.     Continue and, if feasible, expand information/assistance services at
                 the Senior Center for seniors and their families.
          b.     Promote existing and develop, if feasible, new senior
                 daycare/respite services particularly for working families.
                                             270
Davis General Plan                                     Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                               Chapter 11: Human Services
         c.        Promote programs to assist caregivers and adult children with aging
                   parents.
         d.        Continue to support and develop, if feasible, in-home supportive
                   services such as home maintenance, meals delivery and
                   transportation.
         e.        Maintain, if feasible, an affordable curb-to-curb transit service
                   specifically designed for frail seniors.
         f.        Develop, if feasible, an affordable transit escort service to assist frail
                   seniors.
OUTREACH AND ADVOCACY
GOAL HS 5. Inform Davis residents about human service needs and
programs.
         Policy HS 5.1 Develop a program to publicize human service needs and
                   programs.
         Actions
         a.        Convene meetings of parents, teens, school officials and service
                   providers to assess the extent of the problems facing teens and to
                   identify approaches to solving them.
         b.        Compile and publish a summary analysis of Davis' unmet medical
                   and human services needs, along with suggestions for community
                   services to meet these needs. The analysis could be based on the
                   Needs Assessment being conducted with CDBG funds in 1996-97.
         c.        Support education activities for parents aimed at reducing tolerance
                   of alcohol use among young people.
         d.        Offer health benefit information, dependent care information and
                   health information in newcomers, business, school and other
                   publications.
         e.        Work with the Davis Enterprise to sponsor a wellness column in the
                   Enterprise.
                                              271
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 11: Human Services                         May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
          f.     Consider adding a health category to the utility bill Pledge Program
                 that allows residents to make voluntary donations to community
                 causes.
                                             272
                     Chapter 12. Art and Culture
BACKGROUND
Davis’ non-profit museums and art galleries include the Pence Gallery, featuring
regional art and archaeological displays; the Davis Art Center Gallery; the Hattie
Weber Library Museum in Central Park at 445 C Street, which is a local history
museum and meeting facility; and the Memorial Union Art Gallery, the Richard L.
Nelson Gallery and Fine Arts Collection, the Design Gallery and the C.N. Gorman
Museum, featuring contemporary Native American Art, all of which are located on
the UC Davis campus. The city of Davis has an active public art program that is
complemented by privately-funded public art and the university’s public art. More
than thirty-five pieces of publicly-accessible art are located around the community
and on the university campus.
Other cultural facilities include numerous for-profit art galleries in the downtown
area; The Artery, an artists cooperative; The Davis Art Center, a multi-purpose
educational and performing center offering a wide range of art classes; International
House; Explorit Science Center; the Veterans Memorial Theatre and the Varsity
Theatre, two performing arts theaters managed by the city of Davis; and a variety of
facilities on the UC Davis campus, including the Craft Center, the Main Theater and
Wyatt Pavilion.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GOAL A&C 1. Support, promote and enrich artistic, cultural and arts-educational
endeavors in Davis.
          Policy A&C 1.1 Encourage and promote regional, city-wide and
                  neighborhood arts and cultural events, activities and educational
                  endeavors.
          Actions
          a.      Facilitate the creation of a central visitors center in the downtown
                  area where information on local arts and cultural events is available.
          b.      Develop and update annually a comprehensive guide of local
                  studios, galleries, performing arts events, festivals, and public art.
                                            273

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 12: Art and Culture                              May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          c.        Identify and obtain additional funds to be used to promote art and
                    culture in Davis. This could include funds normally used for
                    economic development if appropriate.
          d.        List arts and cultural events in city calendars and publications
                    without a fee.
          e.        Support diverse art and culture activities that promote cultural
                    pluralism.
          f.        Provide fee waivers or other appropriate financial support to
                    exemplary arts and cultural activities held for the community's
                    benefit.
          Policy A&C 1.2 Enhance the viability of Davis' art and cultural community.
          Actions
          a.        Develop and implement a marketing plan that promotes the arts and
                    art-related businesses and promotes opportunities for local artists to
                    market their creative efforts in the Davis community. Update as
                    needed to ensure that evolving needs are met.
          b.        Offer technical assistance and business training programs to artists.
          c.        Assist artists in securing low cost studio, presenting and
                    performance space.
          d.        Facilitate the development of clustered affordable artist studio and
                    gallery space.
          e.        Develop a resource list of affordable materials, services, classes,
                    business assistance and other assistance. Update as needed, a
                    minimum of every three years.
          f.        Assist in educating artists on environmental health and safety issues
                    and to develop environmentally safe practices.
          g.        Seek supplemental arts contract funds from all potential public and
                    private sources to increase funding for arts programs including on-
                    going support of established art organizations, as well as funding for
                    special group and individual projects.
          h.        Maintain, update and disseminate information on public and/or
                    private grant opportunities for cultural and arts programs.
                                               274
Davis General Plan                                     Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                Chapter 12: Art and Culture
         i.        Facilitate City/University art and cultural exchanges.
         Policy A&C 1.3 Integrate publicly-accessible art and creative thinking of
                   artists into the planning, design and physical development of the
                   City.
         Actions
         a.        Expand the City of Davis' collection of art in public places, revising
                   parameters as needed to incorporate new concepts of public art.
         b.        Expand the use of artists in the City's facilities and infrastructure
                   planning process to develop art plans for City capital improvement
                   projects, including, but not limited to, new city buildings, parks, and
                   plazas.
         c.        Strongly encourage the provision of public art and publicly-
                   accessible art in private development projects.
         d.        Ensure that the Civic Arts Commission participates in review of
                   proposed projects having the potential to impact public art.
         e.        Update the city’s design guidelines to include expectations for
                   publicly-accessible art in private development projects.
         f.        Establish a mini-grant program, funded by the Municipal Arts Fund,
                   for temporary public art displays.
          g.       Develop a murals program, with special emphasis on blank walls in
                   downtown Davis.
         Policy A&C 1.4 Enhance, promote and financially support educational
                   opportunities in all the arts for all members of the community.
         Actions
         a.        Develop and distribute a directory of Davis artists to help
                   organizations program art educational opportunities.
         b.        Develop and financially support educational opportunities through
                   artist-in-residency programs in schools and in the community.
         c.        Provide technical assistance and other appropriate aid to encourage
                   and support local organizations that offer educational art activities.
                                             275

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 12: Art and Culture                           May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          d.        Continue to provide funds for exemplary arts education programs in
                    school and community settings, to be matched by schools and/or
                    the private sector.
          Policy A&C 1.5 The City shall encourage the Yolo County to compensate
                    for the increased demand in library space and materials by using
                    various expansion techniques, including, but not limited to, book
                    mobiles and satellite facilities.
          Actions
          a.        Encourage the private sector to fund library construction and book
                    acquisition through corporate sponsorships and individual
                    memberships.
                                              276
                          Chapter 13. Diversity
BACKGROUND
Table 15 shows the ethnic composition of the population in Davis and Yolo County
in 1990. The non-Hispanic white population in Davis is higher than in the County
as a whole (76.1 percent vs. 68.6 percent). The Hispanic and minority population in
Davis, however, has increased from 16.7 percent of the population in 1980 to 23.9
percent in 1990.
The City of Davis has had an affirmative action employment program since 1977. It
is defined as a program of positive action aimed at remedying the effects of past
discriminatory practices in order to give substance to the term "equality of
employment opportunity," and its purpose is to have a city labor force that reflects
the ethnic and sex composition of the labor force in the employment service areas.
The affirmative action program includes rules regarding recruitment and selection of
city employees and Council set affirmative action goals. The city's current
breakdown of employees by ethnic group and sex is shown in Table 16.
Except for the Personnel Board, which must consist of seven members and include
at least two women and two minority members per the affirmative action program,
there is no written affirmative action program or policy for city commissions.
However, the City Council encourages affirmative action appointments to all city
commissions.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GOAL DIV 1. Attain equal opportunity in all aspects of public life, including
employment, entrepreneurship, financing, and housing.
          Policy DIV 1.1 Create and support social structures that encourage equal
                 access for each resident to every arena of Davis public life, and
                 change those social structures which produce, support, and
                 legitimate values and practices which limit such access.
                                          277
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                     Davis General Plan
Chapter 13: Diversity                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                               Table 15
                       POPULATION ETHNIC BREAKDOWN
                                             City of Davis            County of Yolo
   White - Non Hispanic                             35,159     76.1          96,825         68.6
   Black - Non Hispanic                              1,311      2.8           2,975           2.1
   Asian - Non Hispanic                              5,955     12.9          11,455           8.1
   Native American - Non Hispanic                      291      0.6           1,363           1.0
   Other Race - Non Hispanic                            68      0.1             292           0.2
   Hispanic Origin                                   3,425      7.4          28,182         20.0
   TOTAL                                            46,209                  141,092
                                               Table 16
            CITY STAFF ETHNIC AND GENDER COMPOSITION
                 White male                                                   160
                 Black male                                                     10
                 Hispanic male                                                  34
                 Asian male                                                     11
                 Native American male                                            2
                 Total Male                                                   217
                 White female                                                   94
                 Black female                                                    0
                 Hispanic female                                                15
                 Asian female                                                    6
                 Native American female                                          4
                 Total Female                                                 119
                 Total Employees                                              336
                                                   278
Davis General Plan                                     Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                      Chapter 13: Diversity
         Standards
         a.        Access to all City programs shall be available to everyone, inclusive
                   of race, ethnicity, culture, religion, gender, sexual orientation,
                   physical ability and socio-economic background. Access shall also
                   not be denied based on age, except in the case of programs
                   specifically intended to serve specific age groups.
         b.        Offer assistance and support to individuals with disabilities
                   consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act and Rehabilita-
                   tion Act '78.
         Actions
         c.        Review all City policies and programs to insure that they support
                   equal opportunities and equal access.
         d.        Continue to promulgate non-discrimination laws and the City's Fair
                   Housing Program.
         e.        Encourage developers and tenants to practice affirmative action in
                   planning, construction, purchasing and in personnel recruitment and
                   selection.
         f.        Practice an open-door policy in city programs, welcoming all
                   individuals regardless of ethnicity, race, religion, class, disability,
                   sexual orientation, and gender.
         g.        Develop City programs that use education, outreach, and training to
                   assist historically under-represented groups in obtaining access to
                   City programs and employment opportunities.
         h.        Publicize and actively recruit for City programs and employment
                   opportunities in media sources widely used by all and in media
                   sources of special interest to historically under-represented groups..
         i.        Implement barrier-free accessible design in all City of Davis
                   projects.
         j.        Encourage barrier-free accessible design in private development
                   projects throughout the city.
         k.        Make information on City services available in foreign languages,
                   TDD and media accessible to the visually impaired.
                                              279
Section V: Community Facilities and Services                                    Davis General Plan
Chapter 13: Diversity                                     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          l.        Encourage the DJUSD to create an active multi-cultural education
                    program in City schools.
          m.        Support and publicize events that celebrate diverse and rich
                    traditions of different cultures, subcultures and special groups.
          n.        Develop and make available educational programs on diversity and
                    special needs that can be used for presentations throughout the
                    community.
          o.        Provide information to the public on cultural exchange
                    opportunities.
          p.        Periodically assess the degree of inclusiveness in City activities and
                    programs to determine whether or not the City's goal of assuring
                    equal access is being met. The test of equal access shall be the
                    degree of diverse resident or guest participation.
          q.        Determine the degree to which diverse participation reflects
                    residential composition based on regular monitoring and annual
                    reporting of:
                    1. the relative diverse resident composition of the City and the
                         greater Davis area, as reported in the US census; and
                    2. the relative diverse employment and membership composition
                         within all classification types at all levels of responsibility of each
                         City department, board, commission, program, or civic activity;
                         and
                    3. the diverse utilization of all public and private services utilizing
                         public resources.
          r.        Establish reasonable participation goals for the following year based
                    on the results of the monitoring and reporting activities required by
                    action (p) above.
          s.        Encourage associations representing business, professional, social or
                    service interests serving the people of Davis to: 1) provide an
                    annual report on diverse participation in those associations, and 2)
                    establish and report reasonable diverse participation goals and
                    objectives for the following year.
          t.        Encourage DJUSD to provide an annual report on the diverse
                    participation in all activities within its jurisdiction and to establish
                    reasonable diverse participation goals and objectives for the
                    following year.
                                                280
Davis General Plan                                      Section V: Community Facilities and Services
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                       Chapter 13: Diversity
         u.        Create an active and on-going education, training, outreach and
                   mentoring program to achieve the goals of equal access and
                   participation in all activities of contemporary life and in all elements
                   of civic or public life.
         v.        Regularly report to the public on diversity activities.
GOAL DIV 2. Accomplish representation in the City’s workforce,
commissions, committees, boards, and all civic activities to reflect as nearly
as possible the racial and ethnic composition of Davis.
         Policy DIV 2.1 Take all actions necessary to create a diverse City
                   workforce and diverse participation on all commissions, committees,
                   boards, and in all civic activities.
         Standards
         a.        Actions listed under Policy DIV 1.1 will serve to implement this
                   policy.
                                               281

Section V: Community Facilities and Services                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 13: Diversity                            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             282
     SECTION VI.
COMMUNITY RESOURCE
   CONSERVATION

 Chapter 14. Habitat, Wildlife, and Natural Areas
BACKGROUND
The Davis area does not consist of pristine biological conditions in that most of the
non-urbanized land is currently used for agriculture. Areas that provide habitat value
are: marshy wetlands in slough channels; irrigation and drainage ditches; riparian
woodlands along the North and South Forks of Putah Creek; the old channel of
Willow Slough; parts of Dry Slough; and ponds.
The valley landscape that once existed in the Planning Area was predominantly a
mixture of native valley grassland types, with small groves and scattered individuals
of valley oak and strips of riparian woodland (cottonwood, box elder, willow, oak,
sycamore) along natural drainage ways. There were probably significant thickets of
elderberry, willow, native blackberry, and other riparian plants in the lowlands and
along watercourses.
The Planning Area is situated in a strategic position in the Pacific Flyway, a major
migration route for waterfowl and other birds in North America. Although the area
has little natural habitat for such species, its location and the presence of water in the
Yolo Bypass and Putah Creek give high potential for natural community restoration.
A current list of special status plant and wildlife species in Yolo County is available
through the California Department of Fish and Game.
Yolo County, the cities in Yolo County, and the California Department of Fish and
Game are currently working on a County-Wide Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP), a
20-year plan that provides a framework for long term habitat conservation. The two
primary goals of the plan are to mitigate the loss of biological resources due to urban
development, and to maintain agricultural values in areas where mitigation will
occur. By viewing the County area as a single large ecological system, the HCP
intends to provide for species survival at a level that would not occur within isolated
pockets of habitat. Implementation of the HCP is dependent upon innovative
public and private sector partnerships and creative management strategies, and
implementation costs are to be reduced by the use of public lands when feasible.
Some of the key areas managed for wildlife habitat value in and near the Planning
Area are the UC Davis Putah Creek Riparian Reserve, 125 acres, which supports
riparian habitats for highly diverse plants and animals; the UC Davis Arboretum, 119
acres, with 1,400 species of plants (not all native); the Audubon / Hunt-Wesson
Hawk-Owl Reserve, in the northern portion of the planning area west of the County
landfill site; the City-owned South Fork Preserve on Putah Creek; the demonstration
wetlands east of the Wastewater Pollution Control Plant; and the State-owned Yolo
Basin Wetlands Project in the Yolo Bypass, directly east of the Planning Area. In
                                            283
Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 14: Habitat and Natural Areas                   May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
total, approximately 4,600 acres in the Davis Planning Area are currently managed
for enhanced habitat value. In addition, the City continues to participate in the
establishment of a 50,000 acre national wildlife refuge in the Yolo Bypass that
stretches from Putah Creek to Liberty Island in the delta.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GOAL HAB 1. Identify, protect, restore, enhance and create natural habitats.
Protect and improve biodiversity consistent with the natural biodiversity of the
region.
          Policy HAB 1.1 Protect existing natural habitat areas, including designated
                    Natural Habitat Areas.
          Standards
          a.        Heritage oak trees and City-designated signature trees shall be
                    protected. Sensitive biological resources should be protected .
          b.        Project design shall demonstrate that avoidance of sensitive
                    resources has been integrated into project design. Where avoidance
                    is not feasible, the project proponent shall compensate for the loss
                    or disturbance within Yolo County. The type and amount of
                    compensation shall be determined in conjunction with the
                    appropriate local, state, and/or federal regulatory agency involved.
          c.        Active recreation facilities should be minimized within natural
                    habitat areas.
          d.        Recreation or interpretive facilities within natural areas should be
                    designed to be site-sensitive and minimally intrusive. Public access
                    into Sensitive Habitat Areas should be limited.
          e.        New developments shall incorporate setbacks from creeks and
                    channels.
          f.        Restoration plans are required for all habitats that are to be restored
                    in new development areas.
          g.        Storm-retention ponds and drainage ponds that have become
                    wildlife habitats should be restored as habitat.
          h.        Develop a list of wildlife species that should be encouraged or
                    protected. A map should be developed that indicates the areas
                    where these species should be encouraged or protected.
                                               284
Davis General Plan                                  Section VI: Community Resources Conservation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                        Chapter 14: Habitat and Natural Areas
         i.        The City shall require a biological survey be prepared by a qualified
                   biologist for proposed development areas that may contain sensitive
                   resources as defined by the City or appropriate state or federal
                   regulatory agencies. The biological study shall be prepared as a
                   requirement of the environmental assessment of a given project
                   unless the City’s Community Development Director determines,
                   based on previous studies or other evidence, that the site’s current
                   state would preclude the finding of sensitive resources. Agricultural
                   use or plowing of a site does not eliminate the probability of
                   sensitive resources. Such studies, when required, shall include:
                   •        surveys and mapping of special-status plants and wildlife
                            during the appropriate identification periods;
                   •        mapping and quantification of sensitive habitat loss; and
                   •        delineation and quantification of waters of the U.S.,
                            including vernal pools, swales, alkali wetlands, seasonal
                            wetlands, and other wetlands shall be done using the current
                            USACE wetland delineation manual.
                   For areas of non-native grassland, rural, developed, or agricultural
                   lands that are determined to contain no special-status species,
                   inclusions of alkali grassland, meadow and scrub, native perennial
                   grassland, or wetlands, no further mitigation will be required. If
                   sensitive habitats are identified, please refer to the mitigation
                   measure(s) below pertaining to that resource to avoid, minimize, or
                   compensate significant effects on these resources accordingly.
         j.        If a biological study of a site determines the presence of sensitive
                   biological resources, the project proponent will retain a qualified
                   biologist, approved by the agency(ies) with regulatory responsibility,
                   to monitor construction activities in sensitive biological resource
                   areas.
         k.        Sensitive biological resources located in or adjacent to the
                   construction area will be protected by placing orange construction
                   barrier fencing, or stakes and flags, including buffer zone ( where
                   appropriate and depending on the type of resource). Adjacent
                   resources that may require protection include oak woodland,
                   riparian woodland and scrub vegetation, drainages, vernal pools and
                   swales, other wetlands, native grassland, special-status species
                   populations, and elderberry shrubs.
                                              285

Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 14: Habitat and Natural Areas                   May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          l.        Develop and implement an Urban Wildlife Program to coordinate
                    habitat protection/expansion and wildlife conservation.
          m.        Maintain an inventory and map of locations of special status habitat
                    types and special status species within the Davis Planning Area.
          n.        Pursue opportunities for the acquisition of wildlife habitat and
                    natural resource areas, using the map of special status habitat types
                    described under Action HAB 1.1mas a guide to priority order of
                    acquisition sites.
          o.        Seek external sources of funding for habitat enhancement and
                    acquisition.
          p.        Encourage the University to protect natural habitat areas on
                    campus.
          q.        Maintain the City-owned South Fork Preserve site as natural habitat
                    and compatible agriculture with public access limited to certain
                    portions of the site so as to minimize impacts to sensitive areas.
          Policy HAB 1.2 Enhance and restore natural areas and create new wildlife
                    habitat areas.
          Standards
          a.        Native plants should be used wherever possible in public and private
                    landscaping.
          b.        Storm-retention ponds, drainage ponds, groundwater recharge areas,
                    channels, and other similar areas should be designated and managed
                    as wildlife habitats when appropriate and environmentally sound.
                    Note: See Action HAZ 4.5a.
          c.        Landscaping should provide wildlife habitat where appropriate.
          d         Hedgerows and other features to provide habitat for beneficial
                    insects and wildlife are encouraged within the Urban Agricultural
                    Transition Area and other agricultural areas.
          e.        As a means to promote safety of habitat areas from toxic materials,
                    new habitat areas should be designated on non-agricultural lands or
                    on agricultural lands that are in organic production.
                                              286
Davis General Plan                                 Section VI: Community Resources Conservation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                       Chapter 14: Habitat and Natural Areas
         Actions
         f.        Cooperate with other governmental agencies, the University, and
                   citizens’ groups in restoring natural areas and habitats that have
                   been lost or degraded. Preserve these areas as habitat and scenic
                   areas, and, where appropriate, for passive recreation.
         g.        Implement a program of habitat enhancement in the existing
                   drainage ponds and other appropriate areas within the Urban
                   Agricultural Transition Area for migratory wetland wildlife.
         h.        Implement the Wetlands Demonstration Project associated with the
                   City’s wastewater treatment plant. This should be done in a manner
                   that does not impose restrictions on adjacent agricultural operations.
         i.        Continue to work with community groups such as Tree Davis to
                   organize tree planting activities.
         Policy HAB 1.3 Commit adequate City resources and staff time so as to
                   protect habitat and other natural resources.
         Actions
         a.        Continue to utilize City staff to work towards conservation of
                   natural resources.
         Policy HAB 1.4 Preserve and protect scenic resources.
         Actions
         a.        Study and implement options for the preservation and protection of
                   scenic resources.
GOAL HAB 2. Increase public awareness of habitat, wildlife and sensitive
species.
         Policy HAB 2.1 Develop environmental educational programs and public
                   access areas and programs to allow viewing of wildlife and habitat
                   through controlled interactions of people with natural areas.
         Standards
         a.        The sensitivity of wildlife habitat and the inherent conflicts in
                   providing public access to habitat areas should be considered in all
                   site design or management plans for natural areas.
                                             287

Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 14: Habitat and Natural Areas                   May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          b.        Develop programs to provide education about plant and animal
                    habitats, particularly those of native or local plants and animals.
          c.        Provide and distribute to schools and teachers information
                    regarding City environmental programs in wildlife habitat creation
                    and wildlife protection.
          d.        Establish information walks and observation days for habitat and
                    wildlife education.
          e.        Include youth, school groups and families in actual preparation,
                    construction and upkeep of nature areas and recreational areas.
          f.        Provide educational material and signage that provides for enhanced
                    enjoyment and understanding of habitat areas.
                                              288
      Chapter 15. Agriculture, Soils and Minerals
BACKGROUND
Agricultural Resources
Much of the area surrounding Davis is used for agriculture, and agriculture is the
most significant industry in the region. The Davis area has a temperate climate with
sunny skies, cooling summer winds, and light rainfall during moderate winters,
which is ideal for agriculture. There is adequate rainfall for crop growth during
seven months of the year; irrigation is required for continued growth during the rest
of the year. Approximately 275 days of the year have a minimum temperature of 32
degrees, which constitutes the growing season.
Figure 33 shows the agricultural soil classifications in the Davis Planning Area.
"Prime agricultural land" in the Planning Area has been classified in three separate
classification systems: the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service Land
Capability Class System of I through VII; the State Department of Conservation’s
Important Farmland Inventory System; and the Cortese-Knox Local Governmental
Reorganization Act of 1985 Criteria. The Natural Resources Conservation Service's
system has seven classes of soils (ranging from a high of I to a low of VII) and
Classes I and II are considered to be of prime agricultural significance. Most of the
City of Davis is built on prime agricultural soils, Classes I and II soils. Class III and
IV soils are found in the northern and eastern portions of the planning area, with a
small area to the east.
Figure 34 shows the agricultural land surrounding Davis under Williamson Act
contracts. Pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (Williamson
Act), a landowner of prime agricultural land may receive a property tax advantage in
exchange for entering into a contract to maintain the land in agricultural use for at
least ten years. If the landowner notifies the County that he/she wishes to terminate
the contract, it normally takes ten years for the development restriction to expire.
The importance of Williamson Act contracts changed with Proposition 13 property
tax laws, but the contracts remain an important tool for preserving farm land.
The provisions of AB 1190 (Chapter 97, Statutes of 1992) amending various
provisions of the Civic Code of the State of California, provide that certain existing
agricultural processing facilities do not constitute a nuisance as long as they continue
to operate in a similar manner to that in which they have historically operated. AB
1190 provides for the protection of a wide range of existing agricultural operations
including, but not limited to, food processing, crop cultivation and the raising of
                                           289

Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 15: Agriculture, Soils and Minerals            May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
livestock. The Hunt-Wesson Cannery and the Simmons property in East Davis fall
under the protection of this legislation. Similarly, existing agricultural operations
adjacent to the Davis city limits in unincorporated Yolo County would be protected
from nuisance complaints under AB 1190.
The city has found that agricultural processing facilities (including the Hunt-Wesson
facility) located within the city meet the criteria of AB 1190 . The city has also found
that the provisions set forth in the noise ordinance related to AB 1190 are necessary
to make the provisions of AB 1190 conform with the city’s requirements to set noise
standards for various activities.
Mineral Resources
The most important mineral resources in the region are sand and gravel, which are
mined on Cache Creek and other channels in Yolo County. A survey of aggregate
resources by the State Division of Mines and Geology showed no significant
aggregate resources in the planning area. The only mineral resource known to exist
in the Planning Area is natural gas, but resource areas have not been identified.
AGRICULTURE
GOAL AG 1. Maintain agriculture as an important industry around Davis.
          Policy AG 1.1 Protect agricultural land from urban development except
                    where the general plan land use map has designated the land for
                    urban uses.
          Standards
          a.        New residential subdivisions and other urban development are
                    discouraged in areas of Class 1 and 2 soils except where the General
                    Plan land use map has designated the land for urban uses.
          Actions
          b.        Encourage participation in the Williamson Act and/or other
                    farmland preservation programs.
          c.        Establish a 150-foot minimum agricultural buffer around the City.
                    Require dedication from developers of lands to make up the buffer
                    concurrently with any peripheral development.
          d.        Continue to work with the counties, other cities and the general
                    public to minimize conflicts with land uses such as agriculture and
                    wildlife habitat when developing agricultural buffers.
                                             290

Davis General Plan                       Section VI: Community Resources Conservation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007         Chapter 15: Agriculture, Soils and Minerals
                                                                                     ____
                                       291
Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 15: Agriculture, Soils and Minerals      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             292
Davis General Plan                       Section VI: Community Resources Conservation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007         Chapter 15: Agriculture, Soils and Minerals
                                                                                     ____
                                       293
Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 15: Agriculture, Soils and Minerals      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             294
Davis General Plan                                   Section VI: Community Resources Conservation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                     Chapter 15: Agriculture, Soils and Minerals
         e.        Implement the provisions of AB 1190 to provide that certain
                   existing agricultural activities, operations, or facilities, or
                   appurtenances thereof do not constitute a nuisance as long as they
                   continue to operate in a similar manner to that in which they have
                   historically operated.
         f.        Define land development guidelines for new projects proposed
                   adjacent to existing agricultural activities, operations, or facilities.
                   Such guidelines may include, but are not limited to, specific
                   mitigation measures such as sound walls, landscaping, beams, and
                   construction standards.
         g.        Continue to require disclosure agreements for new developments
                   within 1,000 feet of agricultural land.
         h.        Urge Yolo County and Solano County to preserve agricultural land
                   within the Davis Planning Area beyond that proposed for
                   development.
         i.        Continue to implement the provisions of the Farmland Preservation
                   Ordinance requiring buffering, notification and conflict resolution in
                   the Planning Area. Maintain a strong right-to-farm policy.
         j.        In order to create an effective permanent agricultural and open
                   space buffer on the perimeter of the City, immediately upon
                   completion of the General Plan Update, pursue amendments of the
                   Farmland Preservation ordinance to assure as a baseline standard
                   that new peripheral development projects provide a minimum of 2:1
                   mitigation along the entire non-urbanized perimeter of the project.
                   The proposed amendments shall allow for the alternate location of
                   mitigations for such projects including but not limited to
                   circumstances where the project is adjacent to land already protected
                   by conservation easements or by some other form of public
                   ownership that guarantees adjacent lands will not be developed.
         Policy AG 1.2 Promote and enhance local agriculture.
         Standards
         a.        Developers shall be required to reduce the impacts caused by their
                   developments on adjacent agricultural lands in accordance with the
                   city’s right to farm and farmland preservation program.
                                              295

Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 15: Agriculture, Soils and Minerals             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          b.        Continue to implement the farmland preservation ordinance to
                    mitigate for the loss of agricultural land.
          c.        Use signage, access restrictions, fines, education and other available
                    means to minimize trespassing into agricultural areas.
          d.        Maintain existing community gardens, and develop more where
                    costs to the City are low.
          e.        Encourage residents to purchase produce from local farmers and
                    community supported agriculture.
          f.        Support the establishment of projects to teach urban residents about
                    the agricultural industry and to provide a forum for dialogue
                    between urban residents and farmers.
GOAL AG 2. Encourage sustainable and organic forms of agriculture.
          Policy AG 2.1 Foster the growth of environmentally friendly agricultural
                    business and industry in Davis.
          Actions
          a.        Maintain all City-owned community gardens as "organic" as defined
                    by California law.
          b.        Develop a sustainable gardening ordinance to encourage users of
                    city-owned community gardens to garden sustainably.
          c.        With landowners, neighbors, the school district, and others,
                    establish a "School Farm or Landscape Program" wherein schools
                    establish and maintain an organic crop farm or landscape on nearby
                    barren or idle sites within the City.
          d.        New apartment complexes should provide a gardening space for use
                    by tenants.
                                              296
Davis General Plan                                 Section VI: Community Resources Conservation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                   Chapter 15: Agriculture, Soils and Minerals
SOILS
GOAL AG 3. Conserve soil resources within the planning area.
         Policy AG 3.1 Develop programs to help to conserve soil resources.
         Standards
         a.        Tree rows or other windbreaks shall be required in buffers on the
                   edges of urban development and in other areas as appropriate to
                   reduce soil erosion.
         b.        Drainage facilities shall be designed to control runoff and minimize
                   erosion.
         Actions
         c.        Regulate activities that cause soil compaction and stratification.
         d.        Include information on soil erosion in the public water conservation
                   program and school education program.
         e.        Coordinate with Yolo and Solano counties, the Resource
                   Conservation District, and the Natural Resources Conservation
                   Service in implementing programs to reduce soil erosion by wind
                   and water and prevent soil contamination.
         f.        Work with area farmers and farming organizations to coordinate
                   farming practices conducive to soil conservation. Provide assistance
                   when appropriate.
MINERAL RESOURCES
GOAL AG 4. Maintain Davis' visual character and natural topography by
minimizing mineral resource exploitation.
         Policy AG 4.1 Discourage the extraction of mineral resources in the
                   planning area.
         Actions
         a.        Coordinate with County government in regulating mineral-resource-
                   production operations, including sand-and-gravel mining, and oil
                   and gas wells.
                                              297
Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 15: Agriculture, Soils and Minerals      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             298
                           Chapter 16. Historic
                  and Archaeological Resources
BACKGROUND
According to a review of available records by the Northwest Information Center of
the California Archaeological Inventory, there are four recorded and eight reported
prehistoric, and no recorded historic archaeological sites in the Davis planning area.
However, less than 10 percent of the total area of the City has been archaeologically
surveyed; therefore, there is a likelihood of additional resources in the Planning Area
beyond those recorded and inventoried.
The City of Davis has shown its commitment to preservation by becoming a
Certified Local Government (CLG), and thus is available to compete for special
federal funds. This funding can be used for various preservation activities in the
community. The State of California’s Office of Historic Preservation and CLG’s
work in partnership to promote historic preservation efforts.
There are seven historic sites listed with the National Register of Historic Places,
seven in the California Inventory of Historic Resources, and 149 with the City's
Cultural Resources Inventory.
The city has an inventory of 31 historic landmarks. The Jerome and Mary Chiles
Davis Homestead at UC Davis, the Dresbach-Hunt-Boyer Home at 602 Second
Street, the Davis Junction train station of the California Pacific Railroad, and the
Richards Underpass are examples of resources that are in the City's inventory. A
recent update of the inventory has listed a number of additional properties with
potential historic merit. This list does not have regulatory provisions associated with
it.
The residential areas north of the Core Area consist of well-preserved
neighborhoods of cottages and bungalows typical in the early 20th Century. While
individual structures are not of great architectural significance, the neighborhood is a
fine example of its type.
The city's Street Tree Commission has identified 98 "landmark" trees on public and
private property. These trees are designated because they are healthy and unique as
an outstanding specimen of a desirable species; one of the largest and oldest trees in
Davis; historical interest; or distinctive form. Property owners and developers are
asked to save these trees and to maintain them in good condition for the benefit of
the present and future citizens of Davis. Archives of local history are maintained at
the Davis Branch of the Yolo County Library, the UC Davis Library, the Yolo
                                             299

Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 16: Historic and Archaeological Resources       May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
County Historical Museum in Woodland, and the Yolo County Archives in
Woodland.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GOAL HIS 1. Designate, preserve and protect the archaeological and historic
resources within the Davis community.
          Policy HIS 1.1 Maintain an inventory of archaeological and historic
                    resources.
          Actions
          a.        Maintain and update a map and an inventory of prehistoric and
                    historic archaeological resources and historic resources, including
                    but not limited to, underground sites, artifacts, buildings, structures,
                    landmarks, districts, linear resources, landscapes, gardens, sites, trees
                    and other vegetation.
          b.        Establish archaeological or historic districts where significant
                    numbers of archaeological or historic resources are grouped
                    together. Areas to consider for such districts include, but are not
                    limited to, College Park, Bowers' Addition, Old East Davis, the area
                    between 5th and 8th Streets, and the Lincoln Highway.
          c.        Work cooperatively with the University to identify historic resources
                    and historic and prehistoric archaeological resources and to plan for
                    their preservation.
          Policy HIS 1.2 Incorporate measures to protect and preserve historic and
                    archaeological resources into all planning and development.
          Standards
          a.        The City shall review proposed alteration to City-designated historic
                    resources and improvements within historic districts utilizing the
                    Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines
                    for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and the State Historic Building
                    Code.
          b.        A cultural resources survey shall be required for development sites
                    where cultural resource conditions are not known (as required by
                    the Community Development Department). Resources within a
                    project site that cannot be avoided should be evaluated. Additional
                                                  300
Davis General Plan                                 Section VI: Community Resources Conservation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007            Chapter 16: Historic and Archaeological Resources
                   research and test excavations, where appropriate, should be
                   undertaken to determine whether the resource(s) meets CEQA
                   and/or NRHP significance criteria. Impacts to significant resources
                   that cannot be avoided will be mitigated in consultation with the
                   lead agency for the project. Possible mitigation measures include:
                   •        a data recovery program consisting of archaeological
                            excavation to retrieve the important data from
                            archaeological sites;
                   •        development and implementation of public interpretation
                            plans for both prehistoric and historic sites;
                   •        preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, or reconstruction of
                            historic structures according to Secretary of Interior
                            Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties;
                   •        construction of new structures in a manner consistent with
                            the historic character of the region; and
                   •        treatment of historic landscapes according to the Secretary
                            of Interior Standards for Treatment of Historic Landscapes.
         Actions
         c.        Establish standards, rules and regulations governing the protection,
                   preservation, restoration, remodeling, reconstruction,
                   redevelopment or demolition of historic resources and
                   improvements within historic districts and the development or
                   alteration of archeological resources, with the purpose of cultivating
                   an environment that reflects Davis' roots.
         d.        Research and adopt design and sign guidelines for future in-fill
                   construction and remodeling within designated historic districts.
         Policy HIS 1.3 Assist and encourage property owners and tenants to
                   maintain the integrity and character of historic resources, and to
                   restore and reuse historic resources in a manner compatible with
                   their historic character.
         Actions
         a.        Continue to serve as a leader in historic preservation by preserving,
                   restoring and reusing City-owned historic resources where feasible.
         b.        Investigate and ascertain sources of public and private funding
                   available for the preservation of historic resources.
         c.        Prepare a "how to" guide for restoring historic and architecturally
                   significant structures and make it available to the public.
                                             301

Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 16: Historic and Archaeological Resources       May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          d.        Provide design assistance, through staff or volunteers, to property
                    owners, tenants and builders who work with historic resources.
          e.        Develop incentives for property owners to restore historic buildings,
                    such as reduced permit fees.
          f.        Create a facade improvement program that encourages preservation
                    of historic facades and exteriors.
          g.        Create a property owner recognition program to reward citizens
                    who have demonstrated excellence in maintaining and/or
                    rehabilitating a historic resource.
          h.        Create a program to encourage the reuse of salvaged architectural
                    materials.
          i.        Develop means of informing property owners with designated
                    resources and trees with special designations.
          Policy HIS 1.4 Preserve historic features of the core area and historic
                    districts.
          Standards
          a.        The City shall establish procedures for demolitions and standards
                    and/or guidelines for remodeling and reconstruction in Davis’ older
                    neighborhoods within and around the core area, generally bounded
                    by First Street, Seventh Street, A Street and L Street (precise
                    boundaries subject to further study). The objective would be to
                    maintain the historic character of these neighborhoods.
GOAL HIS 2. Promote public awareness of the prehistoric and historic past
of the Davis area.
          Policy HIS 2.1 Add to the knowledge and understanding of Davis' past.
          Actions
          a.        Continue to establish, support and fund projects that will add to the
                    knowledge of Davis' past. Activities may include oral histories,
                    historic research and writing, additions to the Hattie Weber Museum
                    collection, and school projects.
          b.        Continue to publish and distribute educational and interpretive
                    information about the City's historic resources, preservation
                                                  302

Davis General Plan                                 Section VI: Community Resources Conservation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007            Chapter 16: Historic and Archaeological Resources
                   activities and architecture that exemplify our history as a railroad
                   town, an agricultural center and a college town.
         c.        Establish procedures and guidelines for the interpretation of historic
                   resources (such as placement of plaques) in parks, landscapes,
                   habitat areas, transportation corridors, historic districts and historic
                   city buildings.
         d.        Cooperate with civic organizations in the placement of appropriate
                   monuments or plaques to publicize or memorialize historic sites.
         e.        Encourage, participate in and promote activities and events designed
                   to educate the community about Davis' past and its historic sites,
                   structures and events.
         f.        Work with the University and other partners to develop a regional
                   history center showcasing archaeological, prehistoric and historic
                   resources of the Sacramento Valley.
                                             303
Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 16: Historic and Archaeological Resources     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                                  304
                           Chapter 17. Energy
BACKGROUND
Personal energy consumption is generally categorized into the categories of:
   • transportation, which accounts for approximately 50 percent;
   • space heating and cooling, which accounts for approximately 25 percent; and
   • appliances and hot water heating, which accounts for approximately 25
      percent.
Energy conservation efforts in Davis have involved various sectors of the
community, including the City government, UC Davis, utility companies, architects,
engineers, builders, and consumers. Energy conservation strategies have included
the following:
   • Subdivisions are planned to maximize natural heating and cooling
      opportunities, primarily through the climate orientation of lots and building
      "envelopes." State and City building codes require new buildings to meet
      minimum standards for energy conservation.
   • The design review of multi-family residential and commercial projects includes
      the review of landscapes for water conservation and plantings which promote
      energy conservation and comfort. The shading of parking lots by trees is
      intended to reduce re-radiation of heat from pavement.
   • The use and re-use of existing buildings is encouraged to conserve buildings
      materials and increase community identity.
   • Bicycle facilities have been constructed to provide an alternative to automobile
      use. Public transit is provided by YoloBus and Unitrans, with subsidies from
      the City.
   • Dispersed, smaller neighborhood shopping centers are encouraged to reduce
      the length of frequent trips.
   • Reduced lot sizes, yielding higher population densities, have been encouraged
      to allow for more efficient use of existing public facilities, police and fire
      protection services, water and sewage services, and public transit.
   • The City and PG&E are experimenting with propane, methanol, compressed
      natural gas and electric powered cars.
                                          305

Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 17: Energy                                     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
There are many goals, policies and actions in other chapters of this General Plan that
will help to conserve energy. Some of the most significant are included in Chapter 2,
Mobility and Chapter 8, Computers and Telecommunications.
GOAL ENERGY 1. Reduce per capita energy consumption in Davis.
          Policy ENERGY 1.1 Develop programs to increase energy conservation
                   on the household and business level.
          Actions
          a.       Complete a study of existing literature and of Davis-specific
                   estimates to determine what percentage of the community's income
                   goes to pay for energy bills.
          b.       Develop and utilize a method to measure per capita energy use in
                   Davis.
          c.       Develop and distribute educational materials to Davis residents,
                   including energy usage audits and analyses and information about
                   the direct financial benefits and community benefits of reducing
                   energy use.
          d.       Pursue the creation of a community energy management
                   corporation, whose purpose shall be to reduce energy use in the city.
          e.       Study and implement options for providing incentives for property
                   owners to upgrade their homes and businesses for improved energy
                   conservation.
          f.       Provide incentives for retrofitting existing homes and businesses for
                   improved energy efficiency. An example of a retrofit feature would
                   be a passive solar device.
          Policy ENERGY 1.2 Develop a comprehensive program to reduce City
                   government energy consumption.
          Standards
          a.       The City shall incorporate calculations of energy expenses into its
                   purchasing decisions.
                                             306
Davis General Plan                                  Section VI: Community Resources Conservation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                        Chapter 17: Energy
         Actions
         b.        Provide departments with information on their energy use to create
                   awareness. Provide incentives (awards, money or other) to
                   departments that meet efficiency objectives.
         c.        Continue to provide education and information to City employees
                   on energy saving opportunities.
         d.        Continue to perform audits of City facilities for energy use and
                   retrofit efficiency measures.
         e.        Continue the city's vehicle fleet program to improve city vehicle
                   energy efficiency, reduce emissions, and reduce costs. Program
                   components should include purchase of fuel-efficient and
                   alternative-fuel vehicles, and preventative maintenance.
         Policy ENERGY 1.3 Promote the development and use of advanced
                   energy technology and building materials in Davis.
         Actions
         a.        Use subsidies, expedited permit processing, density bonuses or other
                   incentives to support implementation of photovoltaic and other
                   renewable energy technologies to provide a portion of the City's
                   energy needs.
         b.        Promote energy-load management programs for both the residential
                   and commercial sectors through an education and outreach
                   program.
         Policy ENERGY 1.4 Continue to enforce landscaping requirements that
                   facilitate efficient energy use or conservation.
         Standards
         a.        City projects should be designed with accompanying trees and other
                   vegetation to minimize pavement, provide shade and reduce energy
                   use.
         b.        Energy efficient landscaping and preservation of existing shade trees
                   is encouraged on all building sites.
                                              307
Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                                      Davis General Plan
Chapter 17: Energy                                         May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          c.       Provide information and education to residents on how, what type,
                   and where to plant trees to reduce energy demand.
          Policy ENERGY 1.5 Encourage the development of energy-efficient
                   subdivisions and buildings.
          Standards
          a.       Natural factors such as cooling breezes, solar access, wind
                   protection, and shade shall be considered in site and building design.
                   See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Energy
                   Efficient Subdivision Design".
          b.       Site planning should maximize the effects of cooling southwest
                   winds to the extent possible.
                   See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Energy
                   Efficient Subdivision Design".
          c.       At least 80 percent of all residential lots in any proposed new
                   development should be oriented so that buildings have their long
                   axes within 22.5 degrees of east/west. Allow a developer not
                   providing the required percentage to demonstrate that other site
                   design, building design or construction measures would provide
                   similar opportunities for conserving energy.
                   See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Energy
                   Efficient Subdivision Design".
          Actions
          d.       Develop and implement energy-efficient design requirements that
                   go beyond the State building standards for energy efficiency.
          e.       Develop design guidelines for climate-oriented site planning,
                   building design and landscape design to promote energy efficiency.
          f.       Establish a technical assistance program to help developers in
                   complying with the energy code and implementing energy efficient
                   technologies.
          g.       Offer incentives to developers for projects that result in energy
                   savings of at least 20 percent when compared to the energy
                                               308
Davis General Plan                                  Section VI: Community Resources Conservation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                        Chapter 17: Energy
                   consumption that would occur under similar projects built to meet
                   the minimum standards of the energy code.
         h.        Provide recognition for projects that maximize energy efficiency in
                   the form of awards and presentations at council meetings.
         i.        Develop an ordinance containing requirements and incentives for
                   innovative, environmentally-friendly (also known as “green” or
                   “sustainable”) development and building projects. Examples of
                   projects that may qualify for such incentives may include:
                   • Those incorporating innovative, technologically-advanced
                        energy efficient design concepts significantly exceeding Title 24
                        standards.
                   • Those utilizing “green” building materials and permaculture
                        landscape concepts.
                   • Those containing specific, implementable and sustainable
                        measures for reduced dependence on automobile parking
                        demand.
                   Possible development incentives to be considered in this ordinance
                   could include density bonuses, setback variations, modified street
                   standards, reduced parking standards, or similar modifications to
                   standard requirements.
                   See “Green development and building” in the glossary.
                                             309

Section VI: Community Resources Conservation                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 17: Energy                               May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                             310
    SECTION VII.
COMMUNITY SAFETY

                     Chapter 18. Police and Fire
BACKGROUND
Police Services
The City Police Department currently operates out of a single station in the core
area. The number of sworn police officers is 53 and the number of full-time
employees is 81. Sworn officers perform law enforcement tasks as well as
administration and supervision, and civilian personnel are involved in administration,
support services, supervision, dispatch, parking enforcement, and community service
duties. UC Davis also contains on-campus police department that maintains a
mutual aid agreement with the City for major incidents, although direct officer-to-
officer communication is severely limited due to non-compatible radio systems.
Table 17 provides statistics on typical police activities. The most frequent types of
calls for police services are related to property crimes (theft and burglary), domestic
violence, and noise complaints. However, the per capita level of crime against
people has been slowly rising over the last twenty years.
                                         Table 17
                          CALLS FOR POLICE SERVICE
             Type of Call                     1991             1995         Change
 Part 1 Offenses (homicide, rape,                 3,624            3,243        -10.5%
 assault, burglary, etc.)
 911 Calls                                        6,836            7,505          9.8%
 Driving Under Influence                            220              153        -30.5%
 Noise Complaints                                 3,602            2,981        -17.2%
 Parking Citations                               16,699           15,552         -6.9%
 Moving Violations                                6,955            5,984        -14.0%
The demand for police services and the need for police staff is expected to grow in
direct proportion to the growth of population and businesses. To meet increased
demands, the Police Department expects that the automation of records and
administration will continue to increase and that there may be increased reliance on
non-sworn personnel for actions traditionally performed by sworn staff, such as
some investigations.
Fire Protection Services
The Fire Department provides emergency and non-emergency services. The non-
emergency services are provided to attempt to prevent an emergency response.
                                            311
Section VII: Community Safety                                                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 18: Police and Fire                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Non-emergency services include plan checking, construction inspection services, fire
and life safety inspections, fire code investigations, public education and weed
abatement. Emergency services include fire response, emergency medical response,
hazardous materials response and public assistance.
Emergency services are dictated by people and property. Demand for service can be
a function of population, although this consideration does not take into account
non-resident employees or visitors to a jurisdiction. Demand for service may also be
correlated to residential and non-residential building. Table 18 summarizes the
increase in calls for fire service over the last 10 years.
                                                 Table 18
                                 CALLS FOR FIRE SERVICE
                                                                                    Min.
              Population       % Increase      Emergencies       % Increase       Staffing     % Increase
    1985             40,524                              1,611                            10
    1995             51,507              27%             2,176            35%            101            0%
    1999             56,018               9%             2,717            25%            122          20%
(1)   In 1994, one firefighter per shift was hired to reduce overtime costs with Proposition 172 monies.
      Minimum staffing has remained at 10 per day.
(2)   In 1999, OSHA's 2-in 2-out regulation was implemented; two firefighters per shift hired.
The City Fire Department currently operates three fire stations, located in the
downtown (core) area, south Davis and west Davis. The Fire Department attempts
to operate within a standard of a five-minute response time, 90% of the time.
Response time includes alarm processing, turnout time and travel time.
Based on response time maps prepared for a station location study completed by the
Fire Department in April 1999, some existing parts of the City lie outside the five-
minute response time area, including parts of West Davis that are closest to Highway
113, large parts of Central Davis that lie west of Anderson Road and north of
Eighth Street, most of North Davis bounded by Covell Blvd., Highway 113, and F
Street, most of East Davis north of Fifth Street and east of Pole Line Road, and the
western portion of South Davis. A developed area in which response time is most
deficient is the Wildhorse development, in which the response time maps indicate
that response time would be over seven minutes.
To improve the Fire Department’s five minute response time coverage, the City
Council has directed the Fire Department to pursue planning for a fourth fire
station.
                                                     312

Davis General Plan                                                Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                 Chapter 18: Police and Fire
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
SERVICE CAPACITY AND RESPONSE TIMES
GOAL POLFIRE 1. Provide high quality police and fire protection services to
all areas of the City.
         Policy POLFIRE 1.1 Recruit and maintain a staff of high-quality police
                   officers and firefighters.
         Actions
         a.        Set police and fire salaries to allow recruitment and maintenance of
                   excellent staff.
         b.        Ensure that police officers receive ongoing training in all areas of
                   operations, including access to facilities for physical and simulated
                   training, including but not limited to a live firing range.
         Policy POLFIRE 1.2 Develop and maintain the capacity to reach all areas
                   of the City with emergency police and fire service within a five-
                   minute emergency response time, 90% of the time. Response time
                   includes alarm processing, turnout time and travel time.
         Actions
         a.        Increase police and fire protection personnel commensurate with
                   population growth.
         b.        Continue planning for fire, medical and other emergency services
                   for areas of the City outside of the five minutes response time.
         c.        Develop a standard for numbers of sworn police officers per
                   population or developed land use.
         d.        Develop a standard for number of firefighters and associated staff
                   per population or developed land use.
         e.        Consider ways to improve ambulance service within the City.
                                              313
Section VII: Community Safety                                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 18: Police and Fire                             May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
POLICE
GOAL POLFIRE 2. Provide for an emotionally and physically safe
environment where the people of Davis are able to live without fear of
violence or other forms of abuse.
          Policy POLFIRE 2.1 Reduce crime through community policing, public
                    education, crime prevention, neighborhood watch and outreach
                    programs.
          Actions
          a.        Maintain a police presence in the downtown area through foot or
                    bike patrols or a station annex if a new police station is constructed.
          b.        Continue to work with the School District to familiarize students
                    and parents with law enforcement officials and roles, along with
                    conflict resolution programs and services and other local programs
                    providing crisis intervention services.
          c.        Maintain safety education programs at the Senior Center.
          d.        Continue and expand the program of police outreach to the public
                    through participation at fairs and community events and distribution
                    of crime prevention information through City publications, news
                    media, and community-based organizations.
          e.        Promote and support neighborhood watch and safety programs.
FIRE PROTECTION
GOAL POLFIRE 3. Increase fire safety through provision of adequate fire
protection infrastructure, public education and outreach programs.
          Policy POLFIRE 3.1 Provide adequate infrastructure to fight fires in
                    Davis.
          Actions
          a.        Conduct an assessment of fire station, facility and equipment needs
                    to ascertain how the fire department should grow to adequately
                    serve Davis.
                                              314
Davis General Plan                                                 Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                  Chapter 18: Police and Fire
         b.        Monitor water fire flow throughout the City and set a high priority
                   on improving fire flow in those areas where adequate flow is not
                   available.
         c.        Improve fire flow in areas where adequate fire flow is not available.
         d.        Continue to coordinate fire protection services with UCD, including
                   continuing provisions for interconnection of water systems for
                   emergency use.
         e.        Provide sufficient water system capacity through wells, mains and
                   water storage facilities to provide for a fire flow of 2,500 gallons per
                   minute for four (4) hours at 20 lbs. residual pressure, assuming
                   operation at 80 percent of available well capacity.
         f.        Continue to implement a residential resale program which keeps the
                   housing stock in higher quality condition.
         Policy POLFIRE 3.2 Ensure that all new development includes adequate
                   provision for fire safety.
         Standards
         a.        All new development shall comply with the fire safety requirements
                   of the California Fire Code and California Building Code as adopted
                   by the city of Davis.
         b.        All new development shall provide water mains and hydrants to
                   create adequate fire service.
         c.        All new development shall provide adequate roadway access to
                   create adequate fire service. Roadway surfaces shall support fire
                   apparatus in all weather conditions.
         Actions
         d.        Adopt and enforce new editions of the Uniform Fire Code and
                   Uniform Building Codes as they are published.
         e.        Consider a requirement for fire sprinklers in any Group R-1 (hotels
                   and apartments) building over 5,000 square feet.
                                              315
Section VII: Community Safety                                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 18: Police and Fire                           May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          f.        Consider Fire Department recommendations for adoption of other
                    regulations governing conditions that will lessen hazards to life and
                    property from fire and explosion.
          Policy POLFIRE 3.3 Make fire protection services visible and accessible
                    to Davis residents.
          Actions
          a.        Continue to support the Fire Department Public Education
                    Program and its fire prevention programs.
          b.         Publicize the Fire Department Education Program.
                                            316
                          Chapter 19. Hazards
BACKGROUND
Flooding
The Planning Area is drained by Putah Creek, Dry Slough, and the Willow Slough
Bypass. The old North Fork of Putah Creek east of Interstate 80 no longer contains
flowing water because it has been diverted into the South Fork for flood control.
The South Fork of Putah Creek runs through the UC Davis campus eastward and
terminates in the Putah Creek Sinks, located in the Yolo Bypass at the eastern edge
of the Planning Area. Groundwater is naturally recharged in this area.
The California Department of Water Resources maintains the Willow Slough
Bypass, which directs water away from Willow Slough and Dry Slough, in the
eastern section of the Planning Area, and carries water eastward to the Yolo Bypass
at the eastern boundary of the Planning Area. Willow Slough drains the valley floor
between Putah and Cache Creeks. Agricultural runoff contributes water to the
slough during irrigation season. Dry Slough, which forks with Willow Slough in
Plainfield, has an intermittent flow. The Yolo Bypass, which runs north-south, is
flooded when the Sacramento River carries high stormwater runoff levels. Water is
released into the Bypass from the Fremont Weir located downstream from Knight's
Landing.
Figure 35 shows areas known to be subject to flooding in the Planning Area. This
map represents a combination of information from the adopted 1987 National
Flood Insurance Map from FEMA, a 1997 draft update of FEMA data for the west
side of Davis and a 1992 update of information from the “Covell Drainage System
Comprehensive Drainage Plan” prepared by Borcalli Associates for the Yolo
County Flood Control and Water Conservation District. This study addressed the
problems of drainage and flooding in the Covell Drain system, which includes
Willow Slough, Dry Slough, the Covell Drain, the Willow Slough Bypass and the
Yolo Bypass.
Flood hazards shown in Figure 35 generally consist of shallow sheet flooding
caused by surface water runoff during large rain storms. Flooding could be caused
by creeks and other waterways overflowing their banks along Putah Creek, Willow
Slough, Dry Slough, and the edge of the Yolo Bypass. Davis is also in the path of
flooding that would occur in the event of the failure of Monticello Dam on Putah
Creek (Lake Berryessa). An inundation map prepared by the Bureau of Reclamation
to analyze the effects of dam failure shows that the flooding in Davis would not be
significantly greater than in a 100-year flood. This is because of the 23-mile distance
between the dam and Davis.
                                           317

Section VII: Community Safety                                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 19: Hazards                                    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
The city's Public Works Department currently maintains (or contracts for the
maintenance of) three main channels and three detention ponds which provide for
drainage and storm water detention. A fourth pond, the North Stonegate Detention
Pond, is operated by a local maintenance association. Maintenance of the channels
includes removal of silt, control of weeds, and removal of brush. The Public Works
Department also operates drainage pump stations.
Flood control services outside of the City are provided by the Yolo County Flood
Control and Water Conservation District and the State Department of Water
Resources. The Department of Water Resources has primary responsibility of
maintaining the levees in the Planning Area.
Geology and Soils
Davis is located in the eastern portion of the Putah Creek Plain, one of the major
features of the southwestern Sacramento River valley. The land slopes at generally
less than one percent, and elevations range from 60 feet above sea level in the west
parts of the city to 25 feet in the east parts of the city. The foothills of the Coast
Range are approximately fourteen miles to the west, and the Sacramento River is
approximately eleven miles to the east.
Beneath the Sacramento Valley floor is a layer of metamorphic and igneous rock at
depths greater than 17,000 feet. Atop this layer is a layer of marine and sedimentary
rocks up to 15,000 feet thick. Neither of these layers bear water. The surface layers
consist of up to 3,000 feet of water-bearing alluvial sediments, most of which are
semi-consolidated, while only the uppermost layer, up to 200 feet deep, consists of
unconsolidated alluvial deposits.
No earthquake faults run through the Planning Area, although the San Andreas fault
system is to the west and the Eastern Sierra fault system is to the east. Numerous
quakes along these faults have been felt in Davis. Major quakes occurred in 1833,
1868, 1892, 1902, 1906, and most recently in 1989, but Davis suffered no significant
damage. The Office of Planning and Research has placed the Davis area in Seismic
Activity Intensity Zone II, which indicates that the maximum intensity of an
earthquake would be VII or VIII on the Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale. An
earthquake of such magnitude would result in “slight damage in specially designed
structures; considerable in ordinary substantial buildings, with partial collapse; great
in poorly built structures.” The Uniform Building Code places all of California in
the zone of greatest earthquake severity because recent studies indicate high
potential for severe ground shaking.
Due to a high proportion of silt and clay, the soils in the Planning Area are only
moderately or slowly permeable, which hinders drainage and ground water recharge.
Erosion hazards are “none to slight.” Shrink-swell potential, which is the potential
for soil to expand and contract due to moisture and temperature, is predominantly
“moderate to high.”
                                            318

Davis General Plan                         Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                Chapter 19: Hazards
                                                                    ____
                                       319
Section VII: Community Safety                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 19: Hazards               May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                              320
Davis General Plan                                             Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                    Chapter 19: Hazards
Disaster Planning
The City of Davis Fire Department maintains the City’s Multi-Hazard Functional
Planning Guide, which plans for emergency management and evacuation in the
event of disasters. According to the departments, the most likely disaster scenario
for Davis is a toxic spill on Interstate 80 or the Southern Pacific mainline railroad
tracks passing through town. Other disasters could occur, such as a flood, an
earthquake or a major fire.
The Guide includes operating procedures in the event of a disaster, as well as
descriptions of emergency evacuation routes in Davis. According to the guide, all
major roads are available for evacuation, depending on the location and type of
emergency that arises. Major roads identified for evacuation in the Guide are Russell
Boulevard, Highway 113, Interstate 80, Richards Boulevard, Road 102/Pole Line
Road, Mace Boulevard southbound, Road 32A, Covell Boulevard/Road 31, “F”
Street and North Sycamore Frontage Road.
Hazardous Materials
The 1995 Annual Report on Hazardous Waste Sites in the Davis Area, prepared by the
Natural Resources Commission and submitted to the Davis City Council, contains
status reports on eight identified hazardous waste sites in the city. Of the eight sites,
four are underground tank sites at former gas stations and one is an underground
tank site at an operational gas station. The remaining three sites are located on
government or former industrial lands. The contaminants at these sites include
gasoline constituents, solvents, pesticides, herbicides and other chemical compounds
which have the potential to affect both soil and water. The condition and level of
remediation at these sites varies greatly from approval of work plans to remediation
being nearly complete. Regulatory agencies which monitor sites in the City include
the toxic substances control departments of both the State of California and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the Regional Water Quality Control Board, and
the Yolo County Department of Environmental Health.
The City is committed to continued monitoring of water contamination in the
vicinity of the abandoned Davis Land fill site located on the west side of Pole Line
Road north of the City.
The City's Fire Department, with the assistance of the Public Works Department,
responds to all types of spills or illegal disposal. The Yolo County Department of
Environmental Health and Safety is responsible for enforcing compliance with the
disclosure requirements for all businesses handling hazardous materials in amounts
equal to or greater than the State threshold quantities. The Yolo County Public
Works Department, in conjunction with the City's Public Works Department, are
responsible for the Davis Household Hazardous Drop Off and the Small Quantity
Generator programs.
                                             321

Section VII: Community Safety                                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 19: Hazards                                    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
The City has developed an Integrated Pest Management program, in which an insect
or weed pest are managed in an ecosystem context. As an alternative to the
conventional use of pesticides and herbicides, the city implements the program at
city facilities, including parks and greenbelts. In addition, the city has recently
created an Integrated Pest Management Task Force to further analyze these issues
and programs.
Electromagnetic Fields
Over the past decade, public health concerns have been raised regarding
electromagnetic fields (EMFs) emanating from high tension power lines and other
public electrical facilities. There has been a great deal of research about EMFs over
the past several years, but there have been no definitive conclusions from this
research.
EMFs are imperceptible energy emissions located at the low end of the
electromagnetic spectrum, produced by alternating current as it surges in electric
wires. As the term “electromagnetic” suggests, EMFs have two components, an
electric charge and a magnetic attraction. Low-frequency EMFs are less blatantly
damaging to living cells than higher-frequency forms of radiation such as x-rays,
microwaves, or ultraviolet rays, which contain more energy.
It is very difficult to determine what subtle effects, if any, low-frequency fields may
have on living tissue over long periods. Some researchers believe that exposure to
EMFs could have health consequences for humans, while others disagree.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
FLOOD SAFETY
GOAL HAZ 1. Provide flood protection which minimizes potential damage,
while enhancing recreational opportunities and wildlife habitats and water
quality.
          Policy HAZ 1.1 Site and design developments to prevent flood damage.
          Standards
          a.        No development may occur in flood-prone areas, including all areas
                    below an elevation of 25 feet, unless mitigation of flood risk is
                    assured. Any mitigation proposed by the project proponent to
                    mitigate flood risks shall demonstrate that the mitigation/design
                    does not adversely impact other properties.
          b.        Development shall not increase flood hazards or reduce the
                    effectiveness of existing flood-control facilities.
                                              322

Davis General Plan                                                Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                       Chapter 19: Hazards
         c.        New development shall be designed to include measures to protect
                   structures from a 100-year flood.
         d.        New development shall include stormwater detention or retention
                   ponds and other facilities, if necessary, to prevent flooding by
                   surface-water runoff.
         Actions
         e.        Adopt and revise as needed a local Flood Plain Management
                   Ordinance.
         f.        Work with FEMA to update FEMA flood maps of the city.
         g.        Update the flood zone map whenever land is annexed to the city.
         h.        Evaluate the effects of development proposals on upstream and
                   downstream flooding and drainage courses.
         i.        Develop a City Disaster Plan that considers actions in the case of
                   failure of Monticello Dam on Lake Berryessa, or failure of levees
                   along the Yolo Bypass.
         j.        Promote the protection and increase in capacity of the regional
                   flood control system to accommodate both existing and planned
                   development.
         Policy HAZ 1.2 Continue to provide flood control improvements that are
                   sensitive to wildlife habitat and open space preservation .
         Action
         a.        When designing new or retrofitted flood control facilities, include
                   wildlife and/or public open space facilities in them to the extent
                   possible.
GEOTECHNICAL SAFETY
GOAL HAZ 2. Minimize risks associated with soils, geology and seismicity
in Davis.
         Policy HAZ 2.1 Take necessary precautions to minimize risks associated
                   with soils, geology and seismicity.
                                             323
Section VII: Community Safety                                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 19: Hazards                                     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Standards
          a.        A soils report shall be required for development sites where soils
                    conditions are not well known, as required by the Community
                    Development or Public Works departments.
          b.        As a condition of approval of development, mitigation of any
                    identified soils hazards shall be required.
          Actions
          c.        Continue to update and enforce Building Code requirements for
                    seismic and geologic safety and to address ground shaking and
                    ground failure.
          d.        Continue to monitor studies of seismic activity in the region, and
                    take appropriate action if significant seismic hazards, including
                    earthquake faults, are discovered in the planning area.
DISASTER PLANNING
GOAL HAZ 3. Provide for the safety and protection of citizens from natural
and environmental hazards.
          Policy HAZ 3.1 Provide for disaster planning.
          Actions
          a.        Continue to maintain and update the City’s Multi-Hazard Functional
                    Planning Guide.
          b.        Publicize the Multi-Hazard Functional Planning Guide.
          c.        Train appropriate city staff in the use of the Multi-Hazard
                    Functional Planning Guide and in emergency response
                    responsibilities.
TOXICS
GOAL HAZ 4. Reduce the use, storage and disposal of toxic and hazardous
substances in Davis, and promote alternatives to such substances and their
clean up.
          Policy HAZ 4.1 Reduce and manage toxics within the planning area.
                                              324

Davis General Plan                                                 Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                        Chapter 19: Hazards
         Actions
         a.        Before construction starts, a project proponent will submit a
                   hazardous materials management plan for construction activities
                   that involve hazardous materials. The plan shall discuss proper
                   handling and disposal of materials used or produced onsite, such as
                   petroleum products, concrete, and sanitary waste, shall be
                   established prior to the commencement of construction-related
                   activities, and shall be strictly enforced by the project proponent. A
                   specific protocol to identify health risks associated with the presence
                   of chemical compounds in the soil and/or groundwater and identify
                   specific protective measures to be followed by the workers entering
                   the work area. The City of Davis will make available up-to-date
                   information on known hazardous waste sites if the presence of
                   hazardous materials is suspected or encountered during
                   construction-related activities, the project proponent shall complete
                   a Phase I or Phase II hazardous materials study for each identified
                   site.
         b.        Continue to study and implement programs through the city’s
                   Natural Resource Commission to minimize hazardous material use
                   and exposure.
         c.        Continue to cooperate with Yolo County agencies in implementing
                   State laws relating to the use of hazardous materials, including the
                   review of “business plans” for businesses using hazardous
                   materials.
         d.        Create and enforce zoning regulations regarding siting and
                   permitting of businesses that handle hazardous materials.
         e.        Periodically review the Zoning Ordinance and revise it as needed to
                   ensure high environmental quality.
         f.        Develop an enforcement program to maintain a high level of
                   compliance with hazardous materials regulations.
         g.        Provide persons and small businesses within the planning area with
                   environmental information or audits to help them conserve
                   resources, energy, reduce toxics and waste, and provide general
                   education on how to run an environmentally friendly business or
                   household.
         h.        Educate owners of business with operations potentially polluting
                   groundwater as to appropriate management practices.
                                              325

Section VII: Community Safety                                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 19: Hazards                                    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          i.        In cooperation with local agricultural interests and the agricultural
                    commissioners from the counties of Solano and Yolo, work toward
                    voluntary reduction or elimination of aerial and synthetic chemical
                    application in areas adjacent to the city.
          Policy HAZ 4.2 Provide for the proper disposal of hazardous materials in
                    Davis.
          Actions
          a.        Continue the program to educate residents on the negative impacts
                    of dumping hazardous materials in driveways, streets, and drains.
          b.        Continue programs aimed at ensuring that household hazardous
                    wastes and small generator commercial wastes are not disposed of in
                    the general waste stream.
          c.        Continue and expand the household hazardous waste collection and
                    recycling program and the small quantity generator program.
          d.        Work with the County to establish a permanent household
                    hazardous waste collection facility.
          e.        Develop and adopt a pressure treated timber disposal ordinance.
          f.        Maintain used oil drop-off sites.
          Policy HAZ 4.3 Reduce the potential for pesticide exposure for people,
                    wildlife and the environment.
          Actions
          a.        Develop and adopt an Integrated Pest Management Ordinance .
                    The ordinance should consider the impacts that City pesticide
                    applications may have on wildlife.
          b.        Develop a program to encourage alternatives to the use of pesticides
                    and herbicides and practice integrated pest management strategies.
          c.        Reduce the potential for pesticide spray drift to impact Davis
                    residents.
          Policy HAZ 4.4 Increase awareness of agricultural chemical use impacting
                    Davis residents.
                                              326
Davis General Plan                                               Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                      Chapter 19: Hazards
         Actions
         a.        Develop a program to inform Davis home buyers, homeowners and
                   renters of all City or county right to farm ordinances and their
                   property's proximity to agricultural lands or other lands that are
                   subject to pesticide or other chemical applications.
         Policy HAZ 4.5 Minimize impacts of hazardous materials on wildlife
                   inhabiting or visiting the Davis area.
         Actions
          a.       Monitor sediments and water quality in areas used by wildlife for
                   pesticides, heavy metals and other contaminants, and establish base
                   line data.
                   Note: See Standard HAB 1.2b.
         Policy HAZ 4.6 Increase awareness of asbestos in the community.
         Actions
         a.        Notify City water customers yearly of City water quality test results
                   regarding asbestos content. Notification shall also include notice to
                   water customers whose water is delivered through pipes made of
                   asbestos containing materials.
         b.        The city’s building inspection division should maintain a list of some
                   of the typical materials containing asbestos and of businesses that
                   are licensed to do asbestos testing.
         Policy HAZ 4.7 Ensure that remediation of hazardous waste sites is
                   conducted in the most timely and environmentally responsible
                   manner possible.
         Actions
         a.        Maintain an enforcement program to ensure that all releases of
                   hazardous materials are promptly and appropriately cleaned up to
                   the level required by law.
         b.        Proactively work with site owners and state and federal agencies to
                   expediently clean up hazardous materials sites.
                                             327

Section VII: Community Safety                                              Davis General Plan
Chapter 19: Hazards                                    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          c.        In hazardous material remediation projects, injection wells shall only
                    be permitted for aiding in cleanup of State or Federally recognized
                    contaminated sites, and for no other disposal purpose.
COMBINED POLLUTANTS
GOAL HAZ 5. Reduce the combined load of pollutants generated in the City
by 30 percent by the year 2010.
          Policy HAZ 5.1 Reduce the combined load of pollutants generated in the
                    City's wastewater, stormwater and solid waste streams. Such
                    pollutants include, but are not limited to toxic and hazardous
                    substances.
          Action
          a.        Maintain and enhance existing programs, and develop new
                    programs, to reduce the City's combined load of pollutants.
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS
GOAL HAZ 6. Monitor research regarding the health effects of
electromagnetic fields, maintain a public information program on the current
state of knowledge about EMF, and make this information available to all
citizens.
          Policy HAZ 6.1 When there are issues of public concern regarding EMF,
                    encourage efforts to minimize exposure to EMF when this can be
                    accomplished with reasonable planning and investment.
          Actions
          a.        Consider establishing EMF exposure standards if they are suggested
                    in the future by appropriate state and federal agencies.
          b.        Continue to monitor research and policy developments concerning
                    EMF.
                                             328
                        Chapter 20. Air Quality
BACKGROUND
Air quality in Davis is dependent on regional air quality and local pollutant sources.
•   Regional air quality is a function of basin topography and wind patterns. Davis
    is in the Sacramento Air Basin. The Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management
    District (AQMD) manages a portion of this basin, including Davis. Under the
    provisions of the Federal Clean Air Act, the Yolo-Solano District is in non-
    attainment for ozone for the Federal standard. The District is in non-
    attainment for both ozone and PM10 (ten micron particulate matter) for the State
    standards.
•   Local pollutant sources include both stationary sources, such as factories, and
    mobile sources, which are automobiles. Mobile sources are the major
    contributors of local and regional emissions. In Yolo County, motor vehicles
    account for approximately 31 percent of PM10 emissions, including road dust
    generated by motor vehicles on paved and unpaved roads. Motor vehicles also
    account for approximately 64 percent of carbon monoxide emissions.
•   Ozone, often called “smog,” is created when certain pollutants (primarily
    reactive hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen) emitted by vehicles and other
    sources react to sunlight in a photochemical process. In northern California,
    smog can be trapped in a particular area as the result of temperature inversions,
    in which cool air settles above warm air, combined with coastal day winds and
    proximity to local mountains which trap the pollutants.
The California Air Resources Board (CARB) monitors ozone, carbon monoxide,
and nitrogen dioxide levels near Davis. The AQMD monitors ozone, particulate
matter smaller than 20 microns in diameter (PM 10) and fine particulate matter
(PM25) in Woodland. Also, the AQMD monitors PM10 in West Sacramento.
Auto emissions are expected to increase in California through 2010. Emissions will
not increase in direct proportion to the increase in vehicle miles traveled, since
vehicles are expected to run cleaner as technology improves. Still, the City's greatest
opportunities for reducing air pollution are reducing automobile trips (through
voluntary trip reduction programs); reducing trip lengths (through land use
planning); reducing vehicular emissions (through transit and alternative modes); and
improving traffic flow (through roadway improvements).
                                           329

Section VII: Community Safety                                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 20: Air Quality                               May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
Under the California Clean Air Act of 1988, the AQMD adopted an Air Quality
Attainment Plan (AQAP) in 1992 to bring the District into compliance with the
State ambient air quality standards for all pollutants that violate certain standards.
In November 1994, the Yolo-Solano AQMD Board of Directors adopted the
District’s portion of the Sacramento Area Regional Ozone Attainment Plan along
with the four other air districts in the region. The plan is designed to bring the
Sacramento area, including Davis, into attainment of the federal ozone standards by
2005. This plan has essentially replaced the District’s 1992 Air Quality Attainment
plan and is a portion of California’s State Implementation Plan (SIP) which contains
federal, state, and district stationary and mobile source measures. The SIP was
submitted to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in November 1994,
and approved by the EPA in September of 1996. The SIP was adopted to replace
the Federal Implementation Plan, which was rescinded by the EPA in April 1996.
EPA proposed revisions to the federal air quality standards for ozone and particulate
matter in December 1996. The current federal standard for ozone is 0.12 ppm
averaged over one hour. The proposed new ozone standard is 0.08 ppm averaged
over 8 hours. New standards for “fine particulate matter,” or PM2.5, have also been
proposed in conjunction with the new PM10 standards. The new standards are
being proposed because EPA and its Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee have
concluded that the current federal air quality standards do not provide adequate
protection against acute health effects with the required margin of safety. EPA is
expected to establish criteria for designations and air quality standards attainment
dates in 1998 and to establish planning and control requirements in 1999.
There are many programs in place in California and the Sacramento region that will
continue to reduce ozone and particulate matter emissions, such as those measures
contained in the 1994 Sacramento Area Regional Ozone Attainment Plan and
current state required PM10 control strategies. The 1994 Sacramento Area Regional
Ozone Attainment Plan will continue to provide emission reductions on a regional
basis as long term strategies are implemented. The key issue for California and the
Sacramento region will be the timing for current federal air quality standard
attainment progress and attainment deadlines for new standards, especially the
proposed new PM2.5 standards. The proposed new ozone standards will primarily
involve addressing transport impacts on areas “downwind” of urban centers.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GOAL AIR 1. Maintain and strive to improve air quality.
          Policy AIR 1.1 Take appropriate measures to meet the AQMD's goal for
                   improved air quality.
                                            330

Davis General Plan                                              Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                  Chapter 20: Air Quality
         Actions
         a.        Continue to participate in regional planning activities to meet air
                   quality goals.
         b.        Identify potential emission sources of airborne toxics from mobile
                   and stationary sources within a two year period following adoption
                   of the General Plan. This may be in coordination with the
                   California Air Resource Board and the Yolo-Solano AQMD, as
                   appropriate. The results of the identification process shall be made
                   public within one month of identification.
         c.        Enforce rigid high standards to restrict fumes, smoke, dust, or other
                   environmental pollutants from stationary sources of pollution.
         d.        Work with UC Davis, the Air Resources Board, Yolo-Solano
                   AQMD and the Davis Joint Unified School District (DJUSD) to
                   develop educational materials regarding air quality, impact of air
                   quality on people, plants and animals, and what youth can do to
                   improve air quality. The air quality materials shall include specific
                   fugitive dust-control, ROG, and NOx measures that are required by
                   the YSAQMD to reduce both construction and operations-related
                   emissions of these pollutants. Include such materials in the DJUSD
                   curriculum. Examples of educational materials include guidelines
                   for burning practices which would promote clean air and
                   information on wood stoves which comply with standards of the
                   Environmental Protection Agency.
         e.        Implement transit- and pedestrian-oriented land use and design
                   strategies outlined in the Land Use, Design and Mobility chapters of
                   this General Plan.
         f.        Explore options, such as the distribution of educational material,
                   with the Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District to encourage
                   Davis residents and business to use alternatives to gas powered
                   garden tools to reduce air and noise pollution and reduce costs.
GOAL AIR 2. Keep Davis citizens informed about progress in achieving air
quality goals.
         Policy AIR 2.1 Develop a program to monitor and publicize air quality
                   parameters.
                                             331
Section VII: Community Safety                                               Davis General Plan
Chapter 20: Air Quality                                  May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          a.       Coordinate with the Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District
                   to track local air quality status on a regular basis.
          b.       Coordinate with the Yolo-Solano Air Quality Management District
                   to track potential sources of airborne toxics from identified mobile
                   and stationary sources.
          c.       Publicize criteria, air pollutant levels and other monitoring results
                   (both high and low) in the Davis Enterprise or through other media.
                                              332
                               Chapter 21. Noise
BACKGROUND
The major noise sources in the Planning Area are: roadway noise from traffic on
Interstate 80, Highway 113 and arterial streets; railroad noise from the Union Pacific
and California Northern Railroad; airport noise from the UC Davis Airport; and
stationary sources such as industrial and agricultural operations next to sensitive
uses. Existing noise contours and sensitive receptors in the City are shown in
Figure 36. Appendix E gives background on environmental noise.
Roadway Noise
Existing residential areas which are subjected to the highest levels of unmitigated
roadway noise are residences in close proximity of Interstate 80 and along many
arterial roadways. For the Gateway/Olive Drive Specific Plan EIR, noise levels
resulting primarily from Interstate 80 were measured at 73 DNL at a point 400 feet
from the freeway.1
Existing traffic noise conditions in the planning area have been modeled using the
FHWA Highway Traffic Noise Prediction Model (Report No. FHWA-RD-77-108).
The model predicts sound levels for free-flowing traffic based upon noise emission
factors for automobiles, medium trucks, and heavy trucks. The model takes into
account the volume and speed of traffic, the roadway configuration, the distance to
receivers, and the acoustical characteristics of a site.
In July, 1992, the Public Works Department prepared a "Noise Wall Investigations
Report." This study concluded that along many of the arterial streets studied, noise
levels were in the "conditionally acceptable" range of compatibility. The report
recommended that the City implement a noise wall program to reduce noise levels
and that the financial and aesthetic implications of noise walls should be evaluated
on a case-by-case basis before a decision to install noise walls is made.
          1 Gateway/Olive Drive Specific Plan Draft EIR, page 4-44.
                                                 333
Section VII: Community Safety                                                                                 Davis General Plan
Chapter 21: Noise                                                                         May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Figure 36: Existing Noise Contours and Sensitive Receptors
Source: Robert Bein, William Frost & Associates and City of Davis Public Works Department
                                                                                      334
Davis General Plan                                               Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                        Chapter 21: Noise
Railroad Noise
Railroad trains passing through Davis on the Union Pacific and California Northern
railroad tracks create relatively high noise levels close to the tracks. These noises are
intermittent, since trains pass by only occasionally.
For the Gateway/Olive Drive Specific Plan EIR, noise levels resulting primarily
from train traffic along the Union Pacific route were measured at about 82 DNL at a
distance 30 feet from the centerline of the tracks, which corresponds to about 70
DNL 200 feet from the tracks. Twenty-four individual train pass-bys were measured
during a 24-hour period. Maximum noise levels from individual whistle blasts and
engines ranged from 85 dB to over 112 dB.2
Aircraft Noise
The UC Davis Airport is used almost exclusively for flight training and for
infrequent, short duration operations. No impact to sensitive residential areas has
been found.
The Sacramento Metropolitan Airport currently does not significantly impact Davis
with aircraft noise. The City of Davis must monitor future airport plans to become
aware of any proposed changes to the flight paths.
Stationary Noise Sources
The Hunt-Wesson processing plant is a stationary source that affects adjacent
property. Noise from the cannery has come under scrutiny as a result of several
proposals over the years to develop adjacent property for residential uses. A recent
noise study conducted by Brown-Buntin Associates indicates that CNEL values in
the range of 57 to 59 dB occur along the northern and northeastern property line of
the cannery. Information regarding noise levels from the Hunt-Wesson plant is
currently disputed by various analysts. Further evaluation and assessment is being
undertaken as part of the Covell Center environmental review process. The city has
also made findings regarding the Hunt-Wesson plant under AB 1190, which are
described in Chapter 15.
FUTURE NOISE LEVELS
Traffic noise will continue to be the predominant source of noise in Davis. Traffic
noise levels that will occur under build out of the General Plan have been predicted
using projected traffic volumes and the noise modeling methodology described
above. Figure 37 depicts projected traffic noise contours in the planning area.
         2 Ibid.
                                           335
Section VII: Community Safety                                             Davis General Plan
Chapter 21: Noise                                     May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS
GOAL NOISE 1. Maintain community noise levels that meet health
guidelines and allow for a high quality of life.
          Policy NOISE 1.1 Minimize vehicular and stationary noise sources, and
                  noise emanating from temporary activities.
          Standards
          a.      The City shall strive to achieve the “normally acceptable” exterior
                  noise levels shown in Table 19 and the target interior noise levels in
                  Table 20 in future development areas and in currently developed
                  areas.
          b.      New development shall generally be allowed only in areas where
                  exterior and interior noise levels consistent with Table 19 and Table
                  20 can be achieved.
          c.      New development and changes in use shall generally be allowed only
                  if they will not adversely impact attainment within the community of
                  the exterior and interior noise standards shown in Table 19 and
                  Table 20. Cumulative and project specific impacts by new
                  development on existing residential land uses shall be mitigated
                  consistent with the standards in Table 19 and Table 20.
          d.      Required noise mitigation measures for new and existing housing
                  shall be provided with the first stage and prior to completion of new
                  developments or the completion of capacity-enhancing roadway
                  changes wherever noise levels currently exceed or are projected
                  within 5 years to exceed the normally acceptable exterior noise levels
                  in Table 19.
          Actions
          e.      Explore options, such as distributing educational materials, to
                  encourage Davis residents and businesses to use alternatives to gas
                  powered garden tools to reduce noise and air pollution, reduce
                  costs, and be courteous of neighbors.
          f.      Continue to enforce the noise-control ordinance.
          g.      Revise the City's Noise Ordinance (Chapter 16B, "Noise
                  Regulations" of the City of Davis Municipal Code) to reflect
                  construction criteria that can be met by typical construction
                  activities.
                                            336

Davis General Plan                         Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                  Chapter 21: Noise
                                       337
Section VII: Community Safety                         Davis General Plan
Chapter 21: Noise                 May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                              338
Davis General Plan                                                                       Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                                                   Chapter 21: Noise
                                                        Table 19
                   STANDARDS FOR EXTERIOR NOISE EXPOSURE
                                                                  COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
                                                                             Ldn or CNEL, dBA
                                                       Normally       Conditionally        Normally             Clearly
  USE                                                 Acceptable       Acceptable       Unacceptable        Unacceptable
  Residential                                          Under 60          60-70*               70-75           Above 75
  Transient Lodging - Motels, Hotels                   Under 60           60-75               75-80           Above 80
  Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals,             Under 60           60-70               70-80           Above 80
  Nursing Homes
  Auditoriums, Concert Halls,                          Under 50           50-70                NA             Above 70
  Amphitheaters
  Sports Arenas, Outdoor Spectator Sports                 NA            Under 75               NA             Above 75
  Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                      Under 70            NA                 70-75           Above 75
  Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water                  Under 70            NA                 70-80           Above 80
  Recreation, Cemeteries
  Office Buildings, Business Commercial                Under 65           65-75            Above 75              NA
  and Professional
  Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities,                Under 65           70-80            Above 80              NA
  Agriculture
NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE: Specified land use is satisfactory assuming all buildings involved are of conventional
construction, without special noise insulation requirements.
CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE: New construction or development should be undertaken only after a detailed
analysis of the noise reduction requirements is conducted, and needed noise attenuation features are included in the
construction or development.
NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE: New construction or development should be discouraged. If new construction or
development does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements must be conducted and needed noise
attenuation features shall be included in the construction or development.
CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE: New construction or development shall not be undertaken.
NA: Not applicable.
*       The City Council shall have discretion within the “conditionally acceptable” range for residential use to allow
        noise levels in outdoor spaces to go up to 65 dBA if cost effective or aesthetically acceptable measures are not
        available to reduce noise levels in outdoor use spaces to the “normally acceptable” levels. Outdoor spaces which
        are designed for visual use only (for example, streetside landscaping in an apartment project), rather than outdoor
        use space, may be considered acceptable up to 70 dBA.
                                                            339

Section VII: Community Safety                                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 21: Noise                                        May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                                                Table 20
                  STANDARDS FOR INTERIOR NOISE LEVELS
 USE                                                            NOISE LEVEL (dBA)
 Residences, schools through grade 12, hospitals and
 churches                                                                45
 Offices                                                                 55
          h.        Require an acoustic study for all proposed projects that would have
                    noise exposure that may exceed City Noise Ordinance standards for
                    construction activities or impacts after development that would be
                    greater than normally acceptable as indicated by Figure 37 of the
                    General Plan update.
          i.        Consider lowering speed limits or installing traffic calming measures
                    adjacent to all residences, schools, hospitals, and libraries that
                    experience noise levels that exceed acceptable noise levels.
          j.        Develop procedures to address citizen noise complaints and provide
                    remedies that encourage the use of alternative noise mitigation
                    measures over conventional sound walls.
          k.        The City should conduct an acoustic study of the City and revise
                    noise standards and ordinances to reflect the urbanized setting of
                    the City.
          l.        Periodically review noise levels along arterials and minor arterials
                    and report to the City Council alternative solutions for achieving
                    acceptable noise levels.
          m.        The project proponent shall employ noise-reducing construction
                    practices. The following measures shall be incorporated into
                    contract specifications to reduce the impact of construction noise.
                   •     All equipment shall have sound-control devices no less effective
                         than those provided on the original equipment. No equipment
                         shall have an unmuffled exhaust.
                                                   340

Davis General Plan                                                     Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                              Chapter 21: Noise
                   •    As directed by the City, the contractor shall implement
                        appropriate additional noise mitigation measures including, but
                        not limited to, changing the location of stationary construction
                        equipment, shutting off idling equipment, rescheduling
                        construction activity, notifying adjacent residents in advance of
                        construction work, or installing acoustic barriers around
                        stationary construction noise sources.
         Policy NOISE 1.2 Discourage the use of sounds walls whenever
                   alternative mitigation measures are feasible, while also facilitating the
                   construction of sound walls where desired by the neighborhood and
                   there is no other way to reduce noise to acceptable exterior levels
                   shown in Table 19.
                   See the separate General Plan policy interpretation document titled "Major
                   Arterial Landscaping, Noise Attenuation Design and Greenstreets".
         Standards
         a.        Where sound walls are built, they should include dense landscaping
                   along them to mitigate their visual impact, as illustrated in Figure 38.
         b.        Where sound walls are built, they should provide adequate openings
                   and visibility from surrounding areas to increase safety and access, as
                   illustrated in Figure 38. Openings should be designed so as to
                   maintain necessary noise attenuation.
         c.        Review sound walls and other noise mitigations through the design
                   review process.
         Actions
         d.        Develop procedures to finance and facilitate construction of sound
                   walls and other noise mitigation measures where the City Council
                   determines they are needed along corridors.
         Policy NOISE 1.3 Develop and implement procedures for the accurate
                   measurement and prediction of noise levels in Davis.
         Actions
         a.        Directly measure noise levels along all arterials and minor arterials,
                   rather than simply estimating them with computer models.
         b.        Adopt guidelines and criteria for ongoing monitoring of noise levels
                   as traffic increases.
                                               341

Section VII: Community Safety                                Davis General Plan
Chapter 21: Noise                        May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          .
      Minimal Landscaping and Inadequate Openings for Access
      Dense Landscaping and Adequate Openings for Access
      Figure 38: Sound Wall Design Concepts
                                 342
Davis General Plan                                                 Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                                          Chapter 21: Noise
         Policy NOISE 1.4 Take a proactive role in State law-making regarding
                   noise regulation.
         Actions
         a.        Support implementation of state legislation that requires reduction
                   of noise from motorcycles, automobiles, trucks and aircraft.
         b.        Advocate in favor of changes in State traffic law so that noise can be
                   used as a criterion for setting speed limits.
GOAL NOISE 2. Provide for indoor noise environments that are conducive to
living and working.
         Policy NOISE 2.1 Take all technically feasible steps to ensure that interior
                   noise levels can be maintained at the levels shown in Table 20.
         Standards
         a.        New residential development or construction shall include noise
                   attenuation measures necessary to achieve acceptable interior noise
                   levels shown in Table 20.
         b.        Existing areas that will be subjected to noise levels greater than the
                   acceptable noise levels shown in Table 20 as a result of increased
                   traffic on existing city streets (including streets remaining in existing
                   configurations and streets being widened) shall be mitigated to the
                   acceptable levels in Table 20. If traffic increases are caused by
                   specific projects, then the City shall be the lead agency in
                   implementing cumulative noise mitigation projects. Project
                   applicants shall pay their fair share for any mitigation.
                                              343
Davis General Plan                         Section VII: Community Safety
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007                  Chapter 21: Noise
                                       344
      SECTION VIII.
PLAN IMPLEMENTATION

              SECTION VIII. IMPLEMENTATION
This section of the General Plan includes goals, policies and actions that the City of
Davis will follow in implementing the General Plan. These goals, policies and
actions apply to all the various components of the Plan.
ON-GOING EVALUATION AND CHANGE
GOAL IMP 1. Maintain the General Plan and the City's overall planning
process as a dynamic, responsive document.
        Policy IMP 1.1 Identify and monitor unmet community needs; mobilize
                 and develop resources to meet those needs.
        Actions
        a.       Identify an on-going process for developing and maintaining
                 demographic data, service statistics and other indicators of
                 community needs to assist in service planning.
        b.       Develop a process for incorporating city administered program
                 service statistics into program funding plans.
        c.       Prioritize all capital projects in relation to one another in the Major
                 Projects Financing Plan.
        d.       Evaluate all City programs on a regular, periodic basis, not to exceed
                 every 36 months.
        e.       Modify and improve programs based on the periodic evaluations.
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
GOAL IMP 2. Promote progressive, innovative and effective citizen-based
planning and participation.
        Policy IMP 2.1 Continue to promote community review of the
                 environmental and social impacts of new projects and
                 developments.
                                            345
Section VIII: Implementation                                               Davis General Plan
                                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          a.       Provide procedures by which interested residents may appeal to the
                   City for improvements in their area or by which they may express
                   their approval or disapproval of proposed City or private projects.
          b.       Strengthen the neighborhood noticing and participation program
                   used for major public projects and private development projects.
                   Through a public process, establish guidelines to address the type
                   and extent of noticing to be provided for different types of public
                   and private projects including but not limited to major roadway and
                   intersection modifications, general plan amendments, zone changes
                   and certain conditional use permits. The City should review the
                   noticing and participation program annually for effectiveness, with a
                   public hearing to allow for citizen input.
          c.       Develop a method for documenting, distributing and maintaining
                   interpretations of the municipal code, the General Plan, and
                   program policies as each relate to development approval.
          d.       Develop a neighborhood outreach/liaison program coordinated by
                   the City to proactively address neighborhood issues.
          e.       Promote effective and respectful exchange of ideas in the public
                   forum.
          Policy IMP 2.2 Continue to encourage volunteerism.
          Actions
          a.       Expand coordination and training activities for volunteers, and
                   training city and community-based staff in effective recruitment and
                   retention of volunteers.
          b.       Expand City volunteer recruitment activities.
          c.       Expand the City "in-kind" gifts program to include community-
                   based social services organizations.
          d.       Assist in the creation of non-profit [501(c)(3)] cultural institutions
                   and organizations founded for public benefit by, and under the
                   control of, Davis residents.
          Policy IMP 2.3 Encourage mediation as an alternative to violence or
                   antagonism.
                                             346
Davis General Plan                                              Section VIII: Implementation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
         Actions
         a.        Continue to offer community mediation services.
FINANCING
Budget. During the last decade, there has been a profound and ongoing change in
the structure of public finance. Due to the extreme budgetary problems at the
federal and state levels, local governments have been required to assume
responsibility for a broader range of programs with more traditional funding
mechanisms, including property tax, being shifted to the state.
In May, 1996, the City Council received the preliminary budget for the 1996-97 fiscal
year. The preliminary budget anticipates $57.4 million in revenue and $60 million in
expenditures. Capital projects account for the nearly $3 million difference, which
will be paid from a reserve fund. The funds for these capital projects have been
received in previous years through the construction tax, bond funds and other
sources.
The preliminary budget is intended to provide renewed stability within the general
fund after the development of the current 1995-96 budget required significant
general fund expenditure reductions ($1.4 million) and a reduction in staff positions
not experienced since 1979 following the passage of Proposition 13. In 1995, the
city had to respond to a budget shortfall of $1.2 million as a result of state property
tax shifts, rising expenditures and a struggling local economy. The city continues to
suffer from stagnant sales and property tax levels, which hit peaks in the early 1990s
and have not managed to recover. Davis remains near the bottom statewide in
terms of sales tax per capita, half of nearby Woodland and Sacramento, and the city's
share of property taxes has decreased $1.4 million since 1992.
To meet ongoing financial challenges, the city will need to consider diversification of
its economic base, exercise budgetary discipline, establish citywide priorities, and
identify process improvements and cost saving measures.
Development Impact Fee Study and Capital Improvements Master Plan. As
described in Section I, Introduction, the city’s Development Impact Fee Study is a
financial analysis of the cost of infrastructure requirements dictated by the new
development envisioned by the City’s General Plan. The Development Impact Fee
Study is updated annually to reflect changes in actual and projected development in
the community and to enhance the infrastructure descriptions, costs and allocations.
The Capital Improvements Master Plan is the city’s master capital improvement
program, which identifies funding sources for various projects in a manner that is
consistent with the General Plan and city specific plans. The infrastructure projects
                                            347

Section VIII: Implementation                                                Davis General Plan
                                                       May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
include street and other transportation facilities, core area, park and recreation,
public safety, general city facilities and open space. The Capital Improvements
Master Plan is updated annually to reflect changes in cash flow, project cost
refinements and any necessary adjustments in project timing or funding.
GOAL IMP 3. Ensure Davis' financial solvency while also setting fees and
taxes that are competitive with surrounding communities.
          Policy IMP 3.1 Annually review the Capital Improvements Master Plan to
                   reflect community priority and realistic prospects for future growth.
          Standards
          a.       The City shall not add to the Capital Improvements Master Plan
                   without identifiable sources of funding.
          b.       If costs for projects in the Capital Improvements Master Plan rise at
                   a rate greater than inflation, then projects in the Capital
                   Improvements should be decreased in scope, delayed or deleted, or
                   additional funding sources for them should be identified, in order to
                   make up the resulting funding shortfall.
          c.       The City shall establish adequate maintenance funding for any lands
                   to be managed by the City. If the City cannot sustain the
                   maintenance burden, it may consider working with other
                   organizations or individuals to provide that service or to receive
                   ownership.
          Actions
          d.       Maintain and continue to update and improve the City's unified
                   infrastructure financing system.
          e.       Review Development Impact Fee Study nexus assumptions for non-
                   residential uses. Consider the trade-offs between fee reductions to
                   encourage economic development versus the resulting loss in city
                   income.
          f.       Identify and take advantage of opportunities to leverage planned
                   City expenditures to realize multiple community objectives. For
                   example, needed drainage facilities can be designed to include
                   habitat or open space, thereby fulfilling multiple goals.
                                              348
Davis General Plan                                                Section VIII: Implementation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
         Policy IMP 3.2 Ensure that City fees and taxes are competitive with those
                   of surrounding communities when weighed against the services
                   provided.
         Actions
         a.        Revise the City's tax and fee structure to be as competitive as
                   possible on a regional basis.
         b.        Work on a regional basis to share and/or contract for infrastructure
                   capacity.
         Policy IMP 3.3 Require that the costs of mitigation and service provision
                   for development projects be borne by those projects.
         Standards
         a.        Capital improvements, or portions thereof, that extend services to
                   new users shall be financed by new development.
         b.        Capital improvements, or portions thereof, that enhance the level of
                   service for existing residents shall be financed by existing
                   development.
         c.        Costs for capital improvements and related development fees and
                   on-going operations and maintenance shall be allocated in
                   proportion to burden incurred or benefit received, based on the
                   service demand generated.
         d.        Non-residential development shall pay its fair share to help meet the
                   community's recreational, social, and cultural needs, as well as its
                   infrastructure requirements.
STREAMLINING
GOAL IMP 4. Continue to develop a more economical and service-oriented
approach for all City departments.
         Policy IMP 4.1 Streamline the permit-approval process to the extent
                   feasible.
                                             349
Section VIII: Implementation                                              Davis General Plan
                                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          Actions
          a.       Review current Community Development, Public Works and other
                   departmental project management and processing in order to make
                   the project approval process more efficient and streamlined.
          b.       Investigate a “one-stop” approval process for non-discretionary
                   applications which require actions from multiple departments. The
                   purpose would be to avoid unnecessary and confusing processing
                   steps..
          c.       Provide developers in advance with full information needed to
                   reduce the length of time and cost of approval of development.
          d.       Continue outreach efforts to inform architects, contractors, and
                   builders of City standards and requirements.
          e.       Develop mechanisms in the Community Development and Public
                   Works Departments to allow for early and expedient evaluation of
                   alternative designs proposed by private applicants to meet City
                   standards.
          f.       Consider expanding the use of third-party project reviewers and
                   plan checkers to reduce permit processing time.
          g.       Establish and apply maximum time limits for permit processing.
          h.       Review and incorporate private sector methods of achieving greater
                   efficiency and reduced cost in the provision of City services.
          Policy IMP 4.2 Make City services as responsive as possible to community
                   needs.
          Action
          a.       Develop methodologies to gauge the demands for and effectiveness
                   of City services.
                                            350

Davis General Plan                                                Section VIII: Implementation
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
INTER-DEPARTMENTAL AND INTER-AGENCY
COOPERATION
GOAL IMP 5. Increase coordination of existing services to ensure broader
access for all Davis residents.
         Policy IMP 5.1 Foster collaboration and partnership among city
                   departments and between the city and other agencies and
                   jurisdictions in service delivery.
         Actions
         a.        Continue to hold regular meetings of city department heads to
                   coordinate programs and actions.
         b.        Assist in the expansion of Davis residents' understanding and
                   utilization of Yolo-Link.
         c.        Ensure that the schools have access to Yolo-Link and other services
                   at school sites.
GOAL IMP 6. Form strong cooperative partnerships with surrounding cities,
the school district, UC Davis, local community colleges and Yolo and Solano
Counties regarding community planning, business enterprises, technological
developments, arts, culture, and education.
         Policy IMP 6.1 Maintain and strengthen the City's collaborative relationship
                   with the school district, University of California, and Yolo and
                   Solano counties and regional service providers.
         Actions
         a.        Continue to work to improve cooperation, communication and
                   consolidation of services between the City and the University.
         b.        Encourage inter-organizational representation in the long-term
                   planning efforts of each agency, especially in relationships between
                   the City, UC Davis, Yolo County, surrounding cities and DJUSD.
         c.        Maximize joint-use facilities and open space use with UC Davis and
                   the Davis Joint Unified School District.
                                             351
Section VIII: Implementation                                               Davis General Plan
                                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
          d.       Seek to schedule meetings on a regular basis with UC Davis
                   administration, DJUSD administration, the counties and
                   surrounding cities to engage in regional problem solving and plan
                   joint programs and joint use facilities.
          e.       Maintain and expand partnerships with Yolo County to provide
                   health, mental health, substance abuse and social services in Davis.
STANDARDS FOR FUTURE STUDIES
GOAL IMP 7. Strive for accuracy and completeness in city studies.
          Policy IMP 7.1 Set clear standards for future city studies.
          Standards
          a.       Any studies of individual projects that serve as a basis for project
                   approval shall be directed or conducted by the City of Davis and
                   made available for public review.
          Actions
          b.       To the extent appropriate, use consistent methodologies in city
                   studies, with standardized sampling methods and definitions of
                   variables.
          c.       Analyze and mitigate for cumulative (not just project-by-project)
                   impacts created by new projects.
                                            352
  SECTION IX.
GLOSSARY AND
DEFINITIONS

                           SECTION IX. GLOSSARY
Active Recreation Area: A city-owned or -maintained property that is meant to
provide facilities for active recreation activities such as field sports, play on
structures, and barbecues.
Agricultural Land with Conservation Easement: Agricultural land whose owners
have sold or otherwise dedicated the additional development rights of their property
so that the land will be assessed and taxed as agricultural land rather than as land that
could be developed at a higher intensity.
Arena: A sphere of interest or activity.
Art in Public Places: A city program, which funds the purchase and display of visual
art in city buildings and on city-owned property. Funds for Art in Public Places are
provided through the Municipal Art Fund.
Artist: Any person working or creating in any of the arts, including visual arts,
literary arts, dance, music, video and film making, performance art, media art and all
other forms of artistic expression.
Community Separators: Agricultural and open space areas located between cities that
provide visual relief from continuos urbanization, encourage compact urban form,
and maintain the unique identity of communities in close proximity. These lands are
frequently subject to intense development pressures, especially within transportation
corridors. The areas between the cities of Davis and Dixon and between the cities
of Davis and Woodland have been identified as the primary Community Separators
in the Davis General Plan.
Cultural Resource Site: Archeological sites containing information of known or
potential value in answering scientific research questions; archeological sites
containing information that may shed light on local, State, or national history; sites
of cultural importance to local people or social or ethnic groups, such as locations of
important events in their history, historic or prehistoric cemeteries, or shrines; sites
associated with events important in the history of the community as a whole
(battlefields, trails, etc.); cemeteries associated with important events or people, or
whose study can provide important information about history or prehistory; ruins of
historically or archaeologically important buildings or structures; historically
important shipwrecks; cemeteries important for the architectural or artistic qualities
of their constituent structures and monuments; constructed landscapes that
exemplify principles, trends, or schools of thought in landscape architecture, or that
represent fine examples of the landscape architect’s art.
                                              353

Section IX: Glossary                                                        Davis General Plan
                                              Adopted May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Demand Responsive Transit: Transit which is dispatched on request to specific
locations to meet a passenger. Examples include paratransit, jitneys and taxis.
Densification A type of infill development, involving a building addition or
redevelopment to add dwelling units or floor area, consistent with City policies.
Design Guidelines: A set of guidelines defining the parameters to be followed in site
and/or building design and development.
Diverse or diversity: Having or representing a multitude of races, ethnicities,
cultures, ages, religions, genders, sexual orientations, disabilities, or socio-economic
backgrounds.
Dwelling Unit: A structure that contains living facilities, including provisions for
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
Dwelling Unit, Duplex: Two primary, separate dwelling units, either attached or
detached on one lot, each unit allowing one family or one group of congregate
residents.
Dwelling Unit, Multi-family: Any residential building providing separate dwelling
units for three or more families, or groups of congregate residents, owned by a single
entity.
Dwelling Unit, Single Family Attached: Any building with three or more dwelling
units, structurally attached, for not more than one family or one group of congregate
residents for each unit. Each unit may be owned by a separate entity.
Dwelling Unit, Single Family Detached: Any dwelling unit, not structurally attached
to another primary residence, for not more than one family or one group of
congregate residents for each unit. Each unit is typically on an individual lot and
owned by a separate entity.
Dwelling Unit, Split Lot: Two primary dwelling units, usually attached, each on its
own lot. In contrast, a duplex consists of two separate dwelling units on one lot.
Split lots in Davis have typically been used to create two affordable dwelling units
which are smaller than market-price units.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The ratio of the size of a building to the size of its parcel,
expressed as a decimal number. For example, a 50,000 square foot building on a
50,000 square foot lot has a floor area ratio of 1.00 (or 100%), while the same
building on a 100,000 square foot parcel would have a floor area ratio of .50 (or
50%). The FAR is used in calculating the building intensity of a development
project.
“Green” (or “Sustainable”) Development and Building: Environmentally friendly
                                            354

Davis General Plan                                                      Section IX: Glossary
Adopted May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
building design, construction and maintenance. Based on principles of resource
conservation, energy efficiency, and preserving and enhancing environmental quality.
 Incorporates natural systems such as daylight to fresh air. Fundamentals include
site, building design, engineering and building. Site considerations may include:
redeveloping an existing urban site rather than converting a raw, undeveloped site;
building orientation to conserve energy through solar orientation, daylighting, and
wind; connections to the larger urban community’s facilities and services; below
grade construction to reduce visual and energy impacts; and landscaping to minimize
water irrigation requirements. Building considerations involve the building’s skin,
shading, massing and may include: daylighting; efficient HVAC systems; thermal
insulation; glazing; shading devices; floor plate and shape to bring in more natural
light; design for natural heating and cooling; production of energy; use of removable
(that is, photovoltaic panels or solar hot water technology; efficient use and re-use of
water; and use of environmentally-friendly, low impact materials that can ultimately
be recycled.
Greenbelts: Areas of varying widths, averaging about 100 feet wide, and cover
approximately 10% of the area in new residential development. Greenbelts are
segments of a citywide complex of parks and transportation corridors. Greenbelts
are designed and maintained to provide both recreation opportunities and off-street
transportation. Greenbelts serve the neighborhood and the community in general.
Amenities may include bike paths, children's playgrounds, turf areas, picnic areas and
landscaping.
Greenstreets: One of the components of the City’s greenway network. Greensteets
typically include large canopy shade trees to provide beauty and comfort for
bicyclists and pedestrians and to minimize the heat gain of the paved surfaces. New
greenstreets typically include a parkway space with bike paths between the curbs and
ultimate right-of-way lines, in addition to bike lanes. New arterial greenstreets also
typically provide a landscaped median. It is recognized that exiting designated
greenstreets may have been built without the typical elements. Improvements to
such streets may be planned (for example, as part of corridor plans) and
implemented as resources are available.
Greenways: The components of an integrated, continuous open space system.
Greenways link to and connect open space areas such as parks and habitat areas, and
are to be planted with native vegetation that supports wildlife.
Gross Density: The density of housing in an area, expressed as dwelling units per
acre, including the entire development area with its local and collector streets and
private open spaces. For calculation purposes, the gross density excludes arterial
streets and public open spaces. On mixed use parcels, the gross density is the
density on the entire parcel, without regard to any other uses on the parcel as well.
                                            355

Section IX: Glossary                                                          Davis General Plan
                                                Adopted May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Habitat Area: An area that can host or sustain vegetative and animal biotic resources,
but that has been disturbed or improved in some fashion, as distinct from “Natural
Habitat Areas.”
Heritage Oak Trees: A native oak tree with a 60” or larger circumference
(approximately 19” or larger diameter).
Historic Building: Notable examples of architectural styles and periods or methods
of construction, particularly local or regional types; buildings showing the history
and development of such diverse areas as communications, community planning,
government, conservation, economics, education, literature, music, and landscape
architecture; stores and businesses and other buildings that provide a physical record
of the experience of particular ethnic or social groups; complexes of buildings, such
as factory complexes, that comprise a functionally and historically inter-related
whole; markets and commercial structures or blocks; buildings by great architects or
master builders and important works by minor ones; architectural curiosities, one-of-
a-kind buildings; sole or rare survivors of an important architectural style or type;
studios of American artists, writers, or musicians during years of significant activity;
institutions that provide evidence of the cultural history of a community (churches,
universities, art centers, theaters, and entertainment halls); buildings where
significant technological advances or inventories in any field occurred (agricultural
experiment stations, laboratories, etc.).
Historic District: Groups of buildings that physically and spatially comprise a
specific environment; groups of related buildings that represent the standards and
tastes of a community or neighborhood during one period of history, unrelated
structures that represent a progression of various styles and functions, or cohesive
townscapes or streetscapes that possess an identity of place; groups of building,
structures (silos, barns, granaries, irrigation canals) that possess an identity of time
and place; groups of structures and buildings that show the industrial or
technological developments of the community, State, or Nation; groups of buildings
representing historical development patterns (commercial and trade centers, county
seats, mill towns); Groups of sites, structures, and/or buildings containing
archeological data and probably representing an historical or prehistoric settlement
or pattern of related activities.
Historic Resource: 1. (National Historic Preservation Act definition): Any prehistoric
or historic district, site, building, structure, or object included in, or eligible for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places; such term includes artifacts,
records, and remains which are related to such a district, site, building structure or
object. 2. (Public Resources Code definition): Any object, building, structure, site,
area, place record, or manuscript which is historically or archaeologically significant,
or is significant in the architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural,
educational, social, political, military, or cultural annals of California.
                                              356

Davis General Plan                                                           Section IX: Glossary
Adopted May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
Historic Archaeology: The study of archaeology pertaining to the time period from
first European occupation until the present.
Historic Structure: Industrial and engineering structures, including kilns, aqueducts,
weirs, utility or pumping stations, and dams; transportation structures, including
railroads, turnpikes, canals, tunnels, bridges, roundhouses, lighthouses, and wharves;
agricultural structures such as granaries, silos, corncribs, and apiaries; movable
structures associated with important processes of transportation, industrial
development, social history, recreation, and military history (ships, locomotives,
carousels, airplanes, artillery pieces, etc.).
Inclusion: Equal opportunity for participation by all diversity groups.
Infill Development: Urban development or redevelopment on vacant or
“underutilized” urban-designated land within a city’s boundaries, consistent with
City policies, as an alternative to accommodating growth through expansions of City
boundaries.
Informal Education: Informal education plays a traditional and central role in
intellectual, cultural and social development. Informal education is voluntary,
lifelong and motivated mainly by intrinsic curiosity, exploration and social
interaction. It includes hobbies, visiting museums, youth groups and youth
activities, libraries, and any educational activity that is outside formal, classroom
education.
Landmark Tree: A tree determined by the City of Davis to be of high value because
of its species, size, age, form, historical significance, or similar criteria.
Lifecycle Costing: Cost analysis of a project or improvement that looks at the costs
to implement and maintain the project or improvement over its entire life.
Low Income Housing: Housing which is affordable to families earning low incomes.
 “Low” incomes are 50% - 80% of the median income in Yolo County.
“Affordable” means that a family spends no more than 30% of its gross income on
housing.
Major Intersections: The following street intersections shall be considered “major
intersections” for the purpose of Standard MOB 0.2a related to level of service
standards:
       1.    Covell Blvd.                            Shasta Drive
       2.    Covell Blvd.                            Anderson Road
       3.    Covell Blvd.                            Pole Line Road
       4.    Covell Blvd.                            Alhambra Blvd.
                                               357

Section IX: Glossary                                                     Davis General Plan
                                             Adopted May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
      5.     8th Street                           Anderson Road
      6.     8th Street                           Pole Line Road
      7.     Russell Blvd.                        Arlington Blvd.
      8.     Russell Blvd.                        Anderson Road
      9.     Russell Blvd.                        B Street
      10.    5th Street                           F Street
      11.    5th Street                           Pole Line Road
      12.    1st Street                           E Street / Richards Blvd.
      13.    Richards Blvd.                       Olive Drive
      14.    Cowell Blvd.                         Pole Line Road
      15.    Chiles Road                          Mace Blvd.
      16.    Cowell Blvd.                         Mace Blvd.
      17.    West Covell Blvd.                    SB SR 113 ramps
      18.    West Covell Blvd.                    NB SR 113 ramps
      19.    Russell Blvd.                        SB SR 113 ramps
      20.    Russell Blvd.                        NB SR 113 ramps
      21.    Richards Blvd.                       EB Interstate 80 ramps
      22.    Covell Blvd.                         WB Interstate 80 ramps
Mixed Use: Any mixture of land uses, including mixtures of residences with
commercial, offices with retail, or industrial with offices and retail.
Mobility: The movement of goods and provision of access to activities and
community services that is reasonably available to all people, including those who do
not drive automobiles due to age, income, illness, disability, or choice.
Moderate Income Housing: Housing which is affordable to families earning
moderate incomes. “Moderate” incomes are 80% - 120% of the median income in
Yolo County. “Affordable” means that a family spends no more than 30% of its
gross income on housing.
Multi-family: A term generally describing a residential building providing separate
dwelling units for three or more families where the units in the building are owned
by a single entity. See "Dwelling Unit - Multi Family."
Municipal Art Fund: A revenue fund, comprising a set-aside by the city of 1% on the
construction cost of most capital improvement projects, that is earmarked for the
purchase and display of Art in Public Places. The Civic Arts Commission is
responsible for advising City Council on fund expenditures.
Natural Habitat Area: An area that sustains animal and vegetative biotic resources
that has not been improved or disturbed. Natural Habitat Areas can also be areas
that were previously “disturbed” and have been reclaimed or rehabilitated.
                                          358

Davis General Plan                                                       Section IX: Glossary
Adopted May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
Neighborhood: A cluster of residential and related land uses within the city, which
typically has a focal point at a neighborhood shopping center, school or park, with
an approximate radius of one-quarter to one-half mile from the focal point to the
periphery.
Net Density: The density of housing in an area, expressed as dwelling units per acre,
based on the land area of the development parcels only, and not including public
streets, parks and public open spaces. For calculation purposes, the net density
includes private streets and private open spaces. On mixed use parcels, the net
density is the density on the entire parcel, without regard to any other uses on the
parcel as well.
Participation: Any type of involvement, including employment, membership, or
utilization.
Passive Recreation Area: An area owned or maintained by the City of Davis that is
meant to be used primarily for passive activities such as sitting, walking, nature
watching and general relaxation. A Habitat Area could serve as a passive recreation
area, as could a Natural Habitat Area in some specific cases.
Pedestrian-Oriented Design: Urban design intended to facilitate pedestrian
movement in an area, as opposed to design that primarily serves automobile
movement. Examples of pedestrian-oriented design include continuous building
streetwalls with shop windows, outdoor cafes, street trees, benches and planters.
Planning Area: The land area addressed by the General Plan. The Planning Area in
the Davis General Plan is the incorporated area within the boundaries of the City of
Davis and the unincorporated land outside of its boundaries which in the judgement
of the City bears relation to its planning (per California Government Code Section
65300). State law provides for planning outside of the City’s boundary and the City
can formally communicate its concerns for the future to other jurisdictions.
Cooperative extraterritorial planning may include, but is not limited to, agriculture
and resource conservation, open space, provision of services, or consistent
development standards.
Prehistoric Archaeology: The study of archaeology pertaining to the time period
prior to first European occupation (prior to 1492).
Proposition 70 Acquisition Program: Proposition 70 was a State bond measure
passed in 1988 that included a $2 million line item grant to the City of Davis for the
acquisition and preservation of land that is sensitive wildlife habitat or could be
converted to habitat. Since then, the City has spent more than $1 million of the
Proposition 70 funds acquiring 190 acres of land. There is a June 30, 1998 sunset on
the use of the remaining funds.
                                            359

Section IX: Glossary                                                      Davis General Plan
                                              Adopted May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Public Resource: Any publicly owned property or publicly operated service.
Public Art: All visual art owned by the city, whether purchased in whole or in part by
Municipal Art Funds or donated to the city.
Publicly Accessible Art: All art, whether owned by the city or privately, that is
located such that it is easily viewed by the general public.
Real-Time Information: Information conveyed via a computer or other electronic
device that is updated to reflect actual conditions of the time the information is
conveyed.
Riparian Corridor: A habitat and vegetation zone which is associated with the banks
and floodplains of a river, stream or lake. Riparian trees and shrubs are typically
phreatophytes, plants whose root systems is in constant contact with groundwater.
Second Unit: A self-contained living unit accessory to the primary residential unit on
a single lot. May be attached to or detached from the primary unit. Sometimes
known as a “granny flat” or “accessory unit.” Governed by Section 65862 of the
California Government Code.
Single-family: A term generally describing a dwelling unit for one family which can
be either attached to or detached from other single family units. See "Dwelling Unit
- Single Family Attached," "Dwelling Unit - Single Family Detached," "Dwelling
Unit - Split Lot," "Dwelling Unit - Duplex,' and "Second Unit."
State Historical Building Code: A special building code containing alternative
regulations for qualified historical buildings. This performance-oriented code derives
its authority from the Health and Safety Code and its application is mandatory
pertaining to qualified historical buildings.
Sphere of Influence: A representation of the probable ultimate physical boundaries
and service areas of the City of Davis as adopted by the Yolo County Local Agency
Formation Commission (LAFCO). Under State law, LAFCO is charged with
discouraging urban sprawl and encouraging the logical and orderly development and
coordination of local governmental agencies. The City may extend its Planning Area
beyond the Sphere of Influence adopted by LAFCO (see “Planning Area” in the
Glossary).
Sustainable: Used, designed or conducted in a manner that does not impede the
ability of future generations to live or use resources.
Through Lanes: Lanes on a roadway at an intersection from which traffic proceeds
straight through the intersection.
                                            360

Davis General Plan                                                      Section IX: Glossary
Adopted May 2001/Amended Through January 2007
Traffic Calming Devices: Structures built in roadways intended to slow traffic or
reduce traffic volumes. Examples include speed humps, roundabouts, and traffic
diverters.
Turn Lanes: Lanes on a roadway at an intersection that are designated for use by
vehicles turning right or left.
Underutilized Land: Developed or partially developed urban-designated land which
could be developed in other uses or more dense and intense use consistent with City
policies, surrounding uses and potential impact issues.
Vacant Land: Urban-designated land which is without a particular use, activity and
building.
Very Low Income Housing: Housing which is affordable to families earning very
low incomes. “Very Low” incomes are less than 50% of the median income in Yolo
County. “Affordable” means that a family spends no more than 30% of its gross
income on housing.
Wetlands: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions do
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, bogs, marshes and similar areas.
Yolo-Link: A computerized database of social service agencies and programs in Yolo
County, available on a CD ROM, on paper, or at computer terminals at public
libraries in Yolo County. Intended for use by both service providers and the general
public. Lead organization in creating and administering Yolo-Link is the Yolo
County Library.
Youth: People under 21 years of age.
                                            361

Section IX: Glossary                               Davis General Plan
                       Adopted May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
                     362
  SECTION X.
APPENDICES

                                  APPENDIX A
                    BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON
                       ENVIRONMENTAL ACOUSTICS
The following discussion provides background information on environmental
acoustics and terminology used to describe and evaluate noise. Important physical
characteristics of environmental noise include frequency, amplitude, and time-
varying character.
A-Weighted Decibels
Most sounds consist of a broad range of sound frequencies. Because the human ear
is not equally sensitive to all frequencies, several frequency-weighting schemes have
been used to develop composite decibel scales that approximate the way the human
ear responds to sound levels. The “A-weighted” decibel scale (dBA) is the most
widely used for the purpose.
Ambient Sound
Ambient sound is the all-encompassing sound associated with a given community
site, usually being a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far, with no
particular sound being dominant.
Anomalous Excess Attentuation
Large-scale effects of wind speed, wind direction, and thermal gradients in the air
can cause large differences in sound transmission over large distances. These effects
when combined result in anomalous excess attenuation, which can be applied to
long-term sound-level estimates. Additional sound attenuation on the order of
about 1 to 2 per 1,000 feet can occur.
Attenuation from Barriers
Any solid structure such as a berm, wall, or building that blocks the line of sight
between a source and receiver serves as a sound barrier and will result in additional
wound attenuation. The amount of additional attenuation is a function o f the
difference between the length of the sound path over the barrier and the length of
the direct line of site path. Thus, the sound attenuation of a barrier between a
source and a receiver that are very far apart will be much less than the attenuation
that would result if either the source or the receiver is very close to the barrier.
                                            A-1

Section X: Appendices                                                      Davis General Plan
                                                      May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Community Noise Equivalent Level
The community noise equivalent level (CNEL) is also used to characterize average
sound levels over a 24-hour period, with weighting factors included for evening and
nighttime sound levels. Leq values for the evening period (7:00 p.m. – 10:00 p.m.)
are increased by 5 dB, while Leq values for the nighttime period (10:00 p.m. – 7:00
a.m.) increased by 10 dB. For given set of sound measurements, the CNEL and Leq
are often used interchangeably. Noise fro aircraft operations in California is
commonly expressed in terms of CNEL.
Day-Night Average Sound Level
Average sound exposure over a 24-hour period is often presented as a day-night
average sound level (DNL). DNL values are calculated from hourly DNL values,
with the Leq values for the nighttime period (10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m.) increased by 10
dB to reflect the greater disturbance potential from nighttime noises.
Decibel
The increment of measure for noise. The nature of the decibel scale is such that the
individual sound levels for different sound sources cannot be added directly to give
the combined sound level of these sources. Two sound sources producing equal
sound levels at a given location will produce a composite sound level that is 3 dB
greater than either sound. When two sound sources differ by 10 dB, the composite
sound level will be only 0.4 dB greater than the louder source alone.
Most people have difficulty distinguishing the louder of two sound sources if they
differ by less than 1.5-2.0 dB. Research into the human perception of changes in
sound level indicates the following:
    •     A 3-dB change is just perceptible,
    •     A 3-dB change is clearly perceptible, and
    •     A 10-dB change is perceived as being twice or half as loud.
A doubling or halving of acoustic energy will change the resulting sound level by 3
dB, which corresponds to a change that is just perceptible. In practice, this means
that a doubling of traffic volume on a roadway, doubling the number of people in a
stadium, or doubling the number of wind turbines in a wind farm will, a s a general
rule, only result in a 3 dB, or just perceptible, increase in noise.
Distance Attenuation
As a general rule, sound from localized or point sound sources spreads out as it
travels away from the source and the sound level drops at a rate of 6 dB per
doubling of distance. If the sound source is long in one dimension, such as traffic
on a highway or a long train, the sound source is considered to be a line source. As
a general rule, the sound level from a line source will drop off at a rate of 3 dB per
doubling of distance. If the intervening ground between the line source and the
receptor is acoustically “soft” (e.g., ground vegetation, scattered trees, clumps of
bushes), an attenuation rate of 4.5 dB per doubling of distances is generally used.
                                            A-2

Davis General Plan                                                   Section X: Appendices
May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
Equivalent Sound Level
Time-varying sound levels are often described in terms of an equivalent constant
decibel level. Equivalent sound levels (Leq) are used to develop single-value
descriptions of average sound exposure over various periods of time. Such average
sound exposure values often include additional weighting factors for annoyance
potential attributable to time of day or other considerations. The Leq data used for
these average sound exposure descriptors are generally based on A-weighted sound
level measurements.
Frequency
The frequency, or pitch, of sound refers to the number of complete pressure
fluctuations, or cycles, that occur in a one second period. Cycles per second are
commonly referred to as Hertz (HZ). Human hearing is in the range of 20 HZ to
20,0000 Hz.
Molecular Absorption
Air absorbs sound energy as a function of the temperature, humidity of the air, and
frequency of the sound. Additional sound attenuation on the order of 1 to 2 dB per
1, 000 feet can occur.
Noise Contour Map
A noise contour map is a map depicting lines of equal sound levels and is analogous
to a topographical map which shows lines of equal elevation.
Noise
Airborne sound is the rapid fluctuation of air pressure above and below atmospheric
pressure that is received by the ear and perceived by the brain as sound. Noise is
defined as unwanted or undesired sound. Frequency (pitch) and sound level
(loudness) are the primary parameters used to describe sound. The time varying
character of sound is addressed by using the various averaging methodologies
described below.
Other Atmospheric Effects
Short-term atmospheric effects relating to wind and temperature gradients can cause
bending of sound waves and can influence changes in sound levels at large distances.
These effects can either increase or decrease sound levels depending on the
orientation of the source and receptor and the nature of the wind and temperature
gradient. Because these effects are normally short-term, it is generally not practical
to include them in sound propagation calculations. Understanding these effects,
however, can help explain variations that occur between calculated and measured
sound levels.
Outdoor Sound Propagation
There are a number of factors that affect how sound propagates outdoors. These
                                           A-3
Section X: Appendices                                                    Davis General Plan
                                                    May 2001/ Amended Through January 2007
factors, described by Miller (1982), are summarized below.
Sound Level
Sound level meters measure the pressure fluctuations caused by sound waves.
Because of the ability of the human ear to respond to a wide dynamic range of
sound pressure fluctuations, loudness is measured in terms of decibels (dB) on a
logarithmic scale. This results in a scale that measures pressure fluctuations in a
convenient notation and corresponds tour auditory perception of increasing
loudness.
                                           A-4
