2013-2021 Housing Element
    of the General Plan
  Adopted by City Council
     January 21, 2014
                                      City of Calexico
                               2013-2021 Housing Element
                                    of the General Plan
                                Master Table of Contents
Section/Appendix                                                     Pages
Section 1 Introduction                                           1-1 to 1-6
Section 2 Overview                                               2-1 to 2-7
Section 3 Housing Needs, Goals, Policies, Objectives & Programs 3-1 to 3-23
Appendix A Housing Needs, Sites, Constraints and Progress       A-1 to A-62
Appendix B Organizations Consulted, Data Sources & Definitions   B-1 to B-4
2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
             INTRODUCTION
                                       City of Calexico
                       2013-2021 Housing Element of the General Plan
                                    Section 1-Introduction
                                      Table of Contents
A. Regional Setting                                                  1-1
B. Historical Context                                                1-1
C. State Requirements and Legislative Changes                        1-3
D. Role and Organization of the Housing Element                      1-4
E. Housing Element Consistency with Other General Plan Elements      1-5
F. Other Statutory Requirements                                      1-6
    1. Water and Sewer Priority                                      1-6
    2. Flood Hazards and Flood Management Information                1-6
                                        List of Charts
1-1    City of Calexico Population Growth 1980 to 2013               1-2
                                SECTION 1 - INTRODUCTION
A. REGIONAL SETTING
Calexico is located:
      198 miles southeast of Los Angeles
      122 miles east of San Diego
      62 miles west of Yuma
The City is situated directly along the U.S./Mexico International border, adjacent to the City of
Mexicali, Baja California, Mexico.
Calexico’s port of entry is a major entrance point for thousands of persons as well as large
amounts of goods traveling between the two countries. Its economy reflects its proximity to the
Mexican border and its location in an agriculturally-oriented California county.
Calexico, in recent years, has also been providing alternative housing options for some
commuters from Mexicali that choose to live in the U.S. and work across the border. As housing
prices become unaffordable in other parts of Southern California, commuters from San Diego
County may also be looking to Imperial County for affordable housing options. Calexico’s
location on Highway 98 and near Interstate 8 makes it a logical provider of housing and services
for this new segment of future residents.
Calexico has grown from a population of approximately 14,412 persons in 1980 to 38,572 in
2010, while the population in Imperial County has increased 82,418 from a population of
approximately 92,110 to 174,528 during that same period. This indicates that Calexico absorbed
29% of Imperial County’s growth within that period. Chart 1-1 shows the City’s population
growth from 1980 to 2013.
The community of Calexico faces challenges ahead as it attempts to accommodate future
growth, while protecting its agricultural heritage, international border community ties and quality
of life.
B. HISTORICAL CONTEXT
Calexico, which began as a tent city of the Imperial Land Company, was founded in 1899 and
incorporated in 1908. The Imperial Land Company converted desert land into a fertile setting for
year-round agriculture. The name Calexico was coined from a combination of the words
California and Mexico.
To understand the history of Calexico, it is important to understand the history of the Imperial
Valley.
Geological evidence indicates that hundreds of years ago a salt-water lake of approximately
4,500 square miles occupied the area that is now the Imperial Valley. This body of water,
named Cahuilla after the area's Indian inhabitants, was fed by the Colorado River. The lake
gradually evaporated over 600 years ago, leaving a vast depression covered with salt deposits.
                                                 1-1

                                 SECTION 1 - INTRODUCTION
                                          Chart 1-1
                           Calexico Population Growth
                                        1980 to 2013
        50,00
                                                                                   40,493
        40,00
  .C
   0
  .!!
   :::,
        30,00
   D.
   0    20,00
  ll.
        10,00
              1980               1990              2000               2010              2013
Following the discovery of the Colorado River by Europeans in 1540, various expeditions led by
Spanish explorers crossed the Imperial Valley. Soon after the initial expeditions, Lt. Juan
Bautista de Anza established an overland route from Mexico to the California Pacific Coast for
colonists and supplies. This overland route resulted in the first secular European settlements in
the California. Some of these settlements were founded in the Imperial Valley and served as the
way stations for all overland travel from Mexico to California.
In 1892, the Colorado River Irrigation Company, under the direction of C.R. Rockwood, Chief
Engineer, began planning to build a canal to bring fresh water into the Imperial Valley. The
canal was to connect with the overflow channel of the Colorado River and extend several miles
south into Mexico. The first water diversion project was completed in 1901. Construction on the
main canal, however, was hampered by financial and legal difficulties as well as by natural
disasters. In the period from 1902-1907, the flooding Colorado River changed its course, flowing
northward into the Imperial Valley and remaining in the northern portion to create what is now
the Salton Sea. In 1940, the All American Canal was completed, creating a means of irrigating
land which has become one of the most productive agricultural areas in the nation.
On April 4, 2010 the El Mayor earthquake caused moderate to heavy damage throughout
Calexico and across the border in Mexicali. Measuring 7.2 on the Richter scale, the quake was
centered about 40 miles south of the U.S.-Mexico border near Mexicali. A state of emergency
was declared and officials cordoned off First and Second streets between Paulin and Heber
Avenues. Glass and debris littered the streets of downtown Calexico and two buildings partially
collapsed. The Calexico water treatment plant sustained severe damage.
                                                1-2
                                  SECTION 1 - INTRODUCTION
C. STATE REQUIREMENTS AND LEGISLATIVE CHANGES
The Housing Element is one of the seven mandatory elements of the General Plan, and it
specifies ways in which the housing needs of existing and future residents can be met. The
element became a mandated element of a general plan in 1969, or 44 years ago. The law
acknowledges that, in order for the private market to adequately address housing needs and
demand, local governments must adopt land use plans and regulatory systems which provide
opportunities for, and do not unduly constrain, housing development.
Government Code Section 65583 states:
    The housing element shall consist of an identification and analysis of existing and
    projected housing needs and a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives,
    financial resources, and scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement, and
    development of housing. The housing element shall identify adequate sites for housing,
    including rental housing, factory-built housing, mobile homes, and emergency shelters,
    and shall make adequate provision for the existing and projected needs of all economic
    segments of the community.
In enacting the housing element requirement in 1969, the State legislature found and declared
that -
    The availability of housing is of vital statewide importance, and the early attainment of
    decent housing and a suitable living environment for every Californian, including farm
    workers, is a priority of the highest order.
And that –
    The provision of housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households requires
    the cooperation of all levels of government.
Also –
    Local and state governments have a responsibility to use the powers vested in them to
    facilitate the improvement and development of housing to make adequate provision for
    housing needs of all economic segments of the community.
The Housing Element must include six major components:
     An assessment of the City’s housing needs.
     An inventory of sites that can accommodate the need for new housing.
     An analysis of housing market and governmental constraints that impede public and
        private sector efforts to meet the needs.
     A progress report describing actions taken to implement the 2008-2014 Housing
        Element.
     A statement of goals, quantified objectives and policies relative to the construction,
        rehabilitation, conservation and preservation of housing.
     An implementation program which sets forth a schedule of actions which the City is
        undertaking or intends to undertake to implement the policies and achieve the stated
        goals and objectives.
                                                 1-3

                                  SECTION 1 - INTRODUCTION
The City’s prior Housing Element was adopted on April 6, 2010. Since that date, SB 812 is the
only major change to the law. Chapter 507, Statutes of 2010 (SB 812), which took effect
January 2011, amended State housing element law to require the analysis of the special
housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities. This analysis should include an
estimate of the number of persons with developmental disabilities, an assessment of the
housing need, and a discussion of potential resources.
SB 375 requires that the housing element due date is 18 months after adoption of the Regional
Transportation Plan (RTP). October 15, 2013 (18 months after the RTP was adopted) is the due
date for adoption of the Housing Element. According to Government Code Section 65588(f)(1):
    “Planning Period” shall be the time period between the due date for one housing element
    and the due date for the next housing element.
Therefore, the planning period for the City’s Housing Element is the period from October 15,
2013 through October 15, 2021.
According to Government Code Section 65588(f)(2):
    “Projection Period” shall be the time period for which the regional housing need is
    calculated.
The SCAG Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) covers the period from January 1,
2014 to October 1, 2021.
According to SCAG, the anomaly of the housing element due date (October 15, 2013)
preceding the RHNA start date (January 1, 2014) is due to (a) legislative changes and statutory
definitions and (b) the date that SCAG adopted its Regional Transportation Plan. Also, HCD
uses January 1 or July 1 for RHNA determination start date purposes as these are the effective
dates used by Department of Finance (DOF) in updating DOF housing estimates and population
projections.
D. ROLE AND ORGANIZATION OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
As previously noted, the Housing Element is one of seven mandatory elements of a General
Plan. Its focus is on assessing the community’s housing needs and describing programs to
address those needs. The element must describe actions to –
        Identify adequate sites to accommodate a variety of housing needs
        Assist in the development of affordable housing
        Remove governmental constraints to housing improvement and construction
        Improve the condition of housing
        Preserve the affordable housing supply
        Promote fair housing
        Promote energy conservation
In addition to this Introduction, two additional Sections and two Appendices comprise Calexico’s
Housing Element:
                                                  1-4

                                SECTION 1 - INTRODUCTION
    Section 2: Overview: This Section provides an overview of the public participation efforts
    of the City during the development of the Housing Element, challenges the City faces in
    addressing housing needs, and a brief summary of the document.
    Section 3 - Housing Program: This Section provides a summary of the housing needs
    and describes the goals, policies and objectives of the Housing Element. Section 3 also
    describes the individual programs that the City – through the Housing, Planning and
    Building Divisions - will implement during the eight-year planning period in order to
    address the community’s housing needs.
    Appendix A: This Appendix contains detailed information on the following:
       Housing Needs Assessment
       Sites Inventory and Analysis
       Housing Market Constraints Analysis
       Governmental Constraints Analysis
       Progress Report
    Appendix B: This Appendix includes a list of organizations consulted, data sources, and
    definitions.
E. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GENERAL PLAN ELEMENTS
Eight elements comprise the Calexico General Plan:
       Land Use Element
       Circulation Element
       Public Facilities and Services Element
       Conservation and Open Space Element
       Safety Element
       Noise Element
       Economic Development Element
       Housing Element
The Housing Element complements other General Plan elements and is consistent with the
policies and proposals set forth by the General Plan. For example, the housing sites identified in
the Housing Element are consistent with those designated as residential in the Land Use
Element. Also, residential densities established by the Land Use Element are incorporated
within the Housing Element and form the basis for calculating the residential capacity within the
City.
The California Government Code requires internal consistency among the various elements of a
General Plan. Section 65300.5 of the Government Code states that the General Plan’s various
Elements shall provide an integrated and internally consistent and compatible statement of
policy. The City has reviewed the other elements of the General Plan and has determined that
this Housing Element provides consistency with the other Elements of the General Plan. The
City will maintain this consistency as future General Plan amendments are processed by
evaluating proposed amendments for consistency with all elements of the General Plan.
                                               1-5

                                   SECTION 1 - INTRODUCTION
F. OTHER STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS
1. Water and Sewer Priority
Chapter 727 amended Government Code Section 65589.7(a) as follows:
     The housing element adopted by the legislative body and any amendments made to that
     element shall be immediately delivered to all public agencies or private entities that
     provide water or sewer services for municipal and industrial uses, including residential,
     within the territory of the legislative body. Each public agency or private entity providing
     water or sewer services shall grant a priority for the provision of these services to
     proposed developments that include housing units affordable to lower income
     households. [Emphasis added]
Calexico receives all of its potable water from the Calexico Water Department. The Calexico
Water Department purchases its raw water from Imperial Irrigation District (IID) which acquires
its water from the Colorado River via an open canal system. Currently, 2% of IID water is
divided among Calexico and other Imperial Valley cities.
The Planning Division will transmit a copy of the adopted Housing Element to the City of
Calexico Utility Services Department within two weeks of its adoption. (Office location: 608
Heber Avenue, Calexico, CA 92231) Sewer services also are provided by the Utility Services
Department.
2. Flood Hazards and Flood Management Information
Government Code Section 65302 requires all cities and counties to amend the safety and
conservation elements of their general plan to include an analysis and policies regarding flood
hazard and flood management information upon the next revision of the housing element on, or
after, January 1, 2009. The City’s General Plan was adopted on May 1, 2007.
The Safety Element includes an analysis of flood hazards. Flooding is a natural hazard that is
unlikely to affect the City of Calexico under normal rain and run-off conditions. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) hazard area map of the Calexico area shows
that the 500 year floodplain of the New River within the City is contained within the area north of
the Calexico International Airport that is currently zoned as Open Space land. However,
conditions upstream in Mexico do affect the river. As the Mexicali area becomes more
urbanized with nothing heretofore having been done to control urban runoff there, the potential
for flooding could increase in downstream areas such as Calexico.
The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) which is administered by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), provides federal flood insurance and federally financed loans for
property owners in flood prone areas. To qualify for federal flood insurance and assistance, the
City has identified flood hazard areas and implements a system of protective controls. The
Safety Element, Land Use Element, and Title 15, Chapter 15.54 of the Municipal Code fulfill
these requirements.
                                                   1-6

2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                 OVERVIEW
                                       City of Calexico
                       2013-2021 Housing Element of the General Plan
                                     Section 2-Overview
                                      Table of Contents
A. Housing Element Public Participation Effort                                        2-1
    1. Housing Needs Survey                                                           2-1
    2. Community Stakeholder Outreach                                                 2-1
    3. Planning Commission Public Workshop                                            2-3
    4. Public Review of the Draft Housing Element                                     2-3
    5. Planning Commission and City Council Public Hearings                           2-4
B. Challenges to Addressing the Community’s Housing Needs                             2-4
    1. Reduced Funding for the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program               2-4
    2. Reduced Federal CDBG and HOME Funding                                          2-4
    3. Loss of the Redevelopment Agency’s Low and Moderate Income Housing Fund        2-5
    4. California Homes and Jobs Act                                                  2-5
C. Housing Element Summary                                                            2-5
                                        List of Tables
2-1    City of Calexico 2013-2021 Housing Element - Housing Program Outline - List of
       Specific Individual Programs by Program Category                               2-7

                                    SECTION 2 - OVERVIEW
The Section 2 Overview presents information on:
     Housing Element Public Participation Effort
     Challenges To Addressing the Community’s Housing Needs
     Brief Housing Element Summary
A. HOUSING ELEMENT PUBLIC PARTICIPATION EFFORT
A housing element must:
    Include a diligent effort by the local government to achieve public participation of all
    economic segments of the community in the development of the housing element
Community participation formed the foundation for the 2007 comprehensive update of the
Calexico General Plan. The General Plan Update included numerous meetings, workshops, and
public hearings. During the preparation of the prior Housing Element, which was adopted in
April 2010, additional public participation efforts were accomplished. During the development of
the 2013 Housing Element Update, public participation efforts included:
       Housing Needs Survey
       Community Stakeholder Outreach
       Planning Commission Public Workshop
       Public Review of the Draft Housing Element
       Planning Commission and City Council Public Hearings
1. Housing Needs Survey
A Housing Needs Survey comprised of eight questions was posted on the City’s website in both
the English and Spanish languages. The public was notified of the opportunity to complete the
survey through announcements in a local newspaper. The purpose of the Survey was to garner
insights on the respondents housing needs and their opinions on the community’s housing
needs.
As of September 18, 2013, the number of completed surveys was insufficient for the purpose of
analysis. The City will continue to have the Housing Needs Survey posted on the Housing
Division’s webpage through the month of December 2013. The Housing Division will tabulate
the survey results at the end of October, November and December and inform both the
Planning Commission and City Council of the results.
2. Community Stakeholder Outreach
An essential part of the public participation effort was outreach to community stakeholders.
Interviews were conducted with several organizations that represent the interests of low income
families, the elderly, and special needs households. A summary is presented below and on the
next two pages of the housing needs and resources identified as part of the outreach effort.
Campesinos Unidos, Inc. (serves the rural poor)
     Rental assistance is considered a growing and significant problem.
     Campesinos Unidos, Inc. provides emergency rental assistance up to three months.
                                                  2-1

                                    SECTION 2 - OVERVIEW
     Campesinos Unidos, Inc. provides energy bill assistance to get up to date and
        reconnect; a growing problem.
     Growing need for energy efficient homes because many homes are old.
     Most families do not want regular apartments because they prefer garden style
        single story homes which have a minimum upkeep and a small garden area.
Calexico Senior Center
Staff at the Calexico Senior Center described the following needs:
       Seniors want showers instead of tubs.
       Need for solar panels and insulation.
       Need for small homes with low maintenance yards, not apartments.
       The elderly age-in-place as they have limited opportunities to move.
Neighborhood House of Calexico, Inc.
Emergency Shelter: Neighborhood House Shelter is an emergency 30-day stay temporary
shelter for women and children. The Shelter is for women who:
       Have been evicted by landlord or are homeless
       Are low-income
       Are clean and sober for at least 6 months
       Are able to live in a group environment with other women and children
       Are willing to work with a case manager in meeting personal objectives
Transitional Housing: Neighborhood House Transitional Housing (NHTH) is transitional housing
for homeless women and children. The program offers housing, counseling, support group, case
management, assistance, food, clothing, referrals and advocacy with community services.
In 2012, the Neighborhood House Shelter/Transitional Housing served 165 unduplicated
persons and 4,678 shelter nights were provided.
Area Agency on Aging
Staff at the Area Agency on Aging described the following needs:
     People are reluctant to apply for home modifications and repairs because they do not
        want to take on more debt.
     The Agency has limited funds to assist with emergency turn-on/turn-off of utilities.
     The Agency provides three months of rental assistance and then refers the clients to
        the County or a city. About 20 households are assisted each month.
     There seems to be a steady increase in the numbers of elderly requesting
        assistance.
     The types of housing most needed include:
         Energy efficient
         Handicapped accessible (as the elderly get older grab bars and walk-in showers
            are important)
         Garden homes with minimal upkeep would enable more seniors to age in place
                                                2-2

                                    SECTION 2 - OVERVIEW
Department of Developmental Services (DDS) – San Diego Regional Center
     Service coordinators from the Regional Center meet with individuals who are
        requesting assistance to diagnose and assess eligibility and help plan, access,
        coordinate and monitor the services and supports that are needed because of a
        developmental disability.
     227 developmentally disabled persons living in Calexico are served by the Regional
        Center.
Women Haven – the Center for Family Solutions and Domestic Violence Shelter
     Operates two emergency shelters for women and women with children. The shelters
        have a capacity of 12 people and 15 to 18 people. The maximum stay is 60 days,
        although extensions may be granted.
     Operates 13 transitional housing units with a maximum stay of two years. Funding is
        from two sources: EHAP and HUD vouchers. The voucher holders usually select El
        Centro as a place to reside because of available services.
 Calexico Chamber of Commerce
     Encourages mixed use development in the Downtown. Nice, new living units above or
        behind commercial/professional uses would be an enticement for young people to stay
        "home" in Calexico and thereby support the development of additional economic
        development.
     JOBS! That is the number 1 issue for the area. There are many retail positions, but the
        young people graduating from local colleges or trade schools must leave the area to find
        work. Few are lucky enough to find positions with government agencies.
     The accepted boundaries of "downtown" are the International Border on the South (First
        Street); Fifth Street on the North; Both sides of Imperial Avenue on the West; and Mary
        Avenue on the East.
3. Planning Commission Public Workshop
The Planning Commission conducted a Public Workshop on September 5, 2013. The Planning
Commission was informed of the Draft Housing Element and the importance of compliance with
Article 10.6 of the Government Code. The PowerPoint presentation focused on Section 3 -
Housing Program. The Planning Commission asked questions regarding single room occupancy
housing, whether property owners have taken advantage of the 20-30 dwelling units per acre
zone, if the City had enough sites to meets its regional share and other similar questions. The
Planning Commission authorized staff to transmit the Draft Housing Element to the State
Department of Housing and Community Development.
4. Public Review of the Draft Housing Element
The Draft Housing Element will be posted on the City’s website. A notice published in a local
newspaper will inform the public in both English and Spanish of the opportunity to review and to
provide comments on the Draft Housing Element. The review and comment period will
commence when the Draft Housing Element is transmitted to HCD and end just before the
public hearing before the City Council. The Housing Manager and Planning Division will notify
community stakeholders that comments on the Draft Housing Element are welcomed.
                                                2-3

                                    SECTION 2 - OVERVIEW
5. Planning Commission and City Council Public Hearings
The Public Hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council will offer another
opportunity for the public to comment on the Draft Housing Element. Community stakeholders
will be notified by the Housing Manager and Planning Division of the opportunity to comment on
the Housing Element at the scheduled public hearings.
B. CHALLENGES TO ADDRESSING THE COMMUNITY’S
     HOUSING NEEDS
At the beginning of the prior planning period – July 1, 2008 – Calexico was in a much better
position to address the community’s housing needs. Years before the prior planning period
began; the City had established a Redevelopment Agency and had accumulated financial
resources in the Low and Moderate Income Housing Fund. Additionally, the Housing Authority
of the City of Calexico was maintaining its Section 8 rental assistance vouchers. Now five years
later as the City enters the new planning period it faces the challenge of diminishing resources.
1. Reduced Funding for the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher
     Program
Sequestration – automatic Federal spending cuts – impacts the resources the Housing Authority
of the City of Calexico has to administer and make housing assistance payments under the
provisions of the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program. HUD has warned:
     About 125,000 individuals and families, including elderly and disabled individuals, could
     lose assistance provided through the Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program and be at
     risk of becoming homeless. The HCV program, which is administered by state and local
     public housing agencies (PHAs), provides crucial assistance to families and individuals
     in renting private apartment units. There may be even more families affected by these
     sequestration cuts to the extent that PHAs are forced to absorb annual funding losses in
     less than a full twelve month time frame. In addition, since sequestration will also cut
     PHA administrative fees for the HCV program, numerous PHAs may find continued
     operation of the program financially untenable and thus stop operating the program
     entirely, which will harm even more families and individuals, including homeless
     veterans.
     Source: Written Testimony of Secretary Shaun Donovan, Hearing before the Senate Committee
     on Appropriations on The Impacts of Sequestration, Thursday February 14, 2013
2. Reduced Federal CDBG and HOME Funding
Additionally, over the recent years, the amount of Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG) funds available to local communities has been dwindling. Although Calexico is not a
CDBG entitlement jurisdiction, it receives CDBG funds from the State Department of Housing
and Community Development (HCD).
Calexico is not a participating jurisdiction under the HOME Partnerships Program and,
therefore, does not have a dedicated source of affordable housing funds. The City periodically
applies to HCD for HOME funds and has been awarded such funds in recent years.
                                                  2-4

                                    SECTION 2 - OVERVIEW
 3. Loss of the Redevelopment Agency’s Low and Moderate Income
     Housing Fund
Pursuant to State law, the Redevelopment Agency was forced to dissolve in February 2012.
Hence, the City lost the opportunity to expend the Agency’s Low and Moderate Income Housing
Fund on affordable housing developments.
4. California Homes and Jobs Act
The California Homes and Jobs Act of 2013 would place a fee of $75 on the recordation of real
estate related documents — excluding home sales — raising $500 million annually for state
investment in affordable home production and leveraging an additional $2.78 billion in federal,
local, and bank investment in homes and jobs for Californians. If enacted, monies generated by
the fee would be placed in a Trust Fund that would support the –
     …development, acquisition, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing affordable to low-
     and moderate income households, including, but not limited, to emergency shelters,
     transitional and permanent rental housing, including necessary service and operating
     subsidies; foreclosure mitigation; and homeownership opportunities.
If the California Homes and Jobs Act of 2013 is enacted, it may be possible that resources could
become available so a developer could seek funding for an affordable housing development to
be located in Calexico. Efforts are to be made, according to the Act, “to promote a
geographically balanced distribution of funds.”
The California Homes and Jobs Act passed both the Assembly Housing and Community
Development and Assembly Labor and Employment Committees. After the August 30, 2013
Assembly Appropriations hearing, SB 391 remains on track for passage in 2014. Bill author
Senator Mark DeSaulnier reported that the California Homes and Jobs Act will remain on the
Assembly Appropriations Committee's calendar while work is done to strengthen the bill, then
move forward early in the new year. Because this is the first year of a two-year session, bills
introduced in 2013 have until the end of the 2014 session to pass both houses
C. HOUSING ELEMENT SUMMARY
Since the City adopted the current Housing Element in April 2010, only one major change has
been made to the statute. That change requires an analysis of the needs of developmentally
disabled persons. As noted above, resources to address housing needs have dwindled leaving
the City in a much poorer position than it was five years. Table 2-1 on page 2-7 shows the
individual programs that will be undertaken to meet the seven program mandates of the State
housing element law.
Key highlights include:
      Sites to Accommodate the City’s Share of the Regional Housing Need: The City has
         designated sufficient sites to accommodate the need for new construction. Included
         among these sites are those included in approved apartments, subdivisions, planned
         development, and Specific Plan areas.
                                                2-5

                               SECTION 2 - OVERVIEW
 Providing for a Variety of Housing Types: Zoning Ordinance amendments will be
  drafted to facilitate single room occupancy housing, employee housing, transitional
  housing and supportive housing. These amendments will contribute to achieving
  housing diversity while also meeting State law requirements.
 Cost Burdened Renters: – The Housing Authority of the City of Calexico will continue
  to offer rental assistance through the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program.
  This program helps about 227 lower income families to reduce their monthly rental
  costs. Given the status of HUD funding, no significant funding increases are
  anticipated in the years ahead. In fact, because of the sequestration cuts, there may
  be a decrease in the number of poor families who can obtain rental assistance.
 Housing Rehabilitation: As in most communities with an older housing stock,
  rehabilitation is an evident need. The City for many years has supported housing
  rehabilitation initiatives with CDBG funds, when available. The Housing
  Rehabilitation Loan Program is included among the individual programs to be
  implemented during the 2013-2021 planning period. It will be implemented in the
  future as funding becomes available.
 Promote Fair Housing: The City will continue to expand its contribution to achieving
  fair housing by obtaining technical assistance from an experienced fair housing
  provider. The City also plans to disseminate fair housing information on its website
  and other venues to the general public, apartment managers, real estate industry
  and developers.
                                          2-6

                                     SECTION 2 - OVERVIEW
                                              Table 2-1
                                           City of Calexico
                                    2013-2021 Housing Element
                                      Housing Program Outline
                    List of Specific Individual Programs by Program Category
Program Category                                    Specific Individual Program
Category 1 – Identify Housing Sites to              1. Land Use Element/Project Implementation
Accommodate the City’s Share of the Regional        2. Infill Housing Incentives Program
Housing Need                                        3. No Net Loss Program
                                                    4. Zoning Ordinance Amendments to Provide a
                                                        Variety of Housing Types
Category 2 – Assist in the Development of           5. Calexico Housing Authority Rental Assistance
Lower Income and Moderate Income Housing                for Cost Burdened Lower Income Households
.                                                   6. City of Calexico HOME-Funded Tenant Based
                                                        Rental Assistance
                                                    7. Affordable Rental Housing Construction
                                                        Program
                                                    8. First Time Homebuyer Assistance Program
                                                    9. Outreach Program for Persons with Disabilities
                                                    10. Extremely Low Income Housing Program
                                                    11. Affordable Housing Developer
                                                        Partnership Program
Category 3 – Remove Governmental                    12. Zoning Ordinance Amendments to Remove
Constraints to the Maintenance, Improvement             Governmental Constraints on Housing for
and Development of Housing                              Persons with Disabilities
                                                    13. Zoning Ordinance Amendments to Remove
                                                        Governmental Constraints on Housing
                                                        Affordability
Category 4 – Conserve and Improve the               14. Housing Code Enforcement Program
Existing Stock of Affordable Housing                15. Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program
Category 5 – Promote Housing Opportunities          16. Fair Housing Services Program
for All Persons                                     17. Fair Housing Information Program
Category 6 – Preserve Assisted Housing at           18. Affordable Housing Preservation Program
Risk of Conversion to Market Rate Housing
Category 7 – Promote Energy Conservation            19. Energy Conservation Program
                                                  2-7

2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
         HOUSING PROGRAM
                                       City of Calexico
                       2013-2021 Housing Element of the General Plan
                                 Section 3 Table of Contents
A. Introduction                                                                        3-1
B. Housing Program Description                                                         3-1
Program Category #1: Describe Actions to Make Sites Available to Accommodate the City’s
Share of the Regional Housing Need and Encourage the Development of a Variety of Housing
Types                                                                                  3-4
   1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives                                    3-4
   2. Housing Programs                                                                 3-5
       Program #1 – Land Use Element/Project Implementation                            3-5
       Program #2 – Infill Housing Development Incentives                              3-5
       Program #3 – No Net Loss Program                                                3-6
       Program #4 – Zoning Ordinance Amendments to Encourage a Variety of Housing      3-6
           4.1 Single Room Occupancy Housing                                           3-6
           4.2 Transitional and Supportive Housing                                     3-7
           4.3 Employee and Farm Employee Housing                                      3-7
           4.4 Second Units                                                            3-8
Program Category #2: Assist in the Development of Adequate Housing to Meet the Needs
Of Extremely Low-, Very Low-, Low- and Moderate-Income Households                      3-8
   1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives                                    3-8
   2. Housing Programs                                                                 3-9
       Program #5 – Calexico Housing Authority Rental Assistance for Cost Burdened
       Lower Income Households                                                         3-9
       Program #6 – City of Calexico HOME-Funded Tenant Based Rental Assistance       3-10
       Program #7 – Affordable Rental Housing Construction Program                    3-10
       Program #8 – First Time Homebuyer Program                                      3-10
       Program #9 – Developmentally Disabled Outreach Program                         3-10
       Program #10 – Extremely Low Income Housing Program                             3-11
       Program #11 – Affordable Housing Developer Partnership Program                 3-12
Program Category #3: Address and, Where Appropriate and Legally Possible, Remove
Governmental Constraints to the Maintenance, Improvement & Development of Housing     3-13
   1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives                                   3-13
   2. Housing Programs                                                                3-14
       Program #12 – Zoning Ordinance Amendments to Remove Governmental
       Constraints on Housing for Persons with Disabilities                           3-14
           12.1 Reasonable Accommodation Procedure                                    3-14
           12.2 Group Homes Licensed Under the Provisions of the Health & Safety Code 3-14

       Program #13 – Zoning Ordinance Amendment to Remove Governmental Constraints
       on Housing Affordability – Density Bonus Ordinance                              3-15
Program Category #4: Conserve and Improve the Condition of the Existing Stock of Affordable
Housing                                                                                3-15
    1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives                                   3-15
    2. Housing Programs                                                                3-16
       Program #14 – Housing Code Enforcement Program                                  3-16
       Program #15 – Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program                               3-16
Program Category #5: Promote Housing Opportunities for All Persons                     3-17
    1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives                                   3-17
    2. Housing Programs                                                                3-18
       Program #16 – Fair Housing Services Program                                     3-18
       Program #17 – Fair Housing Information Program                                  3-18
Program Category #6: Preserve Lower Income Assisted Housing Developments               3-19
    1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives                                   3-18
    2. Housing Program                                                                 3-20
       Program #18 – At-Risk Housing Preservation Program                              3-20
Program Category #7: Encourage Energy Conservation                                     3-20
    1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives                                   3-20
    2. Housing Program                                                                 3-21
       Program #19 – Energy Conservation Program                                       3-21
C. Summary of Quantified Objectives                                                    3-22
D. Beneficial Impacts                                                                  3-22
                                         List of Tables
3-1    City of Calexico – 2013-2021 Housing Program Summary                             3-2
3-2    City of Calexico Quantified Objectives: 2013-202                                3-22

     SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
A. INTRODUCTION
Government Code Section 65583(c) requires a housing element to include:
   A program which sets forth a five-year schedule of actions the local government is
   undertaking or intends to undertake to implement the policies and achieve the goals and
   objectives of the housing element….
The housing program must:
    Identify Actions to Make Sites Available to Accommodate the City’s Share of the
       Regional Housing Need [Government Code Section 65583(c)(1)]
    Assist in the Development of Adequate Housing to Meet the Needs of Extremely
       Low-, Very Low-, Low- and Moderate Income Households [Government Code
       Section 65583(c)(2)]
    Address and, Where Appropriate and Legally Possible, Remove Governmental
       Constraints to the Maintenance, Improvement and Development of Housing
       [Government Code Section 65583(c)(3)]
    Conserve and Improve the Condition of the Existing Stock of Affordable Housing
       [Government Code Section 65583(c)(4)]
    Promote Housing Opportunities for All Persons Regardless of Race, Religion, Sex,
       Marital Status, Ancestry, National Origin, Familial Status, or Disability [Government
       Code Section 65583(c)(5)]
    Preserve for Lower Income Households Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion to
       Market Rate Housing [Government Code Section 65583(c)(6)]
    Promote Energy Conservation [Government Code Section 65583(a)(8)]
For each of the seven program categories listed above, Section 3 presents:
    A summary of the program category’s housing needs. Each housing need (e.g., cost
       burden, housing rehabilitation) is discussed in greater detail in Appendix A.
    A statement of the program category’s housing goals, policies and objectives.
    A description of the individual programs that will be implemented during the 2013-
       2021 planning period.
B. HOUSING PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
Table 3-1 presents a summary description of the individual programs of each program category
as follows: Individual Program Title, Responsible Implementing Agency, Objective, Time
Schedule, and Funding Source(s).
The meanings of the abbreviations in Table 3-1 are listed below:
      CDD – Community Development Department
      ELI – Extremely low income
      LI – Low income
      VL – Very low income
      HOME – HOME Partnerships Program
      HUD – U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
      CDBG – Community Development Block Grant funds
      LIHTC – Low Income Housing Tax Credits
                                               3-1

            SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
                                                      Table 3-1
                          City of Calexico – 2013-2021 Housing Program Summary
Individual Programs            Responsible              Objective         Time Schedule  Funding Source(s)
                               Implementing
                               Agency
                                              Adequate Housing Sites
1. Land Use                    Community                Implement the     October 2013 – General Fund for CDD
    Element/Project            Development              Land Use          October 2021   Planning staff
    Implementation             Department –             Element and
                               Planning Division        specific projects
2. Infill Housing Incentives   City Manager’s Office    Adoption of       June-July 2014 General Fund for CDD
    Program                    – Housing Division       program                          Planning staff and
                               Community                                                 Sustainable
                               Development                                               Communities Planning
                               Department –                                              Grant for Housing
                               Planning Division                                         Division staff
3. No Net Loss Program         Community                Establish the     June-July 2014 General Fund for CDD
                               Development              evaluation                       Planning staff
                               Department –             procedure to
                               Planning Division        monitor housing
                                                        capacity
4. Zoning Ordinance            Community                Adopted           June-July 2014 General Fund for CDD
    Amendments to Provide      Development              amendments                       Planning staff
    a Variety of Housing       Department –
    Types                      Planning Division
                                                 Affordable Housing
5. Calexico Housing            Housing Authority of     50 LI, 110 VL,    October 2013 – Section 8 contract with
    Authority Rental           the City of Calexico     and 330 ELI       October 2021   HUD, Public Housing
    Assistance for Cost                                 families                         and other funding
    Burdened Lower                                                                       sources
    Income Households
6. City of Calexico HOME-      City Manager’s Office    10 LI, 10 VLI,    Applications   General Fund for
    Funded Tenant Based        – Housing Division       and 50 ELI        submitted in   Housing Division staff
    Rental Assistance                                   families          2014 and 2018  State HOME Funds
7. Affordable Rental           City Manager’s Office    20 LI, 20 VLI,    Application    General Fund for
    Housing Construction       – Housing Division       and 10 ELI        submitted in   Housing Division staff
    Program                                             families          2015 or 2016   State HOME Funds
8. First Time Homebuyer        City Manager’s Office    20 families       October 2013 – General Fund for
    Assistance Program         – Housing Division                         October 2021   Housing Division staff
                                                                                         State CDBG,
                                                                                         CalHome and HOME
                                                                                         funds
9. Outreach Program for        City Manager’s Office    Coordinate with   Implement      General Fund for
    Persons with               – Housing Division       San Diego         outreach       Housing Division staff
    Disabilities                                        Regional          components
                                                        Center            October 15,
                                                                          2015
                                                         3-2

           SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
                                              Table 3-1 - continued
                         City of Calexico – 2013-2021 Housing Program Summary
Individual Programs           Responsible              Objective        Time Schedule  Funding Source(s)
                              Implementing
                              Agency
                                          Affordable Housing continued
10. Extremely Low Income      City Manager’s Office    645 families BD October 2013 -  HUD Section 8, Public
    Housing Program           – Housing Division                        October 2021   Housing, CDBG,
                              Housing Authority of                      r              HOME, CalHome and
                              the City of Calexico                                     other funding sources
11. Affordable Housing        City Manager’s Office    Program          January 2015   General     Fund    for
    Developer Partnership     – Housing Division       implemented                     Housing Division staff
    Program
                                       Remove Governmental Constraints
12. Zoning Ordinance          Community                Adopted          June-July 2014 General Fund for
    Amendments to             Development              Reasonable                      CDD Planning
    Remove Governmental       Department–              Accommodation                   Division staff
    Constraints on Housing    Planning Division        Procedure and
    for Persons with                                   Licensed Group
    Disabilities                                       Homes
13. Zoning Ordinance          Community                Adopted          October 15,    General Fund for
    Amendments to             Development              Density Bonus    2014 5         CDD Planning
    Remove Governmental       Department–              Ordinance                       Division staff
    Constraints on Housing    Planning Division
    Affordability
                                           Improve Housing Conditions
14. Housing Code              Community                2-3 new cases    October 2013 – General Fund for
    Enforcement Program       Development              per month        October 2021   CDD Building Division
                              Department –                                             staff
                              Building Division
15. Housing Rehabilitation    City Manager’s Office    20 housing       October 2013 – CDBG, CalHome, or
    Loan Program              – Housing Division       units            October 2021   Other Non-City Funds
                                               Promote Fair Housing
16. Fair Housing Services     City Manager’s Office    Program          October 2013 – General     Fund    for
    Program                   – Housing Division       implemented      October 2021   Housing Division staff
                              Inland Fair Housing &                                    and Inland Workshops
                              Mediation Board                                          and Training
17. Fair Housing              City Manager’s Office    Information      June-July 2014 General     Fund    for
    Information Program       – Housing Division       disseminated                    Housing Division staff
                                           At-Risk Housing Preservation
18. Affordable Housing        City Manager’s Office    Preserve 337     October 2013-  General Fund and
    Preservation Program      – Housing Division       affordable       October 2021   other housing funds
                                                       housing units                   when available
                                          Promote Energy Conservation
19. Energy Conservation       Community                Program          October 2013 – General Fund for
    Program                   Development              implemented      October 2021   CDD Planning and
                              Department –                                             Building staff
                              Planning Division and
                              Building Division
                                                        3-3

      SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
  PROGRAM CATEGORY #1:
  DESCRIBE ACTIONS TO MAKE SITES AVAILABLE TO ACCOMMODATE THE CITY’S
  SHARE OF THE REGIONAL HOUSING NEED AND ENCOURAGE THE DEVELOPMENT
  OF A VARIETY OF HOUSING TYPES
Government Code Section 65583(c)(1) states that the housing program must:
    Identify actions that will be taken to make sites available during the planning period of
    the general plan with appropriate zoning and development standards and with services
    and facilities to accommodate that portion of the city’s … share of the regional housing
    need for each income level that could not be accommodated on sites identified in the
    inventory … without rezoning…
    Sites shall be identified as needed to facilitate and encourage the development of a
    variety of types of housing for all income levels, including multifamily rental housing,
    factory-built housing, mobilehomes, housing for agricultural employees, supportive
    housing single-room occupancy units, emergency shelters, and transitional housing.
1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives
SCAG’s Regional Housing Needs Assessment has allocated a new housing construction need
of 3,224 housing units, as follows:
                SCAG’S Regional Housing Needs: January 2014 – October 2021
            Extremely                                             Above
                    Low     Very Low        Low    Moderate    Moderate         Total
                     408          409        489          490       1,428       3,224
The Sites Inventory and Analysis demonstrates that there are sufficient sites to meet the
housing needs listed above. Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance are needed to expand the
variety of housing types.
                                              Goals
     Achieve balanced growth in the City by designating suitable sites for residential
        development.
     Accommodate the housing needs of all income groups as quantified by Regional
        Housing Needs Assessment (January 2014 - October 2021).
     Facilitate the construction of the maximum feasible number of housing units for all
        income groups.
                                             Policies
     Use the Land Use Element of the General Plan and the Zoning Ordinance to ensure
        the availability of adequate sites for a variety of housing types and for all income
        groups.
     Promote the provision of both purchase and rental housing to meet the needs of
        families of all sizes.
                                                3-4

     SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
     Encourage the development of housing to meet the needs of elderly, large family,
        and female-headed households.
     Promote and encourage more intensive use of under-utilized land for residential
        construction, particularly within walking distance of downtown Calexico.
     Encourage mixed-use housing and commercial development in downtown Calexico.
     Investigate adaptive reuse of vacant commercial structures in the downtown area for
        housing, possibly in a mixed-use fashion.
     Implement an infill development strategy through development incentives.
                                   New Construction Objectives
            Extremely                                               Above
                   Low    Very Low           Low     Moderate    Moderate         Total
                     10            20           20         856        994        1,900
2. Housing Programs
Program #1 – Land Use Element/Project Implementation
The City has sufficient sites to accommodate its share of the regional housing, as summarized
below:
     Five vacant sites/projects with a combined capacity of 1,672 housing units
        accommodate the above moderate income housing need of 1,428 housing units.
        Residential densities range from about 2 to 6 dwelling units per acre.
     Four vacant sites/projects with a combined capacity of 1,802 housing units
        accommodate the moderate income housing need of 490 housing units. Residential
        densities range from about 12 to 14 dwelling units per acre.
     Six sites with a combined capacity of 1,695 housing units accommodate the lower
        income housing need of 1,306 housing units. Residential densities range from 20 to
        30 dwellings per acre.
Program #1, which will continue to implement the Land Use Element and specific project
approvals, will be administered by the Planning Division throughout the 2013-2021 planning
period.
Program #2 – Infill Housing Development Incentives
The State Department of Conservation awarded the City a Sustainable Communities Planning
Grant. One component of the Grant is to encourage and incentivize infill, mixed use housing in
Downtown Calexico. As part of the Grant work program, the City will identify key infill
development opportunities and then post on its website the infill sites that are eligible to receive
development incentives. Aerials, maps, development regulations and assessor information will
be posted on the City’s website. A description will be given of the incentives to encourage infill
development such as waiving utility, capacity and infrastructure fees as well as density bonuses
and permitting a 3-story height limit.
Program #2 will be implemented by the Housing Division and Planning Division. The infill
housing incentives will be adopted by June-July 2014.
                                                 3-5

     SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
Program #3 - No Net Loss Program
The No Net Loss Program implements Government Code Section 65863 and is modeled after a
program description prepared by HCD. The purpose of the program is to ensure that the sites
identified in the 2013-2021 Housing Element continue to accommodate the City’s share of the
regional housing need throughout the planning period. The following activities comprise the
program:
     Monitor annually the sites inventory to determine the amount, type and size of
         development on the sites identified in the 2013-2021 Housing Element.
     Develop and implement a formal ongoing (project-by-project, parcel-by-parcel)
         evaluation procedure pursuant to Government Code Section 65863
     Report on the number of extremely low, very low, low, moderate and above-
         moderate income housing units constructed annually.
     Update the vacant and underutilized parcels inventory to assist developers in
         identifying land suitable for residential development.
     In the event that a site is approved for development of a use or density other than
         that described in the 2013-2021 Housing Element, the City will identify sufficient
         additional, adequate, and available sites with an equal or greater residential density
         so that there is no net loss of residential unit capacity.
The evaluation procedure to implement Government Code Section 65863 will be established by
June-July 2014. A description of the program accomplishments will be included in the Annual
Housing Element Progress Reports. The program will be implemented by the Planning Division
on an ongoing basis throughout the 2013-2021 planning period.
Program #4 – Zoning Ordinance Amendments to Encourage a Variety of Housing
In order to remove identified governmental constraints, Zoning Ordinance amendments will be
adopted to provide for the following housing types:
        Single Room Occupancy Housing
        Transitional and Supportive Housing
        Employee Housing
        Second Units
4.1 Single Room Occupancy Housing
State law requires zoning ordinances to make provisions for single-room occupancy (SRO)
units. There is no official Government Code definition of SRO housing. However, the California
Building Code definition of “efficiency dwelling unit” provides the foundation for the City’s
approach to defining SRO housing:
     The unit shall have a living room of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m 2) of floor
         area. An additional 100 square feet (9.3 m2) of floor area shall be provided for each
         occupant of such unit in excess of two.
     The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.
     The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration
         facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in
         front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided.
                                                    3-6

       SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
      The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet,
          lavatory and bathtub or shower.
The SRO unit size may be in the range of 220 to 500 square feet.
The Planning Division plans to have the SRO housing Zoning Ordinance amendment adopted
by June-July 2014.
4.2 Transitional and Supportive Housing
HCD guidance states:
     The housing element must demonstrate that transitional housing and supportive housing
     are permitted as a residential use and only subject to those restrictions that apply to
     other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone (Government Code
     Section 65583(a)(5)). In other words, transitional housing and supportive housing are
     permitted in all zones allowing residential uses and are not subject to any restrictions
     (e.g., occupancy limit) not imposed on similar dwellings (e.g., single family home,
     apartments) in the same zone in which the transitional housing and supportive housing
     is located. For example, transitional housing located in an apartment building in a
     multifamily zone is permitted in the same manner as an apartment building in the same
     zone and supportive housing located in a single family home in a single family zone is
     permitted in the same manner as a single family home in the same zone.
     If jurisdictions do not explicitly permit transitional and supportive housing as previously
     described, the element must include a program to ensure zoning treats transitional and
     supportive housing as a residential use, subject only to those restrictions on residential
     uses contained in the same type of structure.
Transitional housing is defined in Section 50675.2 of the Health & Safety Code as rental
housing for stays of at least six months but where the units are re-circulated to another program
recipient after a set period. Transitional housing may be designated for a homeless individual or
family transitioning to permanent housing.
Supportive housing as defined at Section 50675.14 of the Health & Safety Code has no limit on
the length of stay, is linked to onsite or offsite services, and is occupied by a target population
as defined in Health & Safety Code Section 53260. Services typically include assistance
designed to meet the needs of the target population in retaining housing, living and working in
the community, and/or improving health and may include case management, mental health
treatment, and life skills.
The 2008-2014 Housing Element included a program to satisfy the requirements of Government
Code Section 65583(a)(5). That program is carried forward to the 2013-2021 planning period.
The Planning Division plans that the transitional and supportive housing Zoning Ordinance
amendments will be adopted by June-July 2014.
4.3 Employee and Farm Employee Housing
California Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5 (Employee Housing Act) requires
jurisdictions to permit employee housing for six or fewer employees as a single-family use. HCD
guidance indicates that employee housing shall not be included within the zoning definition of a
                                                   3-7

       SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
 boarding house, rooming house, hotel, dormitory, or other similar term that implies that the
 employee housing is a business run for profit or differs in any other way from a family
 dwelling. Jurisdictions cannot impose a conditional use permit, zoning variance, or other zoning
 clearance of employee housing that serves six or fewer employees that are not required of a
 family dwelling of the same type in the same zone.
 Although the Zoning Ordinance contains an Agriculture Zone, none of the land within the City
 limits is zoned agriculture. Consequently, the provisions of California Health and Safety Code
 Section 17021.6 (Employee Housing Act) do not apply to Calexico. Farm worker housing needs
 are addressed by existing and new affordable housing some of which could be targeted to meet
 the needs of this special population group.
 The Planning Division will prepare a Zoning Ordinance amendment to provide consistency with
 the Employee Housing Act. The timeline for enacting the zoning provisions is June-July 2014.
 4.4 Second Units
 The City will revise the Second Unit zoning provisions to comply with Government Code Section
 65852.2(a)(3) which requires an application for a second-unit permit to be considered
 ministerially without discretionary review. The timeline for enacting the zoning provisions is
 June-July 2014.
   PROGRAM CATEGORY #2:
   ASSIST IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF ADEQUATE HOUSING TO MEET THE NEEDS OF
   EXTREMELY LOW-, VERY LOW-, LOW-, AND MODERATE- INCOME HOUSEHOLDS
Government Code Section 65583(c)(2) states that a housing program shall:
      Assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of extremely low-,
      very low-, low- and moderate- income households.
 The term “development” includes providing for affordability covenants in existing housing and
 construction of new affordable housing units.
 1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives
 Cost burden or overpaying, which is defined as spending 30% or more of gross household
 income for housing including utilities, is the most severe need experienced by lower income
 households. Cost burden is adversely impacting the quality of life of 2,240 lower income renters
 and 1,424 lower income owners. There also is a need for new housing units for 1,306 lower-
 income and 490 moderate-income households.
                                               Goals
       Support the provision of adequate housing to meet the needs of all economic
          segments of the community.
       Reduce the number of cost burdened lower income households.
       Reduce the number of crowded lower income households.
       Increase the number of lower income, first-time homebuyers.
                                                3-8

     SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
                                              Policies
     Employ a range of housing densities to provide housing for all economic segments of
        the community
     Assist private developers, non-profit organizations, and public agencies involved in
        the provision of affordable housing in identifying and assembling sites suitable for the
        development of lower income households, including extremely low income, and
        moderate-income housing.
     Encourage the inclusion of lower income, including extremely low income and
        moderate-income units in privately sponsored multi-family housing developments.
     Provide rental assistance to extremely low-, very low, and low- income households
        through programs administered by the Housing Authority of the City of Calexico and
        City of Calexico.
     Continue to provide financial assistance available to first time homebuyers.
     Continue to defer development fees for all proposed housing units affordable to
        lower income households.
     Pursue state and federal programs and funding sources designed to expand housing
        opportunities for lower income, including extremely low, and moderate income
        households, including first-time homebuyers, farm workers, the elderly, and the
        handicapped.
     Apply for CDBG and other HUD funds to provide affordable housing opportunities for
        lower income, including extremely low, and moderate-income households.
                                 Housing Assistance Objectives*
                          Extremely
                                 Low     Very Low             Low    Total
                                  390           140            100     630
                         *includes Section 8 assisted families (227), public
                         housing units (263), tenant based rental assistance
                         (70), first-time homebuyer assistance (20), and
                         affordable rental housing units (50).
2. Housing Programs
Program #5 – Calexico Housing Authority Rental Assistance for Cost Burdened Lower
Income Households
The Housing Authority of the City of Calexico administers two programs which address the
rental assistance needs of extremely low and very low income families. The Housing Authority
operates 263 public housing units in a combination of single-family homes, multiplexes, and a
98-unit apartment building. In addition, it provides rental assistance to 227 families through the
Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program.
During the planning period, the City anticipates that the Calexico Housing Authority will continue
to implement these two very important rental assistance programs. The assisted families pay
30% of their income toward monthly rent and, therefore, these programs reduce the number of
cost burdened families. The City will continue to support the efforts of the Housing Authority to
secure additional Section 8 Housing Choice Vouchers.
                                                   3-9

       SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
Program #6 – City of Calexico HOME-Funded Tenant Based Rental Assistance
In 2006, the State awarded the City $500,000 of HOME funds to support 35 families through
what is called tenant based rental assistance. TBRA is a rental subsidy program that enables
lower income families to afford housing costs such as rent, utility costs, security deposits, and/or
utility costs. During the planning period, the Housing Division plans to apply twice for HOME
funds. Each application will be for $500,000 and assist 35 families. The applications will be
submitted in 2014 and 2018, respectively.
Program #7 – Affordable Rental Housing Construction Program
The Housing Division will support and apply for funds to facilitate the construction of affordable
rental housing. The most likely funding sources include: 1) Low Income Housing Tax Credits
(LIHTC) and 2) State HOME Funds. HCD has awarded the City HOME funds which have
supported the construction of 52 senior units and 48 family units.
During the planning period, the Housing Division plans to work with a private affordable housing
developer and apply for HOME funds to support the construction of at least 50 housing units.
The application will be submitted in either 2015 or 2016 following completion of Program #11 -
Affordable Housing Developer Partnership Program.
An additional application may be submitted between 2015/2016 and the end of the planning
period in October 2021. However, because the City has recently received two State HOME fund
awards and the overall decrease of such funds, it may be possible for the City to obtain funds
for only one more project during the planning period.
To the extent allowed by the funding program regulations, the City will target all or a percentage
of the affordable housing units to farmworker households.
.
Program #8 – First Time Homebuyer Program
The First Time Homebuyer Program is funded by the State of California CDBG, CalHome,
and HOME programs to assist low to moderate income families. The programs offer down
payment assistance to first time homebuyer qualified applicants for purchase of an
existing qualifying home in the City of Calexico.
Eligible first time homebuyers may qualify for a down payment assistance of up to $40,000. The
buyer must provide a down payment equal to at least 3% of the purchase price. The interest
rate is 1%. The City records a second Deed of Trust and promissory note to the property.
The Housing Division will continue this program during the planning period. It is estimated that
20 first time homebuyers will be assisted during the 2013-2021 planning,
Program #9 – Developmentally Disabled Outreach Program
Chapter 507, Statutes of 2010 (SB 812), which took effect January 2011, amended State
housing element law to require the analysis of the disabled to include an evaluation of the
special housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities.
HCD guidance indicates that there are a number of housing types appropriate for people living
with a developmental disability: rent subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family
                                               3-10

      SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
homes, inclusionary housing, Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD
housing, and SB 962 homes. The design of housing-accessibility modifications, the proximity to
services and transit, and the availability of group living opportunities represent some of the
types of considerations that are important in serving this need group.
Through this program, the City will work with the San Diego Regional Center to implement an
outreach program that informs families within Calexico on housing and services available for
persons with developmental disabilities. The program could include the development of an
informational brochure, including information on services on the City’s website, and providing
housing-related training for individuals/families through workshops. The City also will work with
the San Diego Regional Center to identify funding sources that can address the housing needs
of developmentally disabled persons.
In addition, through Program #11, the City will identify affordable housing developers that have
addressed or could address the needs of developmentally disabled persons. The City will work
with one or more developers to prepare a strategy for addressing the needs of developmentally
disabled persons. The Housing Division also will coordinate with the San Diego Regional Center
to identify qualified developers. SDRC contracts with two different non-profit corporations to
assist clients with accessing affordable housing. One of these non-profit housing corporations is
working with local affordable housing developers to increase the availability of affordable
housing options for people with developmental disabilities. SDRC also contracts with a non-
profit agency to assist clients who are interested in pursuing homeownership. (Source: San
Diego Regional Center, Demographic Information, February 28, 2013, page 3)
Among the City/developer/SDRC affordable housing strategies that will be explored are the
following:
Mixed-population housing: One possible strategy that will be explored in depth is affordable,
mixed population housing. A model for this approach – which was recently completed in
neighboring El Centro – involved Chelsea Investment Corp. as developer and financing
from the City, Low Income Housing Tax Credits, and Mental Health Services Act. The latter
funding source provided the final balance of the gap financing needed to complete the project.
Mixed population could accommodate the needs of developmentally disabled persons.
SRO Housing: This strategy results in the development of SRO housing units in a 1- or -2 story
single-family dwelling. A model for this approach was recently completed in the City of Monterey
Park. Six SRO units were developed by a non-profit specializing in addressing the housing and
service needs of developmentally disabled adults. Financing sources included CDBG, RDA and
HOME funds.
This program will be implemented by October 15, 2015 or approximately two years after
adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element.
Program #10 – Extremely Low Income Housing Program
The needs of extremely low income households are addressed within the framework of the
programs administered by the City and the Housing Authority of the City of Calexico. Each of
these entities addresses the needs of low and moderate income households, including
extremely low income households. The quantified objectives for extremely low income
households are based on individual programs that address the existing and future needs of
extremely low income households, as follows:
                                                3-11

      SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
     Program #5 – Calexico Housing Authority Rental Assistance Programs – 330
        extremely low income households
     Program #6 – City Tenant Based Rental Assistance Housing Program – 50
        extremely low income households
     Program #7 – Affordable Rental Housing Construction Program – 10 extremely low
        income households
     Program #9 – Developmentally Disabled Outreach Program – an unknown number
        of extremely low income persons
     Program #14 – Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program – 5 extremely low income
        households
     Program #18 – Affordable Housing Preservation Program – 250 extremely low
        income households
Program #11 – Affordable Housing Developer Partnership Program
The Housing Division will implement an Affordable Housing Developer Partnership Program in
order to promote housing for low and moderate income households. The goal of this program is
to encourage developers to address a variety of Calexico’s housing needs.
With respect to implementation of Program #11, the Housing Division has already:
     Compiled a list of affordable housing developers who have developed projects in
        Calexico and all other cities located within Imperial County
     Identified the type of affordable housing developed (large family, senior, special
        needs)
     Type of financing (HOME, Low Income Housing Tax Credits)
     Developer contact information (addresses, lead person(s))
The Housing Division will transmit by no later than mid-year 2014 a survey to the affordable
housing developers to:
     Determine the kinds of affordable housing communities they believe could/should be
        developed in Calexico.
     Identify the funding sources they intend to apply for
     Types of assistance that could/should be provided by the City to facilitate affordable
        housing development (e.g. expedited processing; density bonus units; fee waivers,
        reductions, or deferrals; reduced parking, etc.)
During the fourth quarter of 2014, the Housing Division will meet with interested developers to
craft a development strategy to address Calexico’s housing needs. That strategy then will guide
the submittal of State HOME program funding applications (Program #7).
This program will be fully implemented by January 2015 or approximately one year after
adoption of the 2013-2021 Housing Element.
                                                3-12

     SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
 PROGRAM CATEGORY #3:
 ADDRESS AND, WHERE APPROPRIATE AND LEGALLY POSSIBLE, REMOVE
 GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS TO THE MAINTENANCE, IMPROVEMENT AND
 DEVELOPMENT OF HOUSING
More specifically, Government Code Section 65583(c)(3) states that a housing program must:
   Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove governmental constraints
   to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing, including housing for all
   income levels and housing for persons with disabilities.
   The program shall remove constraints to, or provide reasonable accommodations for
   housing designed for, intended for occupancy by, or with supportive services for,
   persons with disabilities’
1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives
The governmental constraints analysis found that the City needs to enact both a reasonable
accommodation procedure and a density bonus ordinance.
                                             Goals
    Facilitate the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing
       commensurate with local needs.
    Attain barrier and constraint free governmental codes, ordinances, and policies.
    Enact codes, ordinances, and policies that lead to the improvement of the housing
       status of residents.
                                            Policies
    Remove existing governmental constraints to the maintenance, preservation,
       improvement and development of housing.
    Affirmatively further housing goals through City codes, ordinances and policies that
       enhance the housing quality of life experienced by residents.
    Require that adequate public and private services and facilities are or will be
       provided to all new residential developments as a prerequisite for their approval.
    Continue expedited processing of residential development proposals and permits.
    Allow applicants of special needs housing to request reduced parking requirements.
                                           Objectives
The housing program efforts do not involve the production or rehabilitation of housing.
Therefore, quantified objectives cannot be set for this Program Category.
                                              3-13

      SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
2. Housing Programs
Program #12 – Zoning Ordinance Amendments to Remove Governmental Constraints on
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
12.1    Reasonable Accommodation Procedure
The California Attorney General and Federal Departments of Justice and Housing and Urban
Development all recommend that cities adopt a reasonable accommodation procedure. In a
letter dated May 15, 2001 and transmitted to all California mayors, the Attorney General stated:
     Both the federal Fair Housing Act ("FHA") and the California Fair Employment and
     Housing Act ("FEHA") impose an affirmative duty on local governments to make
     reasonable accommodations (i. e., modifications or exceptions) in their zoning laws and
     other land use regulations and practices when such accommodations "may be
     necessary to afford" disabled persons "an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
     dwelling."
The 2008-2014 Housing Element includes a program to amend the Zoning Ordinance to provide
reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities that allow for administrative approval
of handicapped accessible features. This program has not been implemented and is too limited
in scope to meet the State and Federal mandates for a reasonable accommodation procedure.
Consequently, the 2013-2021 Housing Element includes this program to amend the Zoning
Ordinance to satisfy all the requirements of a reasonable accommodation procedure.
The Planning Division plans to have the reasonable accommodation procedure adopted by
June-July 2014.
12.2    Group Homes Licensed Under the Provisions of the Health & Safety Code
Group homes licensed under the provisions of the California Health & Safety Code include:
      Intermediate care facilities for individuals who have developmental disabilities (Health
        and Safety Code Section 1267.8)
      Residential facilities for persons with disabilities and for abused children (Health and
        Safety Code Section 1566.3, and Welfare and Institution Code Section 5116)
      Residential care facility for the elderly (Health and Safety Code Section 1569.85)
      Alcoholism and drug treatment facilities (Health and Safety Code Section 11834.23)
      Residential facilities for persons with chronic life threatening illness (Health and
        Safety Code Section 1568.0831)
When such licensed group homes house six or fewer persons, they must be treated the same
as a family dwelling. Furthermore, they must be a permitted use in the same zones that permit
single family homes. For example, if single-family homes are permitted in the MF zones, then
residential care facilities also need to be permitted.
The Zoning Ordinance will be amended to add a definition of licensed group homes and to list
the residential zones in which such homes are permitted.
The Planning Division plans to have the zoning provisions adopted by June-July 2014.
                                                 3-14

      SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
Program #13 – Zoning Ordinance Amendment to Remove Governmental Constraints on
Housing Affordability – Density Bonus Ordinance
Government Code Section 65915(a) states:
    When an applicant seeks a density bonus for a housing development within, or for the
    donation of land for housing within, the jurisdiction of a city, county, or city and county,
    that local government shall provide the applicant with incentives or concessions for the
    production of housing units and child care facilities as prescribed in this section. All
    cities, counties, or cities and counties shall adopt an ordinance that specifies how
    compliance with this section will be implemented. Failure to adopt an ordinance shall not
    relieve a city, county, or city and county from complying with this section. [Emphasis
    added]
The Zoning Ordinance does not include density bonus provisions. Therefore, the City will enact
an ordinance to meet the density bonus law requirements by October 2014.
  PROGRAM CATEGORY #4:
  CONSERVE AND IMPROVE THE CONDITION OF THE EXISTING                                   STOCK OF
  AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Government Code Section 65583(c)(4) states that a housing program shall describe
actions to:
    Conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock, which may
    include addressing ways to mitigate the loss of dwelling units demolished by public and
    private actions.
1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives
A 2007 Housing Condition Survey is a reliable indicator of the numbers of housing units in need
of rehabilitation or replacement. Based on that Survey and the numbers of housing units
improved since then, the housing rehabilitation need is most likely between 2,600 to 2,800
housing units. The housing replacement need most likely is between 10 and 20 housing units.
                                           Goals
     Achieve a housing stock free of substandard structures.
     Conserve and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock.
                                             Policies
     Continue to implement the Housing Code Enforcement Program.
     Continue to implement a Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program.
     Encourage continued maintenance of currently sound housing through a local
         information and assistance program.
     Utilize the code enforcement capabilities of the City to ensure that proprietors renting
         unsanitary and unsafe housing units correct identified code violations.
     Encourage the rehabilitation of substandard dwelling units instead of requiring their
         demolition, whenever possible, to preserve the existing affordable housing stock.
                                               3-15

       SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
      Continue to use available state and federal funds for housing rehabilitation, in a
          manner that will benefit the largest number of lower income households, including
          extremely low income.
      Allow utilization of rehabilitation assistance funds to alleviate overcrowded
          conditions.
      Allow use of rehabilitation assistance funds to remove architectural barriers in
          residences occupied by handicapped persons.
      Minimize and prevent where possible the displacement of residents due to City
          assisted rehabilitation activities.
      Pursue the removal and replacement of substandard units, which cannot be
          rehabilitated.
                                               Objectives
      Corrected housing code violations at an average level of 2-3 per month for all income
          levels. The total annual objective is 24-36 corrected code violations
      Rehabilitation of 20 existing housing units occupied by extremely low- (5), very low-
          (5), and low- (10) income homeowners.
The rehabilitation objective assumes that funding from a non-City source will continue to be
available during the planning period. The income category distribution is based on the
percentage of the City’s homeowners that belong to each of the three income groups.
2. Housing Programs
Program #14 – Housing Code Enforcement
The Building Division enforces all City codes and inspects properties that have housing
violations. The purpose of code enforcement is to safeguard life, health, property and public
welfare. With respect to existing housing, the Municipal Code includes:
      Chapter 15.08 Uniform Housing Code
      Chapter 15.18 Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
Section 1001 of the Uniform Housing Code identifies 13 conditions that comprise a substandard
building. These conditions range from Inadequate Sanitation to Improper Occupancy. Chapter 2
of the Uniform Building Code authorizes the building official to enforce all provisions of the code.
Section 302 of the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code describes 18 conditions which
constitute a dangerous building. The code authorizes the building official to abate dangerous
buildings.
Program #15 – Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program
The Calexico Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program helps low income homeowners correct code
violations. The Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program was developed to encourage qualified
applicants to improve their property and thus upgrade and preserve the City's residential
neighborhoods. The program works to create a better place to live by enhancing the quality of
life for low income families and preserving the existing housing stock.
                                                  3-16

      SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
The program must be used to correct building, fire, health, and safety deficiencies. General
"eligible" improvements desired by the homeowner may also be included. The program is strictly
designed for low income residents.
The low interest loan program allows expenditures for:
        Handicap provisions (bath/ramps)
        Hazardous structural or safety conditions
        Hazardous wiring
        Faulty plumbing
        Roofing
        Replace windows/doors/flooring
        Exterior paint and stucco
Funding is provided to the City by the State Housing and Community Development Block Grant
Program.
  PROGRAM CATEGORY: #5
  PROMOTE HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL PERSONS
Section 65583(c)(5) requires that the housing program:
     Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex, marital
     status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status, or disability.
1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives
Federal and State fair housing laws prohibit discrimination in the sale, lease, negotiation,
insurance, or financing of housing based on race, color, religion, sex, marital status, familial
status, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, source of income or other arbitrary
factor. Housing discrimination complaints may be filed with HUD and the California Department
of Fair Employment and Housing. Other fair housing needs include general housing counseling
and resolving landlord/tenant conflicts.
                                                  Goal
      Attain a housing market with “fair housing choice,” meaning the ability of persons of
         similar income levels regardless of race, color, religion, sex, marital status, familial
         status, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, source of income or
         other arbitrary factor to have available to them the same housing choices.
                                                 Policies
      Continue to promote fair housing opportunities through the City’s participation in the
         State Community Development Block Grant Program.
      Promote fair housing through the provision of information and referral services to
         residents who need help in filing housing discrimination complaints.
      Promote greater awareness of tenant and proprietor rights.
      Utilize local fair housing agencies to promptly and aggressively investigate any
         complaints involving housing discrimination
                                                  3-17

      SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
                                               Objectives
Because the City has no fair housing provider, quantified objectives cannot be estimated.
2. Housing Programs
Program #16 – Fair Housing Services Program
As the City is not a CDBG entitlement jurisdiction it has no funding to retain the services of a fair
housing provider. However, the City of El Centro, a CDBG recipient, contracts with the Inland
Fair Housing & Mediation Board. The City of Calexico, when funds become available, will
contract with Inland to conduct:
        Fair housing training to City staff
        Fair housing workshop for the benefit of tenants
        Fair housing workshop for the benefit of apartment managers
        Fair housing workshop for the benefit of the real estate industry
Program #17– Fair Housing Information Program
The City will provide residents with fair housing information primarily by posting links to a variety
of fair housing resources including, but not limited, to:
        U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
        Fair Housing/Equal Opportunity (HUD)
        Inland Fair Housing & Mediation Board
        Fair Housing Council of San Diego
        National Fair Housing Advocate
        A Guide to Residential Tenants’ and Landlord Rights and Responsibilities
The City will add to its links the following resource:
                      California Department of Fair Employment and Housing
                                            www.dfeh.ca.gov
The largest number of housing discrimination complaints are filed by disabled persons often due
to a lack of understanding by resident apartment managers of the rules for granting reasonable
accommodations and reasonable modifications. To continue its efforts at disseminating fair
housing information, the City will transmit to on-site resident apartment managers the following
important documents:
     U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division and U.S. Department of Housing
         and Urban Development, Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Joint
         Statement of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and Department of
         Justice, Reasonable Accommodations Under the Fair Housing Act, May 17, 2004
     U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division and U.S. Department of Housing
         and Urban Development, Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Joint
         Statement of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and Department of
         Justice, Reasonable Modifications Under the Fair Housing Act, March 5, 2008
                                                 3-18

      SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
The accessibility requirements of the Fair Housing Act are often misunderstood by developers
and builders. To increase a better understanding of these requirements, the City will post on its
website the following recent document:
     U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Fair Housing and
        Equal Opportunity and U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Joint
        Statement on Accessibility (Design and Construction) Requirements for Covered
        Multifamily Dwellings Under the Fair Housing Act, April 30, 2013
The Housing Division also will make the above information as well as other fair housing
information available at the following locations: Calexico Library; Calexico Housing Authority;
Calexico Chamber of Commerce; and Calexico Community Center.
Program #17 will be implemented by June-July 2014 or approximately six months after adoption
of the Housing Element.
PROGRAM CATEGORY #6:
PRESERVE LOWER INCOME ASSISTED HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
Section 65583(c)(6) mandates that the housing program shall do the following:
    Preserve for lower income households the assisted housing developments . . . The
    program for preservation of the assisted housing developments shall utilize, to the extent
    necessary, all the available federal, state, and local financing and subsidy programs…
    except where a community has other urgent needs for which alternative funding sources
    are not available. The program may include strategies that involve regulation and
    technical assistance.
1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives
At-risk housing refers to affordable rental housing that may convert to market rate housing
between 2013 and 2023. The California Housing Partnership Corporation data base indicates
337 rental housing units located in seven apartment communities are at-risk of conversion to
market rate housing.
                                             Goal
     Preserve the existing supply of affordable housing that is financially assisted by the
        City, County, and State or Federal governments.
                                             Policies
     Monitor and protect the supply of affordable housing.
     Ensure the long-term affordability of future affordable housing developments.
                                            Objectives
     Preserve 337 affordable housing units at risk of conversion to market rate housing.
                                               3-19

     SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
2. Housing Program
Program #18 – At-Risk Housing Preservation Program
The program consists of the following actions:
Monitor Units at Risk: Maintain contact with providers and owners to monitor the status of the
seven existing at-risk developments (337 housing Units) since they may lose their subsidies.
The housing is assisted by the following two programs:
     Section 221(d)(3) Below-Market-Interest-Rate Mortgage Insurance Program of the
         National Housing Act
     Section 515 of the Housing Act of 1949, as amended
Work with Potential Purchasers: Where feasible, provide assistance to public and non-profit
agencies interested in purchasing and/or managing units at risk.
Tenant Education: The California legislature extended the noticing requirement of at-risk units
opting out of low income use restrictions to one year. Within 60 days of a notice of intent to
convert at-risk units to market rate rents, the City will work with potential purchasers using
HCD’s current list of Qualified Entities (http://www.hcd.ca.gov/ hpd/hrc/tech/presrv/)
Should a property owner pursue conversion of the units to market rate, the City will ensure that
tenants were properly noticed and informed of their rights and that they are eligible to receive
Section 8 vouchers that would enable them to stay in their units.
Assist Tenants of Existing Rent Restricted Units to Obtain Section 8 Voucher Assistance:
Tenants of housing units with expired Section 8 contracts are eligible to receive special Section
8 vouchers that can be used only at the same property. The City will assist tenants of "at-risk"
units to obtain these Section 8 vouchers through the Housing Authority of the City of Calexico.
  PROGRAM CATEGORY #7:
  ENCOURAGE ENERGY CONSERVATION
Government Code Section 65583(a)(8) states the Housing Element must include:
    An analysis of opportunities for energy conservation with respect to residential
    development. Cities and counties are encouraged to include weatherization and energy
    efficiency improvements as part of publicly subsidized housing rehabilitation projects.
    This may include energy efficiency measures that encompass the building envelope, its
    heating and cooling systems, and its electrical system.
1. Housing Needs, Goals, Policies and Objectives
Conservation can be accomplished by reducing the use of energy consuming items, or by
physically modifying existing structures and land uses. The California Energy Commission first
adopted energy conservation standards for new construction in 1978. These standards,
contained in Title 24 of the California Administrative Code, contain specifications relating to
insulation, glazing, heating and cooling systems, water heaters, swimming pool heaters, and
several other items.
                                                  3-20

    SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
As part of the Community Stakeholder Outreach, both Campesinos Unidos, Inc. and the Area
Agency on Aging indicated that there is a growing need for energy efficient homes because
many homes are old.
                                               Goal
    Reduce residential energy usage within the City and thereby reduce overall housing
       costs.
                                             Policies
    Encourage the use of energy conserving techniques in the siting and design of new
       housing.
    Actively enforce all state energy conservation requirements for new residential
       construction.
    Allow use of rehabilitation assistance funds to make residences more energy
       efficient.
    Make local residents aware of the free home energy surveys performed by the
       Imperial Irrigation District as a means to reduce energy consumption and, in turn,
       overall long-term housing costs.
    Encourage and promote the maximum use of solar energy systems and other more
       aggressive energy conservation techniques, including construction techniques
       similar to and including LEED thereby increasing opportunities for energy
       conservation and reducing overall long term housing costs.
                                 Energy Conservation Objective
    Reduce energy consumption.
2. Housing Program
Program #19 – Energy Conservation Program
The City’s Energy Conservation Program is comprised of the following actions:
    Utilize the development review process to incorporate energy conservation
       techniques in the siting and design of proposed residences.
    Adopt a green building ordinance to encourage the incorporation of more stringent
       energy conservation techniques in building and development projects in the City.
    Continue to require that all new residential development complies with the energy
       conservation requirements of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.
    Continue to allow energy conservation measures, as improvements eligible for
       assistance under the City’s residential rehabilitation program, including repairs to
       faulty plumbing, hazardous structural and safety improvements, roofing, and
       windows.
    Assist in distributing information to the public regarding free home energy audits and
       other programs of the Imperial Irrigation District (IID).
    Implement the energy conservation measures of the City’s Sustainable Communities
       Planning Grant.
                                               3-21

     SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
The City was awarded a Sustainable Communities Planning Grant. One key element of the
Grant Work Program is the development and adoption of energy conservation measures. The
Grant Work Program is targeted for completion by mid-year 2015.
C. SUMMARY OF QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
Government Code Section 65583(b) requires the Housing Element to establish quantified
objectives by income group for the 2013-2021 planning period with regard to: Construction,
Rehabilitation, Conservation and Preservation. Table 3-2 lists the quantified objectives by
category and income group.
                                             Table 3-2
                                         City of Calexico
                                Quantified Objectives: 2013-2021
                    Extremely                                             Above
   Category                Low    Very Low           Low   Moderate    Moderate        Total
   Construction              10           20           20        856        994        1,900
   Rehabilitation             5            5           10          -            -          20
   Conservation             380         120            60          -            -        560
   Preservation             250           50           37          -            -        337
The construction objective for extremely low, very low and low income households is based on
implementation of the affordable housing programs described earlier.
The rehabilitation objective is based on implementation of the Housing Rehabilitation Loan
Program.
The conservation objective is based on the continued available of rental assistance from the
Housing Authority of the City of Calexico and tenant based rental assistance.
The preservation objective refers to maintaining the affordability of 337 rental units in seven
apartment complexes.
D. BENEFICIAL IMPACTS
Beneficial impacts will be produced by the Housing Program for individual families as well as the
community as a whole.
As the Imperial Valley economy grows, new housing will be constructed to accommodate the
needs of all income groups on the sites designated by the Land Use Element, approved
projects, and the Housing Element. The new housing will not only meet the housing needs
(space, cost, location) of individual families but also generate community benefits by relieving
pressures on the existing housing stock and creating a healthy vacancy rate.
Rehabilitated housing will produce beneficial impacts by eliminating substandard conditions and
reducing overcrowding. As housing is rehabilitated, neighborhood quality will improve and other
families will be encouraged to invest in home improvements.
                                                3-22

       SECTION 3 – HOUSING NEEDS, GOALS, POLICIES, OBJECTIVES & PROGRAMS
Conserving housing will benefit families by reducing housing costs and maintaining a housing
life style that adds diversity to the community’s housing stock. Rental assistance enables poor
families to retain more of their income for necessities such as food, utilities, and gas.
Beneficial impacts will result from housing preservation because low income families will be able
to maintain their current housing at reduced housing costs. If housing is not preserved,
detrimental impacts would be generated such as a reduced vacancy rate, increased cost
burdens, and overcrowding.
The City’s will expand its efforts to ensure that fair housing exists in the community. Expanded
services also will produce beneficial impacts such as educating residents of their rights and
informing apartment managers of the obligation to make reasonable accommodations and
modifications for disabled persons.
Infill development and investment in the existing community is a key objective of the City’s
Sustainable Communities Planning Grant. Infill development will serve pedestrians, cyclists and
automobiles and promote public health, reduce transportation emissions, and create a more
resource-efficient Calexico community.
                                               3-23

2013-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
               APPENDICES
             APPENDIX A
   HOUSING NEEDS, SITES,
CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                       City of Calexico
                     2013-2021 Housing Element of the General Plan
                                         Appendix A
                                      Table of Contents
A. Introduction                                                           A-1
B. Housing Needs Assessment                                               A-2
   1. Introduction and Summary                                            A-2
   2. Housing Characteristics                                             A-3
       a. Existing Housing Stock by Occupancy Status                      A-3
       b. Numbers and Types of Units                                      A-3
       c. Condition of the Existing Housing Stock                         A-4
   3. Household Characteristics                                           A-6
       a. Tenure – Owners and Renters                                     A-6
       b. Level of Payment Compared to Ability to Pay                     A-7
          1. 2013 Income Limits for Income Groups                         A-7
          2. Cost Burdened and Severely Cost Burdened Owners and Renters  A-8
       c. Overcrowding                                                    A-9
   4. At-Risk Housing Assessment                                         A-10
       a. At-Risk Inventory                                              A-10
       b. Cost Analysis                                                  A-11
       c. Preservation Resources                                         A-12
   5. Special Housing Needs                                              A-13
       a. Elderly                                                        A-13
       b. Persons with Disabilities                                      A-15
       c. Persons with Developmental Disabilities                        A-16
       d. Large Families                                                 A-18
       e. Farmworkers                                                    A-18
       f. Female Householders                                            A-19
       g. Families and Persons in Need of Emergency Shelter              A-20
   6. Projected Housing Needs                                            A-21
       a. Population Trends and Projections                              A-21
       b. Employment Trends and Projections                              A-22
       c. Share of Regional Housing Needs                                A-22

C. Sites Inventory and Analysis                                            A-23
   1. Introduction and Summary                                             A-23
   2. Sites to Accommodate the Above Moderate Income Housing Need          A-22
   3. Sites to Accommodate the Moderate Income Housing Need                A-24
   4. Sites to Accommodate the Lower Income Housing Need                   A-25
   5. Public Facilities and Services                                       A-30
   6. Environmental Conditions                                             A-30
D. Housing Market Constraints                                              A-31
   1. Introduction and Summary                                             A-31
   2. Land Costs                                                           A-32
   3. Construction Costs                                                   A-33
   4. Availability of Financing                                            A-34
       a. Financing Availability Based On Interest Rates                   A-34
       b. Financing Availability Based on HMDA Data                        A-35
           1. Introduction                                                 A-35
           2. 2011 Loan Applications                                       A-35
           3. Home Improvement Loan Application – 2011                     A-36
           4. Reasons for Loan Denial-2011                                 A-37
   5. Housing Costs                                                        A-38
       a. Sales Prices                                                     A-38
       b. Monthly Rents                                                    A-39
E. Governmental Constraints                                                A-40
   1. Introduction                                                         A-40
   2. Governmental Constraints Identified by the 2008-2014 Housing Element A-40
   3. Governmental Factors Found Not to be Constraints by the 2008-2014
       Housing Element                                                     A-44
       a. Land Use Controls                                                A-44
           1. Land Use Element                                             A-44
           2. Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types                        A-44
           3. Residential Development Standards                            A-45
           4. Maximum Building Coverage and Housing Unit Sizes             A-46
           5. Open Space Requirements                                      A-46
           6. Parking Requirements                                         A-47
           7. Moratoria and Prohibitions Against Multifamily Housing       A-47

           8. Growth Controls and Urban Growth Boundaries                                 A-47
       b. Building Codes and Their Enforcement                                            A-47
       c. On-Site and Off-Site Improvement Requirements                                   A-48
       d. Fees and Exactions Required of Developers                                       A-49
       e. Processing and Permit Procedures                                                A-50
       f.  Housing for Disabled Persons                                                   A-51
       g. Ability to Meet the City’s Share of the Regional Housing Need                   A-55
F. Progress Report                                                                        A-55
    1. Introduction                                                                       A-55
    2. Appropriateness of Goals and Policies                                              A-55
    3. Implementation Progress and Effectiveness of the 2008-2014 Housing Element         A-56
                                          List of Tables
A-1    City of Calexico Housing Stock by Occupancy Status April 2000, April 2010 and
       January 2013                                                                        A-4
A-2    City of Calexico Housing Stock by Type of Unit April 2000, April 2010
       and January 2013                                                                    A-4
A-3    City of Calexico Condition of the Housing Stock                                     A-5
A-4    City of Calexico Housing Rehabilitation and Housing Replacement Needs               A-6
A-5    City of Calexico Tenure by Age of Householder-2010                                  A-6
A-6    Imperial County Income Limits Adjusted by Household Size                            A-7
A-7    Imperial County: Annual and Monthly Income for a 4-Person Household                 A-8
A-8    City of Calexico Cost Burdened Households by Income Level and Household Type        A-8
A-9    City of Calexico Crowding (Households with More than One Occupant per Room)
       by Tenure                                                                          A-10
A-10   City of Calexico Inventory of Affordable Rental Housing at Risk of Converting to
       Market Rate Housing                                                                A-10
A-11   State Preservation Notice Requirements Pursuant to Government Code
       Sections 65863.10, 65863.11, and 65863.13                                          A-11
A-12   City of Calexico Cost Burdened Elderly Households by Income and Tenure             A-14
A-13   City of Calexico Disability Status of Civilian Non-institutionalized Population by
       Age Group – April 2010                                                             A-16
A-14   City of Calexico Large Families by Tenure – 2010                                   A-18
A-15   City of Calexico Cost Burdened Large Families by Tenure and Income Group           A-18
A-16   Imperial County: Farm Workers by Place of Residence                                A-19
A-17   City of Calexico Female Householders by Tenure – 2010                              A-20
A-18   City of Calexico Population Growth Trends - 1980 to 2013                           A-21
A-19   Imperial County: Employment Growth by City – 2008 -2020                            A-22
A-20   Imperial County: RHNA Housing Need by Income Category – January 1, 2014 –
       October 1, 2021                                                                    A-23

                                 List of Tables continued
A-21 City of Calexico Inventory of Vacant Sites that Accommodate the
     Above Moderate Income Housing Need                                               A-24
A-22 City of Calexico Inventory of Vacant Sites that Accommodate the
     Moderate Income Housing Need                                                     A-25
A-23 City of Calexico Sites Inventory to Accommodate Lower Income Housing Need
     RA – Residential Apartment Zoned Sites (20-30 dus/ac)                            A-26
A-24 City of Calexico Land Prices                                                     A-32
A-25 Construction Costs per Square Foot for Residential Construction                  A-33
A-26 Average Mortgage Interest Rates Weekly Survey of 20 Southland Lenders –
     As of September 11, 2013                                                         A-34
A-27 City of Calexico Conventional Loan Denial Rates by Census Tracts – 2011          A-35
A-28 City of Calexico FHA/VA/FSA Loan Denial Rates by Census Tracts – 2011            A-36
A-29 City of Calexico Home Improvement Loans Originated by Census
     Tracts – 2008-2011                                                               A-36
A-30 City of Calexico Reasons for Loan Denial by Type of Loan – 2011                  A-37
A-31 City of Calexico Sales Prices of Owner Occupied Single Family Homes-
     2011 and 2012                                                                    A-38
A-32 City of Calexico Sales Prices of Non-Owner Occupied Single Family Homes-
     2011 and 2012                                                                    A-39
A-33 City of Calexico Governmental Constraints Identified by the 2008-2014 Housing
     Element and Recommended Actions to Remove or Ameliorate the
     Identified Constraints                                                           A-41
A-34 City of Calexico Zoning Ordinance Provisions Promoting a Variety of Housing TypesA-45
A-35 City of Calexico Development Standards by Development Zone                       A-46
A-36 City of Calexico Development Impact Mitigation Fees (Per Unit)                   A-49
A-37 City of Calexico Typical Processing Procedures by Project Type                   A-51
A-38 City of Calexico Zoning Ordinance Provisions Pertaining to Housing for
     Disabled Persons                                                                 A-52
A-39 City of Calexico 2008-2014 Housing Element – Evaluation of
     Program Accomplishments/Effectiveness                                            A-56
                                       List of Exhibits
A-1  City of Calexico Location of Above Moderate Income Housing Sites                 A-27
A-2  City of Calexico Location of Moderate Income Housing Sites                       A-28
A-3  City of Calexico Location of Lower Income Housing Sites                          A-29

          APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
A. INTRODUCTION
Technical Appendix A provides information on the following required components of a housing
element:
      Housing Needs Assessment
      Sites Inventory and Analysis
      Housing Market Constraints Analysis
      Governmental Constraints Analysis
      Implementation Progress
The Housing Needs Assessment (pages A-3 to A-23) discusses:
    Existing Needs (housing condition, cost burdened, crowding, at risk housing)
    Special Needs (elderly, disabled, large families, farmworkers, female householders, and
       homeless
    Projected Needs (new construction)
The Sites Inventory and Analysis (pages A-23 to A-30) describes the sites that can
accommodate the need for lower-income, moderate-income and above moderate-income
housing.
The Housing Market Constraints Analysis (A-31 to A-39) describes the following components of
housing costs:
      Land
      Construction
      Financing
      Sales prices and monthly rents
The Governmental Constraints Analysis (A-40 to A-55) describes actual and potential constraints
on housing production and improvement such as:
      Land use controls
      Building codes and their enforcement
      Site improvements
      Fees and exactions required of developers
      Local processing and permit procedures
      Constraints on housing for persons with disabilities
      Constraints on meeting regional share housing needs
The Progress Report (A-55 to A-61) describes the progress the City has made toward
implementation of the 2008-2014 Housing Element.
                                             A-1

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
B. HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
1. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
In addition to the Introduction and Summary, the Housing Needs Assessment describes the
following:
      Part 2 - housing characteristics including the number and types of housing units and
        the condition of housing.
      Part 3 – household characteristics including the number of households, level of
        payment compared to ability to pay, and overcrowding.
      Part 4 - an analysis of existing affordable housing developments at risk of converting
        to market rate housing during the next 10 years.
      Part 5 - an analysis of special housing needs experienced by populations such as
        the elderly; persons with disabilities including those with developmental disabilities;
        large families; farmworkers; families with female heads of households; and families
        and persons in need of emergency shelter.
      Part 6 - an analysis of population and employment trends and of projections of
        existing and projected housing needs for all income levels. The existing and
        projected needs include the City’s share of the regional housing need.
A summary of the key findings is provided below:
                   Housing and Household Characteristics and At-Risk Housing
      10,791 housing units comprise the existing housing stock
      Single-family detached homes comprise about two thirds (67.9%) of the existing
        housing stock
      2,600-2,800 housing units need rehabilitation and 10-20 need replacement
      Of the 10,116 occupied housing units, 5,430 (53.7%) are owner-occupied and 4,686
        (46.3%) are renter occupied (2010 Census)
      3,664 lower income households are cost burdened and 2,130 are severely cost
        burdened
      More lower-income renters (2,240) than owners (1,424) experience housing costs
        more than they can afford.
      1,297 households are overcrowded and renters comprise the majority of crowded
        households
      337 affordable apartment units are at-risk of converting to market rate housing
                                      Special Housing Needs
      11% of elderly owners (154/1,353) and 34% of elderly renters (485/1,443) are cost
        burdened – that is, paying more than they can afford for housing
      About 4,950 disabled persons live in Calexico
      The elderly have the highest rate of disabilities as 50.2% of all people 65 years of
        age or older report one or more disability
                                                 A-2

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
     227 developmentally disabled residents are served by the San Diego Regional
        Center
     23% of the large family owners (470/2,027) and 26% of large family renters
        (340/1,324) are cost burdened
     742 farm workers live in Calexico, which is almost one-fourth of all the Imperial
        County farmworkers
     About 3,162 female householders live in Calexico, which is slightly less than one
        third (31.3%) of all the City’s householders
     About 2,319 female householders live with a family and 746 live alone.
     Calexico has about 40 homeless persons, a number which includes the chronically
        homeless
                                       Projected Housing Needs
     SCAG’s 2012 RTP Forecast shows an increase of 4,000 households between 2008
        and 2020
     SCAG’s 2012 RTP Forecast shows an increase in employment of 6,300 jobs
        between 2008 and 2020.
     3,224 housing units is Calexico’ share of the regional housing need, which includes
        1,306 units for lower income households
2. HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS
This part provides information on –
     Existing Housing Stock by Occupancy Status
     Numbers and Types of Housing Units
a. Existing Housing Stock by Occupancy Status
As of January 1, 2013, 10,791 dwellings comprise the housing stock, which is –
     An increase of 3,808 housing units since the April 2000 Census
     An increase of 140 housing units since the April 2010 Census
As of January 1, 2013, 10,249 housing units were occupied and 538 dwellings were vacant,
representing a 5% vacancy rate. Table A-1 reports the detailed statistics.
b. Numbers and Types of Units
The number and type of housing units as of January 1, 2013 is essentially the same as in April
2010. Single-family detached homes comprise just over two thirds of the housing stock. Housing
units in multi-family structures of five or more dwellings comprise about 15% of the housing
stock. Table A-2 shows the numbers and types of housing units in 2000, 2010 and 2013.
                                                 A-3

              APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                                 Table A-1
                                             City of Calexico
                                  Housing Stock by Occupancy Status
                                April 2000, April 2010 and January 2013
    Occupancy                    Number of Housing         Number of Housing       Number of Housing
   Status                                 Units 2000                Units 2010                 Units 2013
   Occupied                                     6,814                    10,116                     10,249
   Vacant                                         169                        535                        542
   Total                                        6,983                    10,651                     10,791
   Percent Vacant                                2.4%                      5.0%                       5.0%
  Source: Census 2000 Summary File 1 (SF 1), DP-1 Demographic Profile, Housing Occupancy
  2010 Census Summary File 1, DP-1 Demographic Profile, Housing Occupancy
  State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates for Cities, Counties,
  and the State, 2013 with 2010 Benchmark Sacramento, California, May 2013
  Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
                                                 Table A-2
                                             City of Calexico
                                     Housing Stock by Type of Unit
                                April 2000, April 2010 and January 2013
                                                                 Number of Units
  Type of Unit                                2000    Percent      2010 Percent         2013 Percent
  1 unit, detached                           4,466       63.9%    7,087       66.5%     7,326       67.9%
  1 unit, attached                             439        6.3%      565        5.3%       486        4.5%
  2 to 4 units                                 888       12.7%    1,359       12.8%     1,158       10.7%
  5+ units                                     986       14.1%    1,473       13.8%     1,651       15.3%
  Mobile homes, Boat, RV, Van, Etc.            205        2.9%      167        1.6%       170        1.6%
  Total                                      6,984     100.0% 10,651        100.0%    10,791 100.0%
Note: According to the State Department of Finance, American Community Survey (ACS) data were used to
distribute 2010 census housing units into the standard housing types (single detached units, single attached
units, two to four units, five plus or apartment units, and mobile homes). Housing units are estimated by
adding new construction and annexations and subtracting demolitions and conversions starting from the 2010
benchmark or based on the prior year’s estimate.
Source: Census 2000 Summary File 3 (SF 3), Table H030 Units in Structure
2008-2010 American Community Survey (ACS) 3-Year Estimates, Table B25024 Units in Structure.
State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates for Cities, Counties, and
the State, 2013 with 2010 Benchmark Sacramento, California, May 2013
Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
  c. Condition of the Existing Housing Stock
  The condition of housing refers to housing in the following states:
        Sound
        In need of minor, moderate or substantial repairs
        Dilapidated
                                                     A-4

          APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
Housing rehabilitation needs encompass all dwellings in need of minor, moderate or substantial
repairs. Dilapidated housing is beyond reasonable repairs and needs to be replaced.
In 2007, a housing condition survey was conducted to evaluate housing in terms of its
foundation, roofing, siding, windows and electrical. Each housing structure was rated as being in
sound or dilapidated condition, or in need of minor, moderate, or substantial repairs. Table A-3
shows that the condition of almost 9,300 housing units was evaluated. Single-family and multi-
family housing comprise the vast majority of the housing units surveyed. Almost 70% of the total
housing stock surveyed was in sound condition. Duplexes had the lowest percentage of housing
in sound condition.
                                            Table A-3
                                        City of Calexico
                                 Condition of the Housing Stock
                     Single Family                   Duplex                     Triplex
Condition          Number         Percent      Number        Percent       Number       Percent
Sound                 5,188        72.6%              48      24.5%             87        72.5%
Minor                 1,500        21.0%              80      40.8%             30        25.0%
Moderate                422         5.9%              68      34.7%               3        2.5%
Substantial               21        0.3%               0        0.0%              0        0.0%
Dilapidated               14        0.3%               0        0.0%              0        0.0%
Total                 7,145       100.0%            169      100.0%            120       100.0%
                      Multi-Family               Mobile Homes                    Total
                   Number         Percent      Number        Percent       Number       Percent
Sound                 1,000        62.2%            145       75.1%          6,468        69.8%
Minor                   490        30.5%              35      18.1%          2,135        23.1%
Moderate                117         7.3%               7        3.6%           617         6.7%
Substantial                0        0.0%               6        3.1%            27         0.3%
Dilapidated                0        0.0%               0        0.0%            14         0.1%
Total                 1,607       100.0%            193      100.0%          9,261       100.0%
Source: 2007 Housing Condition Survey
Since 2007, some housing units have been repaired by their owners or through City code
enforcement and housing rehabilitation programs. And other housing units may have
deteriorated so that they need rehabilitation. Consequently, the 2007 survey remains a reliable
indicator of housing units in need of rehabilitation or replacement. Based on the estimates
shown in Table A-4, the housing rehabilitation need is most likely between 2,600 to 2,800
housing units. The housing replacement need most likely is between 10 and 20 housing units.
                                               A-5

             APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                                 Table A-4
                                              City of Calexico
                    Housing Rehabilitation and Housing Replacement Needs
       Unit Type         Housing Rehabilitation Needs1           Housing Replacement Needs2
       Single Family                                      1,943                           14
       Duplex                                               148                            0
       Triplex                                               33                            0
       Multi-Family                                         607                            0
       Mobile Homes                                          48                            0
       Total                                              2,779                           14
     1
      Includes housing units in need of minor, moderate or substantial repairs
     2
      Includes housing units in dilapidated condition
     Source: 2007 Housing Condition Survey
 3. HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISITICS
 This part examines the following household characteristics:
      Tenure – owners and renters
      Level of payment compared to ability to pay
      Overcrowding
 a. Tenure – Owners and Renters
 Tenure refers to whether housing units are occupied by owners or renters. Census 2010 reports
 10,116 occupied housing units – 5,430 owners (53.7%) and 4,686 renters (46.3%). Table A-5
 shows that younger (<35 years) and older (>65) households are predominantly renters. In
 contrast, households 35 to 64 years of age are primarily owners.
                                                 Table A-5
                                              City of Calexico
                                 Tenure by Age of Householder-2010
 Age of Householder              Owner        Percent        Renter       Percent  Total Percent
 15 to 24 years                       80        31.6%           173         68.4%    253    2.5%
 25 to 34 years                      579        44.2%           730         55.8%  1,309  12.9%
 35 to 44 years                    1,257        56.9%           954         43.1%  2,211  21.9%
 45 to 54 years                    1,427        61.3%           901         38.7%  2,328  23.0%
 55 to 64 years                    1,049        60.2%           693         39.8%  1,742  17.2%
 65 years and over                 1,038        45.7%         1,235         54.3%  2,273  22.5%
 Total                             5,430        53.7%         4,686         46.3% 10,116 100.0%
Source: Census 2010, Summary File 1, Table QT-H2: Tenure, Household Size and Age of Householder
Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
                                                      A-6

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
b. Level of Payment Compared to Ability to Pay
Level of payment compared to ability to pay measures the number and percentage of
households who are paying more than they can afford for housing. This problem is referred to
as “overpaying” or “cost burdened.” For lower income households, overpaying occurs when
they pay 30% or more of their income on housing costs. “Severe” overpaying is when lower
income households spend 50% or more of their income on housing costs.
1. 2013 Income Limits for Income Groups
Table A-6 shows the 2013 household income limits for four income groups, adjusted by
household size –
       Extremely low income : <30% of the Imperial County median household income
       Low income: 30%-50% of the Imperial County median household income
       Low income: 50%-80% of the Imperial County median household income
       Moderate income: 80%-120% of the Imperial County median household income
                                              Table A-6
                                           Imperial County
                     2013 Annual Income Limits Adjusted by Household Size
          Household Size           Extremely      Very Low        Low         Moderate
          (# of persons)        Low Income          Income    Income           Income
          1 person                    $12,150       $20,300   $32,450          $48,650
          2 persons                   $13,900       $23,200   $37,050          $55,600
          3 persons                   $15,650       $26,100   $41,700          $62,550
          4 persons                   $17,350       $28,950   $46,300          $69,500
          5 persons                   $18,750       $31,300   $50,050          $75,050
          6 persons                   $20,150       $33,600   $53,750          $80,600
          7 persons                   $21,550       $35,900   $57,450          $86,200
          8 persons                   $22,950       $38,250   $61,150          $91,750
         Source: State Department of Housing and Community Development, State Income
         Limits for 2013, February 25, 2013
Table A-7 shows the annual income and monthly income limits for a 4-person household in
each of the four income groups. For instance, the monthly income limit of a low income 4 person
household ranges between $2,412 and $3,858.
The income limits are important because they determine eligibility for programs that provide
financial assistance to owners and renters.
                                                 A-7

                 APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                                     Table A-7
                     Imperial County: Annual and Monthly for a 4-Person Household
                        Income Group                  Income Limits    Monthly Income
                        Extremely Low              less than $17,350   less than $1,445
                        Very Low                    $17,351-$28,950      $1,445-$2,412
                        Low                         $28,951-$46,300      $2,412-$3,858
                        Moderate                    $46,301-$69,500      $3,858-$5,791
                       Source: Table A-6
                       Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
      2. Cost Burdened and Severely Cost Burdened Owners and Renter.
      Overpaying is often cited as one of the major problems confronting the lower income (<80%
      AMI) population. Table A-8 shows the total number of households and the number cost
      burdened and severely cost burdened by income group and household type.
                                                     Table A-8
                                                City of Calexico
                    Cost Burdened Households by Income Level and Household Type
 Household                                                                  Total    Percent       Total
 Type/Income                    Small       Large                            Cost       Cost Households
 Level/Cost Burden            Related Related Elderly Other Burdened Burdened                 by Income
                                          Renters Cost Burden >30%
  0-30% AMI                        630        195         300      70       1,195      84.8%       1,410
  30-50% AMI                       350         85         170     115         720      74.2%         970
  50-80% AMI                       250         60          15        -        325      32.5%       1,000
  All Households                1,280         375         485     225       2,365      56.0%       4,225
                                          Renters Cost Burden >50%
  0-30% AMI                        480        195         145      70         890      63.1%       1,410
  30-50% AMI                       150         35          35      30         250      25.8%         970
  50-80% AMI                        65           -         15        -         80       8.0%       1,000
  All Households                   695        230         195     100       1,220      28.9%       4,225
                                          Owners Cost Burden >30%
  0-30% AMI                        145         80          64      15         304      89.4%         340
  30-50% AMI                       200        155          40      25         420      71.8%         585
  50-80% AMI                       335        235          50      80         700      66.4%       1,055
  All Households                1,205         775         324     150       2,454      46.0%       5,335
                                          Owners Cost Burden >50%
  0-30% AMI                        120         80          20      15         235      69.1%         340
  30-50% AMI                       170        155          25      10         360      61.5%         585
  50-80% AMI                       180         35          20      80         315      29.9%       1,055
  All Households                   535        280          90     105       1,010      18.9%       5,335
Source: Source: HUD User Website, CPD Data, City of Calexico, 2006-2010 CHAS.
Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
                                                         A-8

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
In summary:
     There are a total of 1,750 extremely low income renter and owner households (1,410
        + 340) of which 1,499 (1,195 + 304) are cost burdened (>30%). More than eight of
        every ten ELI renters are cost burdened.
     There are a total of 1,555 very low income renter and owner households (970 + 585)
        of which 1,140 (720 + 420) are cost burdened (>30%). Nearly three-fourths of very
        low income renters are cost burdened.
     There are a total of 2,055 low income renter and owner households (1,000 + 1,055)
        of which 1,025 (325 + 700) are cost burdened (>30%). About one-third of the low
        income renters are cost burdened.
     There are a total of 5,360 lower income (<80% AMI) renter and owner households of
        which 3,664 are cost burdened (>30%). Almost two-thirds of all lower income renters
        are cost burdened.
     There are a total of 9,560 (4,225 + 5,335) households of which 4,819 are cost
        burdened (50%).
Cost burdened renters can be assisted by the Calexico Housing Authority’s Section 8 Housing
Choice Voucher Program, City tenant based rental assistance when available, and the
affordable rental housing stock. Calexico has 23 affordable housing developments offering
apartment units for seniors, large families, small families and other household types.
c. Overcrowding
Overcrowding is one result of the shortage of interior living space. Overcrowding reflects the
financial inability of households to buy or rent housing units having enough space for their
needs. Consequently, overcrowding is considered a household characteristic instead of a
housing structural condition. An "overcrowded" housing unit does not necessarily imply one of
inadequate physical condition; rather, with fewer persons it becomes "uncrowded".
Overcrowding also may be a temporary situation since some households will move to larger
housing units to meet space requirements.
CHAS data provides estimates of the number of occupants per room based on the 2005-2009
American Community Survey (ACS). The following Census Bureau definitions apply:
    Occupants per room is obtained by dividing the number of people in each occupied
    housing unit by the number of rooms in the unit. The figures show the number of
    occupied housing units having the specified ratio of people per room. Although the
    Census Bureau has no official definition of crowded units, many users consider units
    with more than one occupant per room to be crowded. [Emphasis added]
    For each unit, rooms include living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, bedrooms, finished
    recreation rooms, enclosed porches suitable for year-round use, and lodger's rooms.
    Excluded are strip or pullman kitchens, bathrooms, open porches, balconies, halls or
    foyers, half-rooms, utility rooms, unfinished attics or basements, or other unfinished
    space used for storage. A partially divided room is a separate room only if there is a
    partition from floor to ceiling, but not if the partition consists solely of shelves or cabinets.
                                                    A-9

          APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
Table A-9 estimates about 1,300 crowded households. Of this total, about 87% are “crowded”
and 13% are “severely crowded.” Crowded households are an indicator of the need for an
increase in the number of 3-bedroom apartment units and bedroom additions to owner occupied
housing.
                                              Table A-9
                                          City of Calexico
                             Crowding (Households with More than
                              One Occupant per Room) by Tenure
                          Income                  Owner Renter        Total
                          1.01 to 1.50               534     592     1,126
                          occupants per
                          room
                          1.51 or more               107      64        171
                          occupants per
                          room
                          Total                      641     656     1,297
                        Source: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
                        Development, 2005-2009 CHAS (Comprehensive
                        Housing Affordability Strategy)
                        Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
4. AT-RISK HOUSING ASSESSMENT
a. At-Risk Inventory
At-risk housing refers to affordable rental housing that may convert to market rate housing
between 2013 and 2023. Table A-10 shows that 337 rental housing units located in seven
apartment communities are at-risk of conversion to market rate housing.
                                              Table A-10
                                          City of Calexico
                        Inventory of Affordable Rental Housing at Risk
                             of Converting to Market Rate Housing
                  Apartment                            Number of    Type of
                  Community                     Affordable Units    Financing
                  Calexico Village                             36   USDA 515
                  Casa Imperial                                48   USDA 515
                  Casa Sonoma                                  48   USDA 515
                  Casa Sonoma II                               20   USDA 515
                  Villa Del Este                             100    USDA 515
                  Calexico Gardens                             39   HUD 221
                  Casa Del Retiro                              46   HUD 221
                  Total                                      337
                 Source: California Housing Partnership Corporation and Southern
                 California Association of Governments, Local Housing Element
                 Assistance: Existing Housing Needs Data Report, City of Calexico
                                                 A-10

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
The process of converting affordable housing to market rate housing is a difficult and lengthy
process, which requires notices to tenants, local government, local housing authorities and
qualified entities. State notice requirements apply to any multifamily rental housing development
that receives governmental assistance from specific housing programs including the two listed
below:
     Section 221(d)(3) Below-Market-Interest-Rate Mortgage Insurance Program of the
        National Housing Act;
     Section 515 of the Housing Act of 1949, as amended
Table A-11 summarizes the State notice requirements.
                                            Table A-11
                             State Preservation Notice Requirements
          Pursuant to Government Code Sections 65863.10, 65863.11, and 65863.13
             Type of Notice                       When                         Parties
     Intent to Prepay, Terminate,           6 and 12 Months                    Tenants
     or Expiration of Subsidies                                            Affected Public
                                                                              Agencies
     Opportunity to Submit a                   12 Months                  Qualified Entities
     Purchase Offer
     Notice to Affected Public                  6 Months                   Affected Public
     Agencies                                                                 Agencies
     Notice of Any Changes              Within 7 business days of              Tenants
                                               any change
b. Cost Analysis
The cost analysis involves estimates of the costs to preserve or replace the affordable housing
units in the event all were converted to market rate housing.
A cost estimate to preserve the housing is difficult to establish because of many unknown
factors. Preservation could occur by providing tenant based rental assistance in 337 housing
units located in Calexico. Preservation by means of rental assistance would annually cost an
estimated $2,022,000 based on average monthly subsidy of $500 ($500 x 12 = $6,000 X 337 =
$2,022,000).
Preservation by means of acquisition and rehabilitation of the at-risk housing units is estimated
to cost $60,120,800 based on assumed cost of $178,400 per housing unit ($178,400 x 337 =
$60,120,800).
Replacement by means of new construction is estimated to cost $80,162,190 based on average
per unit cost of $237,870 ($237,870 x 337 = $80,162,190).
(The per unit new construction cost is based on the least costly tax credit project costs. The per
unit acquisition and rehabilitation cost is based on 75% of the new construction cost. Source:
California Tax Credit Allocation Committee, Cost Containment and the LIHTC Program, July
2011 Public Forums.)
                                                A-11

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
c. Preservation Resources
Efforts by the City to retain low-income housing must be able to draw upon two basic types of
preservation resources: organizational and financial. Qualified, non-profit entities need to be
made aware of the future possibilities of units becoming “at-risk”. Should a property become
“at-risk” the City maintains a list of qualified entities that may have an interest in preserving that
property.
In addition, the City of Calexico will develop procedures for monitoring and preserving at-risk
units, which will include:
        Monitoring the Risk Assessment report published by the California Housing
         Partnership Corporation (CHPC).
        Maintain regular contact with the local HUD and USDA offices regarding early
         warnings of possible opt-outs.
        Maintain contact with the owners and managers of existing affordable housing to
         determine if there are plans to opt-out in the future, and offer assistance in locating
         eligible buyers.
        Develop and maintain a list of potential purchasers of at-risk units and act as a
         liaison between owners and eligible purchasers.
        Ensure that all owners and managers of affordable housing have access to
         applicable State and federal laws regarding notice to tenants of the owner’s desire to
         opt-out or prepay.
The following is a list of potential financial resources considered a part of the City's overall
financial plan to deal with retaining affordable units. The number and availability of programs to
assist cities and counties in preserving their affordable housing stock is limited, and public
funding for new projects is unpredictable. The following is a list of current local, state and
federal programs.
     HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) Program
     Calexico Housing Authority is a Public Housing Authority whose jurisdiction includes only
         the City. It administers federal and state funds for its public housing projects and
         government assisted housing units such as the Section Housing Choice Voucher
         Program (rental assistance).
     Low-income Housing Tax Credit Program (LIHTC) - The LIHTC Program provides for
         federal and state tax credits for private and non-profit developers and investors who
         agree to set aside all or an established percentage of their rental units at affordable rent
         levels. These tax credits may also be utilized on rehabilitation projects, contributing to
         the preservation of at-risk housing.
     Preservation Financing Program, operated through California Housing Finance Agency
         (CHFA), offers tax-exempt financing for the acquisition or refinancing of a project with an
         expiring Section 8 contract.
The State Department of Housing and Community Development maintains a list of Qualified
Entities who are interested in purchasing government-subsidized multifamily projects. The
Imperial County list includes seven entities that state they possess the legal and managerial
capacity to acquire, preserve, and manage the at-risk Calexico. The Calexico Community
Action Council, Inc. is on HCD list of Qualified Entities. The Calexico Housing Authority is an
entity that has the expertise to acquire, preserve and manage the at-risk housing units.
                                                  A-12

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
5. SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
Special housing needs refer to the needs of populations such as:
        Elderly
        Persons with disabilities
        Persons with developmental disabilities
        Large families
        Farmworkers
        Families with female heads of household
        Families and persons in need of emergency shelter
a. Elderly
The special housing needs of seniors are unique because of the aging process. Additionally,
elderly housing needs vary because of age, gender, race/ethnicity, health, tenure and economic
status.
The special housing needs that the elderly potentially experience include, but are not limited, to:
        Affordable housing
        Units with accessibility modifications
        Units with special accommodations for live-in caretakers
        Housing developments that provide on-site supportive services
        Assistance in locating housing or in securing shared housing
        Housing located near transportation, shopping and medical services
The Imperial County Area Agency on Aging Plan shows the following as housing related
priorities:
     Priority #2 Safety/home maintenance, modifications, repair
     Priority #4 Utilities/energy costs
     Priority #7 Housing
According to the Plan:
    Housing, safety/home maintenance and services for seniors have ranked high in the
    concerns for seniors. Utilities costs also have an impact on seniors, which is listed as
    one of the top needs. Utilities most directly relate to the use of air conditioners in this
    area, and as such, the AAA has coordinated efforts with Campesinos Unidos, a
    community service provider, for assistance with emergency utility assistance with utility
    companies such as the Imperial Irrigation District (power), the Gas Company, and the
    City Water Departments.
Staff at the Area Agency on Aging described the following needs:
     People are reluctant to apply for home modifications and repairs because they do not
         want to take on more debt.
     The Agency has limited funds to assist with emergency turn-on/turn-off of utilities.
     The Agency provides three months of rental assistance and then refers the clients to
         the County or a city. About 20 households are assisted each month.
                                                A-13

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
     There seems to be a steady increase in the numbers of elderly requesting
        assistance.
     The types of housing most needed include:
         Energy efficient
         Handicapped accessible (as the elderly get older grab bars and walk-in showers
            are important)
         Garden homes with minimal upkeep would enable more seniors to age in place
Staff at the Calexico Senior Center described the following needs:
       Seniors want showers instead of tubs.
       Need for solar panels and insulation.
       Need for small homes with low maintenance yards, not apartments.
       The elderly age-in-place as they have limited opportunities to move.
According to the 2010 Census, there almost 3,000 elderly households (62+ years of age) –
     1,353 owners
     1,443 renters
Table A-12 shows the number of cost burdened elderly households by tenure and three income
groups.
                                             Table A-12
                                          City of Calexico
                  Cost Burdened Elderly Households by Income and Tenure
                   Income Group                   Owners     Renters      Total
                   Extremely Low (0-30%)                64       300        364
                   Very Low (31-50%)                    40       170        210
                   Low (51-80%)                         50        15         65
                   Total                               154       485        639
                  Source: Source: Source: HUD User Website, CPD Data, Calexico,
                  2006-2010 CHAS and Table A-8
                  Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
As noted above, the HUD CHAS data estimates that 639 elderly households are cost burdened
- 154 owners and 485 renters.
About 11% of elderly owners (154/1,353) are cost burdened. While 154 elderly owners are
overpaying, there are no ongoing programs to provide monthly financial assistance to such
owners. Some homeowners may benefit from financial counseling
About 34% of elderly renters (485/1,443) are cost burdened. Rental housing assistance for
elderly renters is available from the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher Program which is
administered by the Calexico Housing Authority. Additionally, the City’s affordable housing
inventory includes eight senior projects having a total of 557 apartment units.
                                                A-14

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
b. Persons with Disabilities
Some key special housing needs may include:
        Affordable housing
        Units with accessibility modifications
        Units with special accommodations for live-in caretakers
        Housing developments that provide supportive services
        Units accessible to public transportation
        Assistance in locating housing or in securing shared housing
        Housing with design features that facilitate mobility and independence
The majority of housing units in most communities lack features such as ramps, extra wide
doors, raised toilets, hand rails, lowered counters, or slip-resistant floors that would make them
suitable for, or readily adaptable, to people with mobility limitations and people using assistive
technology. The majority of existing dwellings are inaccessible to people with a mobility
impairment.
The 2010 American Community Survey asks respondents about six different types of
disabilities:
     Hearing difficulty – “deaf or [had] serious difficulty hearing.”
     Vision difficulty – “blind or [had] serious difficulty even when wearing glasses.”
     Cognitive difficulty – “serious difficulty concentrating, remembering, or making
         decisions.”
     Ambulatory difficulty – “serious difficulty walking or climbing stairs.”
     Self-care difficulty – “difficulty dressing or bathing.”
     Independent living difficulty – “difficulty doing errands alone such as visiting a
         doctor’s office or shopping.”
About 4,950 disabled persons live in Calexico. The elderly have the highest rate of disabilities
as 50.2% of all people 65 years of age or older report one or more disability. Table A-13 shows
the number and percentage of disabled persons by age group.
Disabled householders could benefit from programs that provide assistance to retrofit their
homes. As noted above, the Area Agency on Aging Plan found that seniors consider
“safety/home maintenance, modifications, repair” as their #2 priority. And in Calexico seniors
comprise 45% of all disabled persons (2,213/4,946).
                                                 A-15

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                                Table A-13
                                            City of Calexico
                          Disability Status of Civilian Non-institutionalized
                                Population by Age Group – April 2010
                                            Total           Disabled           Percent
                 Age Group            Population          Population         Disabled
                 < 5 years                  2,986                  63             2.1%
                 5-17 years                 9,025                 433             4.8%
                 18-64 years               22,153               2,237            10.1%
                 65 years +                 4,408               2,213            50.2%
                 Total                     38,572               4,946            12.8%
                Note: Total population per 2010 Census is 38,572 with zero
                institutionalized persons residing in Calexico.
                Sources: 2010 Census Summary File 1, Table P12 Sex by Age (total
                population by age group)
                2010 Census Summary File 1, Table QT-P13 Group Quarters Population
                by Sex, Age, and Type of Group Quarters: 2010 (institutionalized
                population by age group)
                American FactFinder, U.S. Census Bureau, 2010 American Community
                Survey 3-Year Estimates, Table S1810, Disability Characteristics
c. Persons with Developmental Disabilities
According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code a "Developmental disability"
means a disability that originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be
expected to continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which
includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also include
disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to require treatment
similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall not include other
handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional
housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment
where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an
institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because
developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the
developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an
appropriate level of independence as an adult.
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community based
services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families
through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two
community-based facilities. The San Diego Regional Center (SDRC), which serves Calexico, is
a point of entry to services for residents with developmental disabilities. SDR is a service of San
Diego-Imperial Counties Developmental Services, Inc.               About 0.59 percent of California’s
population is served by the DDS. This percentage applied to Calexico’s population yields an
estimate of 227 residents who could be served by the SDRC.
                                                    A-16

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
The SDRC provides a variety of services to persons with developmental disabilities, their
families, and the community. These services include:
    Assessment: Assessments are provided following the initial application for services,
    during the intake and assessment period. These are done for the purpose of establishing
    eligibility for Regional Center services, and also to provide the basis for an initial
    Individual Program Plan for eligible consumers.
    Individual Program Plan (IPP) or Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP): After an
    individual is found to be eligible for Regional Center services and needs are identified, a
    written plan is developed. This plan is called the Individual Program Plan (IPP) or
    Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP) for children 0-3 years of age. Both include goals
    and objectives designed to meet client/family needs.
    Case Management Services: The primary goal of the San Diego Regional Center is to
    provide support services that allow the consumer to live as independently as possible.
    To achieve this goal, service coordinators assist the consumer in securing needed
    services through referral or purchase, by coordinating service programs, and by
    advocating for provision of services through other community agencies.
    Purchase of Services: In securing services and supports, the Planning Team considers
    natural supports and community agencies. The Regional Center may purchase services
    that are necessary and not available through other organizations, which may include:
             Adult Day Programs
             Behavioral Training
             Independent Living Services
             Infant Programs and Services
             Licensed Residential Placement (parental reimbursement fees may be required
              for minors)
             Respite Services
             Supported Employment
             Supported Living Services
             Transportation to Work/Day Program
    Community Services: Public information, community education and the development of
    needed resources are provided by the staff of the SDRC.
There are a number of housing types appropriate for people living with a development disability:
rent subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes, inclusionary housing,
Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD housing, and SB 962 homes.
The design of housing-accessibility modifications, the proximity to services and transit, and the
availability of group living opportunities represent some of the types of considerations that are
important in serving this need group.
Section 2 – Housing Program - describes a program to address the needs of developmentally
disabled persons.
                                                A-17

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
d. Large Families
HCD defines large families as consisting of five or more persons. Lower income, large families
need three, four or five bedroom housing units at affordable costs. Since housing with these
numbers of bedrooms usually command higher costs than smaller units, affordability is another
key need of large families/households. Table A-14 shows the number of large family households
by household size and tenure.
                                              Table A-14
                        City of Calexico: Large Families by Tenure - 2010
       Large Families         Owners      Percent       Renter  Percent     Total Percent
       5 Persons                   963      59.4%          657    40.6%     1,620    48.3%
       6 Persons                   510      59.9%          342    40.1%       852    25.4%
       7 Persons+                  554      63.0%          325    37.0%       879    26.2%
       Total                     2,027      60.5%        1,324    39.5%     3,351 100.0%
      Source: American FactFinder, Census 2010, Summary File 1, Table H16: Tenure by
      Household Size. Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
According to the 2010 Census, there are 3,351 large family households – 2,027 owners and
1,324 renters. Table A-15 shows the number of cost burdened large family households by
tenure and income group. The HUD CHAS data estimates that 810 large family households are
cost burdened – 470 owners and 340 renters.
                                              Table A-15
                                           City of Calexico
                 Cost Burdened Large Families by Tenure and Income Group
                    Income Group                     Owners    Renters     Total
                    Extremely Low (0-30%)                 80       195       275
                    Very Low (31-50%)                    155        85       240
                    Low (51-80%)                         235        60       295
                    Total                                470       340       910
                  Source: Source: Source: HUD User Website, CPD Data, Calexico,
                  2006-2010 CHAS and Table A-8. Table construction by Castañeda &
                  Associates
e. Farmworkers
HCD guidance indicates that a housing element should estimate the number of permanent and
migrant farmworkers within the community. A farm worker is --
     A person who performs manual and/or hand tool labor to plant, cultivate, harvest,
        pack and/or load field crops and other plant life.
     A person who attends to live farm, ranch or aquacultural animals including those
        produced for animal products.
        [Source: State of California, Employment Development Department, Labor Market
        Information Division Occupational Definition]
                                                   A-18

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
Because of their predominantly low incomes, housing affordability is an acute need for
farmworkers.
Using recent American Community Survey data, the Southern California Association of
Governments (SCAG) has estimated the number of Imperial County farm workers by place of
residence. Table A-16 shows that 742 farm workers live in Calexico, which is almost one-fourth
of all the Imperial County farmworkers.
                                             Table A-16
                      Imperial County: Farm Workers by Place of Residence
                                                                                       Percent
     City                  Male Farm Worker      Female Farm Worker      Total Distribution
     Brawley                              615                      71      686          21.7%
     Calexico                             500                    242       742          23.4%
     Calipatria                           111                      18      129           4.1%
     El Centro                            314                    189       503          15.9%
     Holtville                            127                       0      127           4.0%
     Imperial                             135                      10      145           4.6%
     Unincorporated                       564                    171       735          23.2%
     Westmorland                           84                      13       97           3.1%
     County Total                       2,450                    714     3,164         100.0%
    Source: 2005-2009 American Community Survey and Southern California Association of
    Governments
    Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
The housed “farmworkers” who reside in the City live in a household and occupy a housing unit.
Therefore, they would be among the existing households counted as part of the CHAS housing
needs, and estimates of existing and projected housing needs produced by SCAG. That is, the
resident farmworker housing needs would be counted as part of the lower income households
experiencing problems of overpaying, overcrowding, and living in substandard housing.
Because the City’s farm worker population is small, the housing needs of this group are
addressed through its standard affordable housing strategies. The Calexico Family Apartments
II (Chelsea Investment Corp.) offers 80 multi-family rental units targeted to the farm worker
population. A second rental community provides additional farmworker housing.
f. Female Householders
Some important housing needs of female householders include:
        Affordable housing
        Housing developments that provide supportive services
        Assistance in locating housing or in securing shared housing
        Access to housing which accommodates children
        Access to housing which is designed for security and convenience
        Access to housing near parks and open space to serve the needs of female
         householders with children.
                                                 A-19

          APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
Table A-17 shows that, according to the 2010 Census, 3,162 female householders live in
Calexico.
                                            Table A-17
                                         City of Calexico
                            Female Householders by Tenure – 2010
               Type of Household             Owner      Renter  Total Percent
               Family, No Husband                980      1,339 2,319      73.3%
               Living with others                 33         64    97       3.1%
               Living Alone
               <65 Years                          98        174   272       8.6%
               65 Years+                         121        353   474      15.0%
               Subtotal Living Alone             219        527   746      23.6%
               Total                           1,232      1,930 3,162    100.0%
               Percent                        39.0%      61.0%
              Source: 2010 Census Summary File 1 (SF 1), Table QT-H3 Household
              Population and Household Type by Tenure: 2010
              Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
Female householders comprise a little less than one-third (31.3%) of all householders. An
estimated 2,319 female householders live with a family and 746 live alone. About 15% of all
female householders are 65 years of age or older and live alone. Potential housing needs
include rental assistance and assistance with home maintenance and repairs for owner female
householders living alone.
g. Families and Persons in Need of Emergency Shelter
According to HUD, a person is considered homeless:
    Only when he/she resides in one of the places described below at the time of the count.
    An unsheltered homeless person resides in:
        A place not meant for human habitation, such as cars, parks, sidewalks,
           abandoned buildings, or on the street.
    A sheltered homeless person resides in:
        An emergency shelter.
        Transitional housing for homeless persons who originally came from the streets
           or emergency shelters.
The Imperial County Point-in-time Homeless Count estimates a total of about 140 homeless
persons. The same source indicates that Calexico has about 40 homeless persons. The total
City count includes the chronically homeless. Existing resources to address the needs of
homeless persons include Neighborhood House of Calexico, Inc., Campesinos Unidos, and the
Calexico Housing Authority.
The Neighborhood House Shelter is an emergency 30-day stay temporary shelter for women
and children. The Shelter is for women who:
                                               A-20

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
       Have been evicted by landlord or are homeless
       Are low-income
       Are clean and sober for at least 6 months
       Are able to live in a group environment with other women and children
       Are willing to work with a case manager in meeting personal objectives
The Neighborhood House Transitional Housing (NHTH) is transitional housing for homeless
women and children. The program offers housing, counseling, support group, case
management, assistance, food, clothing, referrals and advocacy with community services.
In 2012, the Neighborhood House Shelter/Transitional Housing served 165 unduplicated
persons. In 2012, 4,678 shelter nights were provided.
Campesinos Unidos, Inc. provides emergency assistance up to three months. This organization
considers emergency assistance needs a growing and significant problem.
The Calexico Housing Authority offers a Transitional Housing Program for homeless individuals
working toward self-sufficiency. Housing is provided for one or two years for homeless people
looking for work or going to school. The program pays for rent and utilities and offers referrals to
shelters and motel vouchers until transitional housing is available (usually 2 weeks to 3 months).
6. PROJECTED HOUSING NEEDS
a. Population Trends and Projections
Over the past 33 years, the City’s population grew by almost 26,000 persons. The largest
population gains happened in the 10 years between 2000 and 2010. But a significant number
was also added from 1990 to 2000. Table A-18 shows the population trends during the past
three decades.
                                              Table A-18
                                           City of Calexico
                             Population Growth Trends - 1980 to 2013
                                   Incremental      Incremental % Cumulative Cumulative
    Year          Population           Increase           Increase       Increase % Increase
    1980               14,412
    1990               18,633             4,221              29.3%           4,221        29.3%
    2000               27,109             8,476              45.5%         12,697         88.1%
    2010               38,572            11,463              42.3%         24,160       167.6%
    2013               40,493             1,921               5.0%         25,981       180.3%
   Source:      U.S. Census of Population and Housing for years 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2010
   State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates for Cities,
   Counties, and the State 2012, with 2010 Benchmark Sacramento, California, May 2013
   Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
                                                 A-21

          APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
The population growth projections indicate considerable gains. The SCAG 2012 RTP Forecast
shows an increase of 14,310 persons and 4,518 households in the 12-year period from 2008
and 2020. The household forecast is similar to the City’s regional share allocation of 3, 224
housing units between January 2014 and October 2021, an almost eight year period.
b. Employment Trends and Projections
Employment generates income, which leads to effective housing demand and housing choice.
Table A-19 shows that SCAG projects that Imperial County will add 40,400 jobs between 2008
and 2020. During this 12-year period, SCAG projects that Calexico will add 6,300 jobs or about
one-sixth of the Imperial County total.
According to the 2010 American Community Survey, about 20% of Calexico’s labor force is
unemployed. That means that between 2000 and 2010 the number of jobless persons increased
by almost 2,000 (1,420 to 3,359).
                                            Table A-19
                  Imperial County: Employment Growth by City – 2008 -2020
                                      2008             2020 Employment             Percent
      City                     Employment       Employment          Growth Distribution
      Brawley                        7,500            12,300          4,800          11.9%
      Calexico                       9,000            15,300          6,300          15.6%
      Calipatria                     2,300             4,000          1,700           4.2%
      El Centro                     18,600            31,400         12,800          31.6%
      Holtville                      1,600             2,600          1,000           2.5%
      Imperial                       2,800             4,800          2,000           5.0%
      Unincorporated                18,900            30,300         11,400          28.2%
      Westmorland                       600            1,000            400           1.0%
      Total                         61,300           101,700         40,400         100.0%
     Southern California Association of Governments, 2012-2035 Regional Transportation
     Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy Growth Forecast (adopted by the SCAG Regional
     Council on April 4, 2012)
     Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
c. Share of Regional Housing Needs
SCAG has allocated to each city and county a share of the regional housing need. The regional
share includes new housing need to -
     Accommodate household growth
     Replace units lost from the inventory due to demolitions, fires and other causes
     Provide a healthy vacancy rate
The Imperial County share of the six-county regional housing need is 16,551 housing units.
Table A-20 shows the regional share need for each city and the County for five income groups.
The City’s share of the regional housing need for the period from January 1, 2014 to October 1,
2021 is 3,224 housing units which is 19.4% of the total need allocated to Imperial County.
                                                A-22

              APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                                  Table A-20
                      Imperial County: RHNA Housing Need by Income Category –
                                     January 1, 2014 – October 1, 2021
                         Extremely      Very                             Above                 Percent
 City                          Low      Low        Low     Moderate Moderate        Total Distribution
 Brawley                        380      380        470          466      1,338    3,034          18.3%
 Calexico                       408      409        489          490      1,428    3,224          19.5%
 Calipatria                      18        19        22           22         63      144           0.9%
 El Centro                      243      244        300          297        840    1,924          11.6%
 Holtville                       27        27        31           32         92      209           1.3%
 Imperial                       174      175        205          202        553    1,309           7.9%
 Unincorporated                 816      817     1,001        1,001       2,839    6,474          39.1%
 Westmorland                     28        29        35           36        105      233           1.4%
 Total                        2,094    2,100     2,553        2,546       7,258   16,551         100.0%
                                                           th
Source: Southern California Association of Governments, 5 Cycle Final Regional Housing Needs Assessment
Allocation Plan, adopted by the Regional Council on October 4, 2012
   C. SITES INVENTORY AND ANALYSIS
   1. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
   The City’s share of the regional housing need of 3,224 housing units by income group is as
   follows:
         Above Moderate Income                     1,428 housing units
         Moderate Income                              490 housing units
         Lower income                              1,306 housing units
   Government Code Section 65583(a)(3) states that a housing element must include:
        An inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites
        having potential for redevelopment and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and
        public facilities and services to these sites.
   Section 65583.2(a) states that the inventory of land suitable for residential development –
        …shall be used to identify sites that can be developed for housing within the planning
        period and that are sufficient to provide for the jurisdiction’s share of the regional
        housing need for all income levels….”
   2. SITES TO ACCOMMODATE THE ABOVE MODERATE INCOME
        HOUSING NEED
   Table A-21 identifies five vacant sites/projects with a combined capacity of 1,672 housing units
   that accommodate the above moderate income housing need of 1,428 housing units.
   Residential densities range from about 2 to 6 dwelling units per acre.
   Exhibit A-1 shows the locations of the above moderate income housing sites.
                                                     A-23

                  APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                                   Table A-21
                                                City of Calexico
                                 Inventory of Vacant Sites that Accommodate
                                  the Above Moderate Income Housing Need
                                       General Plan     Zone                   App’d.
 APN               Project Name        Designation      District     Acres      Units Density Constraints
 059-170-005       Las Palmas          LDR              R1          324.00         600       1.85 None
 059-010-007,
 059-010-057,      Estrella
                                       LDR              R1            96.51        391       4.05 None
 059-010-058,      Subdivision
 059-010-059
 059-170-001,      Palazzo                              Specific
                                       Specific Plan                  30.91        182       5.89 None
 059-170-002       Subdivision1                         Plan
 059-180-045       Venezia             LDR              R1            40.01        249       6.22 None
 059-491-003,      Pacific Century
                                       LDR              R1            40.00        250       6.25 None
 059-500-002       Homes
 Total                                                              531.43      1,672        3.14
 1
  Located in Sphere of Influence
Source: Calexico Amended Final Housing Element, December 2009, Table 2.2-17, page 73
City of Calexico, Community Development Department/Planning Division, Project List Monthly Status Report
City of Calexico, Planning Commission Meeting Agenda, December 12, 2011 (Palazzo Specific Plan)
Imperial County Local Agency Formation Commission, Minutes of September 24, 2009 Meeting (Estrella Subdivision
annexation approved)
Imperial County Assessor’s Office (Assessor Parcel Maps and updated Assessor Parcel Numbers)
Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
       3. SITES TO ACCOMMODATE THE MODERATE INCOME HOUSING
           NEED
       Table A-22 identifies four vacant sites/projects with a combined capacity of 1,802 housing units
       that accommodate the moderate income housing need of 490 housing units. Residential
       densities range from about 12 to 14 dwelling units per acre.
       Exhibit A-2 shows the locations of the moderate income housing sites.
                                                      A-24

                      APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                                         Table A-22
                                                      City of Calexico
                                     Inventory of Vacant Sites that Accommodate
                                          the Moderate Income Housing Need
                                                   General
                                                   Plan            Zone             App’d.
  APN                 Project Name                 Designation District      Acres   Units Density Constraints
  059-010-058         Estrella Subdivision         MDR             RC         20.03    244      12.18 None
  058-180-050,        Remington
                                                   MDR             RC         20.00    272      13.60 None
  058-180-064         Condominiums
  058-180-008,
  058-180-009,        River View
                                                   MDR             RC         25.00    352      14.08 None
  058-180-010,        Condominiums
  058-180-011
  059-170-001,                                     Specific        Specific
                      Palazzo Subdivision1                                    65.48    934      14.26 None
  059-170-002                                      Plan            Plan
  Total                                                                      130.51  1,802      13.80
1
 Located in Sphere of Influence
Source: Calexico Amended Final Housing Element, December 2009, Table 2.2-17, page 73
City of Calexico, Community Development Department/Planning Division, Project List Monthly Status Report,
(Palazzo Subdivision and Rancho Diamante)
City of Calexico, Planning Commission Meeting Agenda, December 12, 2011 (Palazzo Specific Plan)
Imperial County Local Agency Formation Commission, Minutes of September 24, 2009 Meeting (Estrella
Subdivision annexation approved)
Imperial County Assessor’s Office (Assessor Parcel Maps and updated Assessor Parcel Numbers)
Source for General Plan Designation is City of Calexico General Plan Map dated 2007
Source for Zoning is City of Calexico Zoning Map dated January 16, 2008
Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
           4. SITES TO ACCOMMODATE THE LOWER INCOME HOUSING NEED
           One approved site and five vacant sites accommodate the lower income housing need of 1,306
           housing units allocated to the City for the 5th Cycle RHNA:
                One vacant site – Villa Primavera - is approved for 48 affordable rental housing units.
                   The developer of Villa Primavera is Chelsea Investco and the project was awarded
                   State HOME funds.
                In addition, five vacant sites (eight assessor parcels) are zoned RA (Residential
                   Apartment Zone) which provides for a residential density between 20 and 30 dwelling
                   units per acre.
                   The housing capacity of the five RA zoned sites is 1,647 housing units (68.69 acres
                   @ 24 dwellings per acre = 1,647 housing units). The housing capacity is based at
                   about the mid-range of 20 to 30 dwelling units per acre.
           Table A-23 lists information for each of the five sites.
           The total housing capacity is 1,695 housing units which exceeds Calexico’s share of the
           regional housing need for lower income housing sites.
                                                            A-25

          APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                             Table A-23
                                          City of Calexico
               Sites Inventory to Accommodate Lower Income Housing Need
                   RA – Residential Apartment Zoned Sites (20-30 dus/ac)
                                                Land Use         Zoning         Housing
           Site                        Acres Designation Designation            Capacity
           059-455-0011
                                        4.22 HDR                 RA                  101
           059-455-0021
           058-832-016                  6.53 HDR                 RA                  156
           058-853-001
                                        9.85 HDR                 RA                  236
           058-853-002
           Part of Calexico
                                       15.00 HDR                 RA                  360
           Mega Park
           059-010-0192
                                       33.09 HDR                 RA                  794
           059-010-020
           Total                       68.69                                       1,647
         Note: The HDR land use designation refers to High Density Residential.
         Parcel size is based on assessor parcel data and plan for Mega Park.
         1
          059-455-001 = 2.07 acres; 059-455-002 = 2.15 acres
         2
          059-010-019 = 19.78 acres; 059-010-020 = 13.31 acres
         Table construction by Castañeda & Associates
Exhibit A-3 shows the locations of the lower income housing sites.
                                                 A-26

         20 Ac. (portion only) 30.91 Acres
40 Acres
                                           324 Acres
                                                     40 Acres (portion only)
                  20 Ac (Portion only) 10 Ac (Portion only)
25 Acres
         20 Acres
                 15 Ac (portion only)
        33.09 Ac
                                           2.07 Ac 2.15 Ac
                                      5 Ac
9.85 Ac
           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
5. Public Services and Facilities
The City of Calexico can supply water and sewer services to all areas within the City limits and
to the areas planned for growth in the Sphere of Influence (SOI). Water and sewer services are
available to the recently approved projects within the City’s limits. Eight of 13 sites identified in
the Sites Inventory and Analysis have been approved and were subject to environmental review
under the provisions of CEQA. The services are available through the extension and upgrading
of certain water and sewer lines and lift stations, which are requirements under each project’s
tentative map conditions of approval. Project developers are responsible for funding the
required improvements.
The City provides its own sewerage service treating effluent at the Calexico Water Pollution
Control Plant located north of Calexico International Airport. The system contains many small lift
stations due to the flat topography, bringing service to the residents. Effluent is processed and
deposited into the New River. The present plant has a design flow capacity of 4.30 million
gallons per day (MGD).
According to the City’s Service Area Plan recommendations, development within the current
Sphere of Influence will necessitate certain improvements and upgrades to the City’s
wastewater facilities in order to accommodate the projected growth. The projected growth
described in the Service Area Plan exceeds the City’s RHNA allocation and extends beyond the
2021 planning horizon.
Existing capacity coupled with the short- and long-term improvements described in the Service
Area Plan will provide sufficient sewer capacity to accommodate the RHNA allocation. These
planned improvements include the installation of new regional pump stations, gravity pipelines
and force mains and the upgrade of the facility from an average daily flow of 4.3 to 8.5 MGD.
The conditions of approval for projects located within the SOI include compliance with the
recommendations.
The City of Calexico Service Area Plan also includes recommendations for the upgrade and
improvement to the City’s Water Treatment Plant facility and water storage and conveyance
systems in order to accommodate growth within the current Sphere of Influence. The conditions
of approval for approved projects include compliance with the recommended improvements and
upgrades to the facility prior to the issuance of any certificates of occupancy. Existing capacity
coupled with the short- and long-term improvements described in the Service Area Plan will
provide sufficient water capacity to accommodate the RHNA allocation.
6. Environmental Conditions
The vacant sites identified in the land survey are sites well suited to residential development.
Environmental constraints, such as wetlands or contamination, do not occur that would inhibit
developers from building on the parcels identified in the Sites Inventory and Analysis or areas
located within the Sphere of Influence. No major grading would be required of the parcels
identified in the sites inventory.
According to the General Plan EIR, the City lies within a seismically active region. The County
of Imperial General Plan estimates that minor earthquakes will affect certain portions of Imperial
County every few months. In addition, Imperial County will most likely experience a moderately
damaging event every five years; and at least once every fifty years, a major earthquake will
                                               A-30

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
most likely occur. Within the last 35 years, Calexico has been damaged due to the movements
of major faults in the San Jacinto Fault Zone (i.e., the Imperial and Superstition Hills Faults).
Liquefaction, settlement, ground lurching, ground displacement along the fault line, and
landslides are often the secondary effects of earthquakes. The soils in the Salton Trough, which
includes the City of Calexico, have properties that could facilitate these effects, including
unconsolidated soils, high groundwater, and saturated soils. Although the City is subject to the
hazards associated with a seismically active region, adherence to the most recent construction
and maintenance practices, such as the California Building Code (CBC), by development
projects will lessen impacts from known geologic hazards. The City requires engineering reports
to establish appropriate design standards and mitigation measures taken to alleviate these
hazards.
D. HOUSING MARKET CONSTRAINTS
1. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
Government Code Section 65583(a)(6) requires –
     An analysis of potential and actual nongovernmental constraints upon the maintenance,
    improvement, or development of housing for all income levels, including the availability
    of financing, the price of land, and the cost of construction.
According to HCD:
    Although nongovernmental constraints are primarily market-driven and generally outside
    direct government control, localities can significantly influence and offset the negative
    impact of nongovernmental constraints through responsive programs and policies.
    Analyzing specific housing cost components including the cost of land, construction
    costs, and the availability of financing assists the locality in developing and implementing
    housing and land-use programs that respond to existing local or regional conditions.
    While the cost of new housing is influenced by factors beyond a locality’s control, local
    governments can create essential preconditions (favorable zoning and development
    standards, fast track permit processing, etc.) that encourage and facilitate development
    of a variety of housing types and affordable levels.
The requisite analysis includes:
     Land Costs – Estimate the average cost or the range of costs per acre for single-
         family and multifamily zoned developable parcels.
     Construction Costs – Estimate typical total construction costs which include materials
         and labor.
     Availability of Financing - Consider whether housing financing, including private
         financing and government assistance programs, is generally available in the
         community. This analysis could indicate whether mortgage deficient areas or
         underserved groups exist in the community.
In addition to the above, the market constraints analysis includes the cost of housing in terms of
the sales prices of single-family detached and attached housing and monthly rents.
                                                 A-31

                    APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
         In summary:
              Land, construction and financing costs each contribute to establishing the minimum
                 costs to produce housing.
              There have been no recent land sale transactions. There are currently only three
                 residential sites on the market, two approved condominium sites and one un-entitled
                 apartment site. The price per unit ranged from $10,150 to $13,352.
              Average construction costs range between $122 and $133 per square foot
              Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data indicates that –
                  86% of conventional loan applications were approved
                  86.8% of FHA loan applications were approved
                  Only two home improvement loan applications were approve
         2. LAND COSTS
         Land costs are a major component of new housing production costs. The development industry
         typically categorizes land into three types: raw land, entitled land, and finished lots.
         The values attributed to parcels of land increase through these three stages. Raw land is a
         vacant piece of land without any entitlements or improvements. Entitled land can range from
         having the appropriate zoning to having a recorded subdivision for the land. Again the values
         can increase the further a piece of land is in the entitlement process. Finally, land can be
         categorized as “finished lots”. This is the final stage prior to the actual construction of a home.
         All grading has been completed and all infrastructure (streets, curbs, gutters, storm drains,
         sewers and utilities) have been installed. In most cases, this also means that all fees (except
         those associated with building permits) have also been paid. At this stage, the land is at its
         highest value.
         There have been no recent land sales. Table A-24 shows current residential land asking prices.
         There is currently no single family land on the market. The estimated per housing unit land
         range between $10,000 and $13,400.
                                                      Table A-24
                                                   City of Calexico
                                                     Land Prices
                       Entitlement                                         Size Number
 Location              Status          Zoning                             (Ac.) of Units          Price Price/Unit
 Meadow Drive1         Raw             RA-Residential Apartment            6.67        133 $1,350,000     $10,150
 109 W. Hwy 982        Approved        Mixed Use Project                 32.66         352 $4,700,000     $13,352
 249 W. Hwy 983        Approved        Condominiums                      19.27         272 $3,500,000     $12,868
1
 Zoning allows 20-30 units per acre. Number of units based on 20 units per acre.
2
 This is the Riverview Condominium Project. Price per unit based only on the number of dwelling units and does not
consider the commercial component of the project.
3
 This is the Remington Development Project.
Source: LoopNet commercial real estate.
                                                         A-32

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
3. CONSTRUCTION COSTS
Average construction costs are difficult to estimate because they can vary due to the following
physical characteristics:
        Design type
        Construction type
        Quality
        Shape
        Location (mountains vs flatlands)
Source: California State Board of Equalization, Assessors’ Handbook Section 531, Residential Building
Costs, January 2010, page 4
The International Code Council (ICC) provides Building Valuation Data (BVD) for its members.
The BVD table provides the “average” construction costs per square foot, which can be used to
determine permit fees for a jurisdiction. The ICC states:
     …it should be noted that, when using this data, these are “average” costs based on
     typical construction methods for each occupancy group and type of construction. The
     average costs include foundation work, structural and nonstructural building
     components, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and interior finish material.
Table A-25 shows the BVD average per square foot construction costs for three types of
buildings.
                                             Table A-25
               Construction Costs per Square Foot for Residential Construction
                                                                           Type IV
                   Group (2012 International Building Code)          Classification
                   R-2 Residential, multiple family                        $124.24
                   R-3 Residential, one- and two-family                    $122.07
                   R-4 Residential, care/assisted living facilities        $149.84
                   Private garage                                            $56.48
                 Source: International Code Council, Building Valuation Data (BVD),
                 August 2012
The estimated average construction cost of the 48 unit Villa Primavera multi-family project is
$133.34 per square foot. The average per unit cost was $114,700.
Based on the BVD, the following are estimated construction costs for a -
      1,000 SF housing unit in an apartment building            $124,240
      1,500 SF single-home on a level lot                       $183,105
      400 SF garage for single family home                       $22,592
However, it is important to note that while this BVD table does determine an estimated cost of a
building (i.e., Gross Area x Square Foot Construction Cost), this data is only intended to assist
jurisdictions in determining their permit fees. This data table is not intended to be used as an
                                                 A-33

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
estimating guide because the data only reflects average costs and is not representative of
specific construction.
The average construction costs may be low because they may not include architecture, building
permit/plan check fees and development impact fees. They also are considerably less than the
lowest tax credit unit costs in the state which is about $237,000. (Source: California Tax Credit
Allocation Committee, Cost Containment Forums Report, August 23, 2011.) Additionally,
affordable housing projects need to pay prevailing wages. This requirement typically drives up
construction costs by 15% to 20%.
New affordable homes and apartments cannot be constructed without some public funding
sources that subsidize the entire development and reduce the loan amount to that which can be
supported by the affordable rents and mortgage payments. For instance, the City’s two newest
affordable housing developments each received State HOME funding
The loss of City redevelopment funds will impede efforts to produce additional affordable
housing units.
4. AVAILABILITY OF FINANCING
a. Financing Availability Based On Interest Rates
For a sustained period of time, market mortgage interest rates have been either very reasonable
or at historic lows. Table A-26 shows interest rates for two points in time. According to a weekly
survey of 20 southland lenders, as of September 11, 2013, the average mortgage interest rates
on 30-year fixed rate loans up to $417,000 have increased by close to 1%. All other loan types
have also increased during the past six months. Interest rates remain low compared to historical
standards.
                                                Table A-26
                                   Average Mortgage Interest Rates
              Weekly Survey of 20 Southland Lenders - As of September 11, 2013
         Type of Loan                                Last Week               I Six Months Prior
         Rates for loans up to $417,000
         30-year fixed                               4.68%/.41 pt.           I 3.80%/.27 pt.
         15-year fixed                               3.76%/.29 pt.           I 2.97%/.31 pt.
         Rates for loans of $417,00 and up
         30-year fixed                               4.85%/.22 pt.           I 4.03%/.41pt.
         15-year fixed                               4.15%/.15 pt.           I 3.31%/.33 pt.
       Note: A pt. (point) is a term used by the lending industry to refer to the loan origination fee.
       One point is equal to 1% of the loan amount.
       Source: Compiled by HSH Associates, Financial Publishers
It should be noted that not all would be homebuyers would qualify for the lowest interest rates
available. The most favorable interest rates are available to loan applicants who have good
FICO credit scores. FICO refers to Fair Issac Corporation, a firm that developed the
mathematical formulas used to produce FICO scores. A FICO score is a snapshot of an
applicant’s credit risk; the higher the score, the lower the risk to lenders. The FICO score is
computed based on: payment history, amounts owed, length of credit history, new credit, and
types of credit in use.
                                                    A-34

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
b. Financing Availability Based on HMDA Data
1. Introduction
HCD has advised cities that an understanding of the geographic areas and or groups without
sufficient access to credit will help localities to design programs to address known deficiencies.
The information that helps most to understand the geographic areas served by credit is the
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act or HMDA data.
HMDA requires lenders to disclose the number, amount, and census tract location of mortgage
and home improvement loan applications. The HMDA data encompasses lender activity for
conventional, FHA, home improvement loans and refinancing loans. The data identifies five
types of action taken on a loan application: loan originated, application approved by the lender
and not accepted by the applicant, application withdrawn, file closed for incompleteness and
application denied.
It is important to remember that the census tract location in the following tables refers to the
property location on which a loan application was made. However, borrowers who live outside
the City frequently make the loan applications, and the reasons for denial may be due entirely to
the credit worthiness of the borrower, and not the characteristics of a census tract.
2. 2011 Loan Applications
In calendar year 2011 301 loan applications were made – 14% for conventional loans and 86%
for FHA insured loans.
Table A-27 shows that practically all of the conventional loan applications were made in two
census tracts. Only 14% of the 43 conventional loan applications were denied. Compared to
other communities, the denial rate for conventional loans was quite low.
                                               Table A-27
                                          City of Calexico
                   Conventional Loan Denial Rates by Census Tracts – 2011
        Census            Loans         Approved, Applications              Total     Denial
        Tract         Originated    Not Accepted            Denied Applications        Rate
        119                   16                   1              4            21     19.0%
        120                   15                   1              1            17      5.9%
        121                    0                   1              0             1      0.0%
        122                    3                   0              1             4     25.0%
        Total                 34                   3              6            43     14.0%
       Source: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), Home Mortgage
       Disclosure Act (HMDA), Loan Application Register System (LARS) 2011.
Table A-28 shows that owner occupied FHA, VA and FSA home purchase loan applications in
Calexico totaled 258 in 2011. While the denial rates ranged from 4% to 50% (only four
applications), the overall denial rate for these loan applications was slightly lower than
conventional applications at 13.2%. However, 41% of the FHA/VA loans were in just one tract
119.
                                                  A-35

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                              Table A-28
                                          City of Calexico
                    FHA/VA/FSA Loan Denial Rates by Census Tracts – 2011
      Census             Loans          Approved, Applications                 Total   Denial
      Tract          Originated      Not Accepted            Denied Applications        Rate
      119                     88                    6             11             105   10.5%
      120                     75                    5             19              99   19.2%
      121                      1                    1              2                4  50.0%
      122                     48                    0              2              50    4.0%
      Total                  212                   12             34             258   13.2%
      Source: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), Home Mortgage
      Disclosure Act (HMDA), Loan Application Register System (LARS) 2011.
Overall, credit is available for homes to be purchased in the City. The FHA loan applicants
wishing to purchase in census tract 120 had a higher denial rate of 19.2%. The reason for this
high denial rate is unknown; however, the City staff plans to analyze prior year HMDA data to
determine if this is long-term trend or an isolated occurrence.
3. Home Improvement Loan Applications – 2011
Typically, loan applications for home improvement loans have higher denial rates than home
purchase loans. In 2011 only two home improvement loans were originated while 13 (81%)
were denied. One application was approved but not accepted.
Table A-29 shows that during the four year period from 2008 through 2011 a total of only 20
home improvement loans were originated, an average of five per year. Sixty percent of the 20
loans were originated in 2008.
                                              Table A-29
                                          City of Calexico
             Home Improvement Loans Originated by Census Tracts – 2008-2011
                Census
                Tract         2008       2009       2010   2011      Total Average
                119               3           4         0      1         8         2.0
                120               5           0         2      1         8         2.0
                121               2           0         0      0         2         0.5
                122               2           0         0      0         2         0.5
                Total            12           4         2      2        20         5.0
              Source: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), Home
              Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), Loan Application Register System (LARS)
              2011.
While home improvement loans were made in all the census tracts, most were made in census
tracts 119 and 120. Therefore, current home owners may need to seek other financing sources
for home improvements such as CDBG funds.
                                                  A-36

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
4. Reasons for Loan Denial – 2011
Table A-30 shows that 53 loan applications for conventional, FHA/VA/FSA and home
improvement loans were denied in 2011. More than one-half of all loans were denied for either
debt-to-income ratios or credit history. The three major reasons for loan denials were:
     Credit history             about 32%
     Debt-to-income ratio about 21%
     Other reasons              about 32%
According to HMDA:
     Credit history refers to insufficient number of credit references provided;
         unacceptable type of credit references provided; no credit file; limited credit
         experience; poor credit performance with lender; delinquent past or present credit
         obligations with others; garnishment, attachment, foreclosure, repossession,
         collection action, or judgment; and bankruptcy.
     Debt-to-income ratio refers to “income insufficient for amount of credit requested and
         excessive obligations in relation to income.”
    Source: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, A Guide to HMDA Reporting
    – Getting Right, January 1, 2008, Appendix A, Reasons for Denial
                                              Table A-30
                                           City of Calexico
                         Reasons for Loan Denial by Type of Loan – 2011
                                                                         Home
 Reasons for Loan Denials              Conventional FHA/VA Improvement           Total Percent
 Debt-to-Income Ratio                               2         9              0      11     20.8%
 Employment History                                 1         0              0        1     1.9%
 Credit History                                     1         6             10      17     32.1%
 Collateral                                         0         1              0        1     1.9%
 Insufficient Cash2                                 0         2              0        2     3.8%
 Unverifiable Information                           0         1              0        1     1.9%
 Credit Application Incomplete                      0         2              1        3     5.7%
 Mortgage Insurance Denied                          0         0              0        0     0.0%
 Other3                                             2        13              2      17     32.1%
 Total                                              6        34             13      53 100.0%
Source: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA), Loan Application Register System (LARS) 2011.
The City’s Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program can assist some of the denied applicants
through low interest loans. The program must be used to correct building, fire, health, and safety
deficiencies. General "eligible" improvements desired by the homeowner may also be included.
The program is strictly designed for low income residents (<80% AMI).
                                                 A-37

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
5. HOUSING COSTS
a. Sales Prices
Although the Housing Element Law and guidelines do not explicitly mention the price of existing
housing, this potential constraint falls within the meaning of “nongovernmental” or market-driven
barriers to affordability. The analysis also helps to determine whether local, State or Federal
programs can be practically applied to address the needs of first-time homebuyers
The sales prices for existing single family homes and condominiums were analyzed for calendar
years 2011 and 2012.
For calendar year 2011, there were a total of 272 sales of existing single family homes to owner
occupants. Forty-nine sales were made to non-owner occupants or investors. It is important to
note that 141 of the 272 (52%) owner-occupied sales were bank-owned or Real Estate Owned
(REO) sales. More than two thirds (69%) of the non-owner occupied sales were bank-owned
sales.
In calendar year 2012 there were a total of 212 sales to owner occupants. Fifty-two sales were
to non-owner occupants or investors. The percentage of bank-owned sales decreased for both
owner-occupants and non-owner occupants to 35% and 44% respectively.
Overall, more than half (54.3%) of the 484 owner occupied sales were at $140,000 or more, and
more than half (59.4%) of the non-owner occupied sales were less than $140,000. Tables A-31
and A-32 provide details on the sales price distribution.
                                               Table A-31
                                            City of Calexico
            Sales Prices of Owner Occupied Single Family Homes-2011 and 2012
                                       2011                   2012                    Total
       Price                   Number Percent Number Percent Number Percent
       <$70,000                        8       2.9%           3       1.4%           11      2.3%
       $70,000-79,999                  7       2.6%           4       1.9%           11      2.3%
       $80,000-89,999                  6       2.2%          14       6.6%           20      4.1%
       $90,000-99,999                12        4.4%           6       2.8%           18      3.7%
       $100,000-109,999              18        6.6%           8       3.8%           26      5.4%
       $110,000-119,000              19        7.0%           9       4.2%           28      5.8%
       $120,000-129,999              25        9.2%          17       8.0%           42      8.7%
       $130,000-139,999              37       13.6%          28      13.2%           65     13.4%
       $140,000-149,999              32       11.8%          30      14.2%           62     12.8%
       $150,000-159,999              24        8.8%          28      13.2%           52     10.7%
       $160,000-169,999              17        6.3%          16       7.5%           33      6.8%
       $170,000-179,999              13        4.8%          10       4.7%           23      4.8%
       $180,000-189,999              11        4.0%           8       3.8%           19      3.9%
       $190,000-199,999              19        7.0%           8       3.8%           27      5.6%
       $200,000+                     24        8.8%          23      10.8%           47      9.7%
       Total                        272 100.0%              212 100.0%             484 100.0%
  Note: There were 141 REO sales in 2011 and 75 in 2012. One Property in 2011 did not record a
  sales price. Source: Realist property tax records from the Pacific West Association of Realtors
                                                   A-38

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                                Table A-32
                                             City of Calexico
          Sales Prices of Non-Owner Occupied Single Family Homes-2011 and 2012
                                        2011                   2012                   Total
        Price                   Number Percent Number Percent Number Percent
        <$70,000                        4      8.2%            9     17.3%           13     12.9%
        $70,000-79,999                  5     10.2%            0      0.0%             5     5.0%
        $80,000-89,999                  2      4.1%            4      7.7%             6     5.9%
        $90,000-99,999                  2      4.1%            1      1.9%             3     3.0%
        $100,000-109,999                0      0.0%            7     13.5%             7     6.9%
        $110,000-119,000                6     12.2%            5      9.6%           11     10.9%
        $120,000-129,999                8     16.3%            7     13.5%           15     14.9%
        $130,000-139,999                7     14.3%            7     13.5%           14     13.9%
        $140,000-149,999                8     16.3%            4      7.7%           12     11.9%
        $150,000-159,999                1      2.0%            3      5.8%             4     4.0%
        $160,000-169,999                1      2.0%            1      1.9%             2     2.0%
        $170,000-179,999                2      4.1%            2      3.8%             4     4.0%
        $180,000-189,999                0      0.0%            0      0.0%             0     0.0%
        $190,000-199,999                2      4.1%            0      0.0%             2     2.0%
        $200,000+                       1      2.0%            2      3.8%             3     3.0%
        Total                          49 100.0%              52 100.0%            101 100.0%
      Note: 34 REO Sales in 2011 and 23 in 2012.
       Source: Realist property tax records from the Pacific West Association of Realtors
Owner occupied single family homes were generally affordable. About one of every eight homes
sold for prices of less than $100,000. Another 46% had sales prices in the range of $100,000 to
$149,999.
Regarding condominium sales to owner occupants, there were only nine sales in 2011 and
2012 ranging in price from $59,000 to $110,000. Three of these sales were REOs. Non-owner
occupants acquired 21 condominiums in 2011 and 2012 with prices ranging from $45,000 to
$145,000. Fourteen of the non-owner occupied sales were REOs.
b. Monthly Rents
The 2009-2011 American Community Survey (ACS) estimated a total of 4,063 renters of which
101 reported “no cash rent” and 3,962 reported a monthly rent. The ACS determined that the
median monthly cash rent was $585. Almost 1,400 renter households reported monthly rents in
the range of $300 to $599. Many of these households probably live in one of the City’s
affordable housing developments. Some 332 renter households have monthly rents of more
than $1,000.
If the City did not have affordable rental developments and Section 8 rental assistance, the cost
burden problem would be much more severe than it now is.
                                                   A-39

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
E. GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS ANALYSIS
1. INTRODUCTION
The Housing Element must include -
    ”An analysis of potential and actual governmental constraints upon the maintenance,
    improvement, or development of housing for all income levels….”
The purpose of the analysis is to determine if a standard or practice “…constitute(s) a barrier to
the maintenance, improvement or development of housing.”
The required analysis includes seven governmental factors:
       Land use controls
       Building codes and their enforcement
       Site improvements
       Fees and exactions required of developers
       Local processing and permit procedures
       Constraints on housing for persons with disabilities
       Constraints on meeting regional share housing needs
The purpose of the analysis is to determine if a standard or practice “…constitute(s) a barrier to
the maintenance, improvement or development of housing.”
2. GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS IDENTIFIED BY THE 2008-2014
    HOUSING ELEMENT
Following a review of the Zoning Ordinance, the 2008-2014 Housing Element identified
amendments that should be enacted to remove or ameliorate governmental constraints.
Consequently, the adopted element included action programs to amend the Zoning Ordinance
to provide for:
       Emergency Shelters
       Transitional Housing and Supportive Housing
       Single Room Occupancy Housing
       Employee Housing
Furthermore, in order to address fair housing laws, it was found necessary to enact a
reasonable accommodation procedure and to revise the family definition. Finally, the City has
not updated the Zoning Ordinance to include procedures for processing density bonus
applications pursuant to Government Code Sections 65915-65918.
In addition, the analysis of zoning provisions for licensed group homes indicates that City must
amend the Zoning Ordinance to define such a use and permit by right licensed group homes in
the residential zones that permit single family homes.
                                                A-40

                 APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
       Table A-33 describes the requirements of the Housing Element Law (Government Code Article
       10.6) and the programs which were included in the 2008-2014 Housing Element in order to
       remove governmental constraints. However, the Zoning Ordinance amendments – due to
       severe staff cutbacks – were not enacted. Consequently, the programs are carried forward into
       the 2013-2021 planning period.
                                                  Table A-33
                                               City of Calexico
                 Governmental Constraints Identified by the 2008-2014 Housing Element
             and Recommended Actions to Remove or Ameliorate the Identified Constraints
                                              Employee Housing
               Health and Safety Code                           2008-2014 Housing Element Program
Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5 requires          The City shall amend the Zoning Ordinance to
that employee housing of six or fewer persons be         include employee housing for six or fewer persons
deemed a single family structure with a residential      in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section
land use, and be treated the same as a single-family     17021.5; such housing shall be treated as a
dwelling of the same type in the same zone.              residential use of property, subject to the same
                                                         requirements.
                                                         This program is carried forward into the 2013-2021
                                                         planning period. Section 3 – Housing Program –
                                                         includes a program to establish provisions for
                                                         employee housing.
                                    Transitional and Supportive Housing
                Housing Element Law                             2008-2014 Housing Element Program
Government Code Section 65583(a)(5) states that          HCD advises:
the Housing Element must demonstrate efforts to
remove governmental constraints that hinder the City         If jurisdictions do not explicitly permit
“…from meeting the need for … supportive housing,            transitional and supportive housing as
transitional housing, and emergency shelters….               previously described, the element must
Transitional housing and supportive housing shall be         include a program to ensure zoning treats
considered a residential use of property, and shall be       transitional and supportive housing as a
subject only to those restrictions that apply to other       residential use, subject to only those
residential dwellings of the same type in the same           restrictions on residential uses contained in
zone.” “For example,” according to HCD guidance, “if         the same type of structure.
the transitional housing is a multifamily use proposed
in a multifamily zone, then zoning should treat the      Program 4.0.e.5 of the 2008-2014 Housing Element
transitional housing the same as other multifamily       states: Zoning Ordinance revision shall establish
uses proposed in the zone.”                              regulations to consider transitional and supportive
                                                         housing as a residential use and only subject to like
                                                         restrictions on other similar residential uses in the
                                                         same zone.
                                                         This program is carried forward into the 2013-2021
                                                         planning period. Section 3 provides more details on
                                                         this action program.
                                                     A-41

                 APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                           Table A-33 continued
                                              City of Calexico
                 Governmental Constraints Identified by the 2008-2014 Housing Element
             and Recommended Actions to Remove or Ameliorate the Identified Constraints
                                    Single Room Occupancy Housing
                Housing Element Law                            2008-2014 Housing Element Program
According to the State housing element law, the City    Program 4.0.e.5 of the 2008-2014 Housing Element
is obligated to enact land use controls that facilitate states: The allowance for Single Room Occupancy
the development of a variety of housing types.          (SRO’s) shall be encouraged and facilitated through
Among these housing types are single room               identification of potential locations and through City
occupancy units (SROs). Government Code Section         assistance with grant writing for the development of
65583(c)(1) states:                                     SRO projects.
Sites shall be identified as needed to facilitate and   This action will be carried forward into the 2013-
encourage the development of a variety of types of      2021 planning period. However, it will be modified to
housing for all income levels, including … single-      include SRO definitions, development standards,
room occupancy units                                    and the zones in which this housing type will be
                                                        permitted. Section 3 provides more details on this
                                                        action program.
                                           Emergency Shelters
                Housing Element Law                            2008-2014 Housing Element Program
Government Code Section 65583(a)(4)(A) requires Program 4.0.e.6 of the 2008-2014 Housing Element
the City to identify –                                  states: In accordance with SB2, adopt a Zoning
                                                        Ordinance amendment to define emergency
    … a zone or zones where emergency                   shelters, to specify development and management
    shelters are allowed as a permitted use             standards and to permit emergency shelters by right
    without a conditional use permit or other           in the RA, High Density residential district. The
    discretionary permit. The identified zone or        proposed ordinance amendment will demonstrate
    zones shall include sufficient capacity to          that proposed permit processing, development, and
    accommodate the need for emergency                  management standards encourage and facilitate the
    shelter…. except that each local government         development of, or conversion to, emergency
    shall identify a zone or zones that can             shelters.
    accommodate at least one year-round
    emergency shelter.                                  Zoning Ordinance provisions for emergency
                                                        shelters will be enacted prior to adoption of the
If the local government cannot identify a zone or 2013-2021 Housing Element by the City Council.
zones with sufficient capacity, the local government
shall include a program to amend its zoning
ordinance to meet the requirements of this paragraph
within one year of the adoption of the housing
element.” [emphasis added]
                                                     A-42

                  APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                           Table A-33 continued
                                              City of Calexico
                  Governmental Constraints Identified by the 2008-2014 Housing Element
             and Recommended Actions to Remove or Ameliorate the Identified Constraints
                                       Reasonable Accommodations
                 Housing Element Law                           2008-2014 Housing Element Program
Government Code Section 65583(c)(3) requires a          Program 4.0.e.3 of the 2008-2014 Housing Element
housing element to provide for reasonable               states: Adopt by Resolution a Reasonable
accommodations for housing for disabled persons.        Accommodation Policy for persons with disabilities
The California Attorney’s General Office and the        that allows for administrative approval of
federal Departments of Justice and Housing and          handicapped accessible needs. Such policy will
Urban Development have advised cities to adopt a        provide simple forms for applicants to fill out and for
reasonable       accommodation     procedure.     This  staff to process. The policy shall also outline
procedure permits disabled persons or their             procedures for processing requested exceptions in
representatives to request exceptions from the          zoning and land use regulations for housing for
standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance, other      persons with disabilities. Staff will provide
land use regulations and the Building Code.             assistance to applicants with the forms. This
                                                        program is carried forward into the 2013-2021
                                                        planning period. Section 3 provides program details.
                                              Family Definition
                   Fair Housing Law                                 2008-2014 Housing Element
To comply with fair housing laws, a definition of The current Housing Element found that the family
“family” must emphasize the functioning of the definition does not make provision for employee
members as a cohesive household:                        housing. However, the family definition also places
                                                        a five-person limit to unrelated persons occupying a
     A definition should not distinguish               housing unit. The Zoning Ordinance defines family
        between related and unrelated persons.          as follows: “Family means an individual or two or
     A definition should not impose numerical          more persons related by blood, marriage or
        limitations on the number of persons that       adoption, or a group of not more than five persons,
        may constitute a family.                        excluding servants, not related by blood, marriage,
                                                        or adoption, living together as a single
                                                        housekeeping unit in a single dwelling unit.”
                                                        The Zoning Ordinance correctly excludes persons
                                                        residing in a licensed residential care facility from
                                                        the occupancy limit. It states: “Family shall also
                                                        mean the persons living together in a licensed
                                                        residential facility as that term is defined in
                                                        California Health and Safety Code Section 1502(a)
                                                        (1), which services six or fewer persons, including
                                                        the licensee, the members of the licensee's family,
                                                        and persons employed as facility staff.”
                                                        The Planning Commission on October 28, 2013
                                                        approved a zoning text amendment that eliminated
                                                        the reference to an occupancy limit. The City
                                                        Council will hold a public hearing on the revised
                                                        definition on December 3, 2013.
                                                    A-43

                 APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                           Table A-33 continued
                                               City of Calexico
                 Governmental Constraints Identified by the 2008-2014 Housing Element
            and Recommended Actions to Remove or Ameliorate the Identified Constraints
                                         Density Bonus Ordinance
                  Density Bonus Law                              2008-2014 Housing Element Program
The State of California enacted significant changes       Program 4.0.b.5 of the 2008-2014 Housing Element
to the state's density bonus law, which went into         states: Revise the Zoning Ordinance to adopt a
effect on January 1, 2005. The legislation, SB 1818       Density Bonus Ordinance according to current State
introduced by Senator Hollingsworth (chaptered as         Law.
Government Code Sections 65915-65918) requires
cities and counties to overhaul their ordinances to       This program is carried forward into the 2013-2021
bring them into conformance with new state                planning period. Section 3 provides more details on
mandates.                                                 this action program.
The new law significantly reduces the number of
units a developer must provide in order to receive a
density bonus and requires cities and counties to
provide between one to three concessions,
depending upon the percentage of affordable units
that the developer provides. It also imposes a new
land donation rule, and statewide parking standards.
       3. GOVERNMENTAL FACTORS FOUND NOT TO BE CONSTRAINTS
          BY THE 2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
       a. Land Use Controls
       1. Land Use Element
       The Land Use Element provides for five residential designations:
             Rural Residential             0.5 to 1 dwelling units per net acre
             Low Density Residential       1 to 5 dwelling units per acre
             Medium Density Residential    5.1 to 12 dwelling units per acre
             High Density Residential      12.1 to 20 dwelling units per acre
             Residential Specific Plan     applied to land not yet annexed to the City
       2. Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
       HCD indicates that a zoning ordinance must make provisions for:
          Multifamily rental housing, factory-built housing, mobilehomes, housing for agricultural
          employees, supportive housing, single-room occupancy units, emergency shelters, and
          transitional housing.
       Table A-34 demonstrates that the Zoning Ordinance provides for a variety of housing types.
                                                     A-44

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                            Table A-34
                                         City of Calexico
             Zoning Ordinance Provisions Promoting a Variety of Housing Types
                                                                                 RR R-1 RC RA R-2
 Single-family dwellings                                                         P   P     P    P   P
 Two-family dwellings                                                            X   C     P    P   P
 Second single-family dwelling on the same lot as an existing single-family C        C     C    C   C
dwelling (See Section 17.03.130(A)(3) of the Zoning Code)
Mobilehomes on individual lots, and permanent foundations which are              P   P     X    X   X
certified under the National Mobilehome Const. and Safety Standards
Act of 1974 and which were constructed after Oct. 1976
 Multiple dwellings:
     Rental                                                                      X   X     P    P   C
     Condo conversions                                                           X   X     C    X   X
The 2013-2021 Housing Element includes a program to amend the Zoning Ordinance to make
provisions for:
        Transitional Housing
        Supportive Housing
        Single Room Occupancy Housing
        Employee Housing
3. Residential Development Standards
Table A-35 shows the development standards for the five residential zones, as follows:
        Maximum building height
        Minimum lot width
        Front, side and rear yard setbacks
        Minimum lot size
        Maximum density (units per acre)
        Parking spaces per unit
The 2006-2014 Housing Element found that the development standards did not contain any
unduly restrictive provisions. Building height, setbacks, lot areas, and parking are generally
within the normal range for requirements and within the range of other small cities in the region
and state. As a result, no programs were adopted to revise a development standard.
With respect to minimum lot size, the City recognizes that there are lots that were originally
smaller than the allowable lot size in each zoning district, typically identified as “lots of record”.
These lots are subject to the provisions concerning small lots in the Zoning Ordinance. A small
lot, or lot of record, that meets these provisions and was recorded before 1945, and was not
created due to any violation of the law or ordinance is considered to have met the lot size
requirement for that zoning district.
                                               A-45

               APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                                  Table A-35
                                               City of Calexico
                              Development Standards by Development Zone
                                                       Minimum Yard         Min.                 Pkg.
  Zone                                                     Setback          Lot       Max.       Spcs.
  District    Building Height      Lot Width       Front    Side     Rear   Size      UPU1       Unit
  RR          35’ or 2-story,      110             40       20       50     43,560    0.5-1      2
              whichever is less
  R-1         35’ or 2-story,      60 interior     25       5        20     6,000     1.1-5      2
              whichever is less    65 corner
  RC          35’ or 2-story,      60 interior     25       15       20     6,000     12-20      1.0
              whichever is less    65 corner
  RA          35’ or 2-story,      60 interior     25       10       10     6,000     20-30      1.0
              whichever is less    65 corner
  R-2         35’ or 2-story,      60 interior     25       5        20     6,000     5.1-12     1.0
              whichever is less    65 corner
1
  Refers to Units Per Acre (UPA)
Source: City of Calexico Zoning Ordinance. Section 17.03.120, Property Development Standards, Minimum
and Maximum Densities Per Residential Zone
    4. Maximum Building Coverage and Housing Unit Sizes
    The maximum building coverage for the residential zones is as follows:
           RR: 35%
           R-1: 40%
           RC: 50%
           RA: 50%
           R-2: 50%
    The Zoning Ordinance does not establish minimum or maximum housing unit sizes.
    5. Open Space Requirements
    Section 17.03.130 B. of the Zoning Ordinance requires:
        In the RC, R-2 and RA zones, including the conversion of apartments to condominiums
        a minimum of two hundred square feet of private open area per ground floor unit shall be
        provided and a minimum of one hundred fifty square feet of private open space for units
        contained wholly on the second story shall be provided.
        The following recreation facilities shall be provided at a minimum unless waived by the
        planning commission:
           Landscaped park-like quiet area;
           Children's play area;
           Family picnic area; and
           Swimming pool with cabana or patio cove
                                                      A-46

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
    A minimum of thirty-five trees per gross acre shall be required as part of the landscaping
    requirements; twenty percent shall be twenty-four inch box size or larger, seventy
    percent shall be fifteen gallon size and ten percent shall be five gallon size. Drought
    tolerant species with low maintenance requirements shall be utilized, where possible.
These standards have not unduly constrained the supply or cost of housing in Calexico.
6. Parking Requirements
For single-family dwellings in the RR and R-1 zones, two covered off-street parking spaces per
dwelling unit are required. In the medium density and high density residential zones, the
requirement is 1 space for each dwelling unit for one bedroom units, 1.5 spaces for 2 bedroom
units, and 2 spaces for 3 bedroom units.
In multifamily districts, including both the RC and the RA zones, covered spaces (approximately
half of the overall requirement) are additionally required to be garages or carports, as opposed
to single-family homes where 100% of the off-street parking (2 spaces per dwelling unit) is
required to be covered. The City allows the flexibility on multi-family projects to allow the
construction of carports only to satisfy the covered parking requirement.
Covered spaces do not require any more land than open uncovered spaces, but the cost of
construction will add an incremental amount to the overall cost of the project. The requirement
has no effect on the City’s ability to achieve the maximum permitted densities because no
additional acreage is required to build the necessary parking. All parking facilities must have
adequate lighting and must have landscaping.
The prior Housing Element found that parking standards did not pose a constraint to the
development of housing. As a result, no programs to reduce parking were included in the 2008-
2014 Housing Element. This same conclusion can be reached for the Housing Element Update
as no changes were made to the parking standards.
7. Moratoria and Prohibitions Against Multifamily Housing
The City has not adopted moratoria or other prohibitions that would impede the development of
multifamily housing.
8. Growth Controls and Urban Growth Boundaries
The City has not adopted growth control measures. The urban growth boundary coincides with
the official Sphere of Influence (SOI). The Sites Inventory and Analysis (Part C of Appendix A)
describes the sites within the City and SOI which accommodate the City’s share of the regional
housing need.
b. Building Codes and Their Enforcement
Compliance with Building Code standards protects the health, safety and welfare of residents
and ensures that the buildings retain their structural integrity. The City has adopted the 2010
California Building Code (CBC). No amendments were made to the CBC.
New structures must conform to the standards of the CBC. The intent of the codes is to ensure
structural safety, safe, sound and energy efficient buildings, including dwellings. Calexico
                                                A-47

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
Building and Safety Department staff is responsible for enforcing state and local regulations.
The City has not adopted any amendments to this code. Compliance with Building Code
standards often adds to the cost of construction, but is necessary to protect the health, safety
and welfare of occupants. Building Permit compliance ensures that buildings maintain their
structural integrity and protect life and limb. Such requirements ensure safe, habitable
structures.
The City maintains a program of inspection and enforcement with its Code Enforcement Officer.
Housing Rehabilitation staff works closely with the Building and Safety Department and Code
Enforcement Department on a proactive basis to identify substandard and dilapidated housing
conditions. When these are reported to Housing Rehabilitation staff, property owners will be
contacted and offered financial assistance to correct any code violations.
Since the City approved the 2008-2014 Housing Element, the most recent model codes have
been adopted. The prior element found that the codes adopted by the City did not constrain the
maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income levels. This same
conclusion can be reached for the Housing Element Update as only the most recent model
codes have been adopted since the prior element was certified by HCD.
c. On- and Off-Site Improvements
For residential projects, the City requires both on- and off-site improvements, including
curb/gutter and drainage facilities, sidewalks, paved streets, landscaping, and water and sewer
service. Such improvements are required as a condition of the subdivision map, or if there is no
required map, improvements are required as part of the building permit. These on- and off-site
improvements promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
Curbs/gutters and drainage facilities direct storm and runoff water out of residential
developments. City roadways are required to be paved. Pavement creates an all-weather
roadway, facilitates roadway drainage, and reduces dust. Pavement also produces a high-
speed circulation system and facilitates relatively safe traffic movement. Roadways are
classified by the City according to traffic needs, as follows:
       Arterial: 100-foot right-of-way,
       Residential Collector: 80-foot right-of-way
       Residential Sub-Collector: 60-foot right-of-way
       Residential: 60-foot right-of-way
Arterials, collectors, and residential streets are designated by the Circulation Element according
to existing and projected needs. Developers are responsible for the development of roadways
associated with their residential project. Development impact fees, as per Ordinance 1036, are
in place to pay a development’s fair share of costs for infrastructure needs, including traffic, fire,
parks and recreation, water, sewer, and other public facilities.
Landscaping is required for development in all zoning districts. Such landscaping would include,
but not be limited to, shrubbery, trees, grass, as well as decorative masonry walls. Landscaping
contributes to a cooler and more aesthetic environment in the City by providing relief from
developed and paved areas. All landscaping is installed by the developer.
Development of, and connection to, municipal water and sewer services are required as a
condition of approving tract maps. Water service is necessary for a constant supply of potable
                                                 A-48

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
water. Sewer services are necessary for the sanitary disposal of wastewater. These off-site
requirements allow for the development of much higher residential densities.
d. Fees and Exactions Required of Developers
Impact fees are charged to the developer in the form of per unit fees, collected at building permit
issuance. Table A-36 lists the per unit fees for multi-family and single-family residential uses.
                                              Table A-36
                                           City of Calexico
                           Development Impact Mitigation Fees (Per Unit)
                                                             Per Unit Fees
           Impact Fee Category               Multi-Family            Single-family
           Public Facilities Impact Fees     $380                    $442
           Library Facilities                $637                    $741
           Police                            $569                    $662
           Fire                              $592                    $689
           Park and Recreation               $1,261                  $1,438
           Traffic                           $932                    $1,084
           Water                             $3,081                  $3,586
           Sewer                             $2,397                  $2,790
           Art in Lieu                       Based on Valuation      Based on Valuation
                                             (See Below)             (See Below)
           Administration                    $82                     $84
           Operational Development Fee       $378 per unit           $496 per unit
           (Imperial County)
         Source: Calexico Planning, Building, Safety and Engineering Departments and Imperial
         County, AQCD.
The City of Calexico has an “Art in Public Places” program by which developers can incorporate
“art” (as defined in the City ordinance) into the design of their construction or pay an in lieu fee
to contribute towards future art in the City. If the developer chooses to pay the in lieu fee, it is
calculated at a rate equal to 1/8 of 1% of the project valuation.
The “Operation Development (OD) Fee” is charged by the Imperial County Air Pollution Control
District. This fee is charged for commercial and major residential projects. According to Imperial
County APCD staff, the OD Fee applies to single-family projects requiring a tentative map, i.e. 5
or more units. Affordable multi-family projects are exempt from the fee.
The Calexico Unified School District serves the City of Calexico and the surrounding
unincorporated areas of Imperial County. The School District assesses a school impact fee on
all new residential development, both multi-family and single-family or, $5.74 per square foot.
The fee for residential land can add significantly to the cost of development. Currently,
exemptions from the school impact fee are not allowed; however, the school board may be open
to considering requests for exemption from the fee.
Fees charged for a typical single-family dwelling unit (approximately 1,300 square feet) that is
part of a subdivision, amount to $13,450.00 plus the school district fee and the County OD Fee.
                                                 A-49

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
For a home valued at $200,000, the City fees 6.7% of the value or cost. For a home valued at
$300,000, the City fees represent 4.5% of the value or cost.
For a typical multi-family project (a 4-unit project in this case), the total fees charged amount to
approximately $43,575, plus school district and County OD fees. The per unit fees are about
$11,000 and would more than likely represent about 4% to 7% of the development costs.
Smaller infill projects are exempt from the OD Fee.
For all typical examples listed, the assumption is that no entitlements are required. Cost
associated with any required entitlements would be in addition to the amounts cited above. The
sites included in the Sites Inventory and Analysis (part C of Appendix A) are either approved or
zoned for the appropriate residential use at the appropriate density. This means they are
consistent with the General Plan and Zoning Map and only require a site plan review process.
Required public works infrastructure improvements vary greatly from project to project. The
improvements are dependent on the amount of existing improvements and the nature of the
project. However, at a minimum, projects are required to install improvements required to serve
their project in order to not overburden the City’s systems, and continue to provide for future
growth. Developers are not subject to exactions for building, for example, parks. Instead,
development impact fees are charged to pay for improvements.
e. Local Processing and Permit Procedures
Typically, proposed projects are submitted to the City, for an initial administrative review by
Planning, Building, and Public Works staff. The project applicant is provided with feedback
during this initial evaluation and notified of the general procedures and provided with an
estimate of the time it will take to process. The time required to process a project can vary
depending on the project complexity and the level of review required.
Where a project requires Planning Commission and City Council review, such as for Rezoning,
Annexation and General Plan Amendments, for both single-family and multi-family projects, a
total processing time of approximately 100 days is required, with an outside maximum review
time of 150 days. It should be noted that State of California required CEQA environmental
review will add additional processing time. The completion of an EIR may add as much as one
year to 18 months to the overall approval time required.
Calexico encourages the joint processing of related applications for a single project in order to
streamline the review process. Applications for rezoning may be reviewed in conjunction with
the required site plan, a tentative tract map, or any other necessary applications. A Tentative
subdivision map does not need City Council approval; however, if it is being reviewed as part of
a larger application package with other discretionary items, it would go before the City Council
along with the other items. Other small scale projects that are consistent with General Plan and
Zoning Ordinance do not require anything other than staff level review.
Table A-37 below outlines the development review and approval procedures for residential
developments, as well as typical processing times for each type of entitlement. Both single
family residential and multiple family residential projects are ministerial projects, when located in
the appropriate single family and multiple family districts, and no discretionary permit is
required. The permit issuance time in such cases is between 2 weeks and 2 months.
                                                 A-50

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
Site plan review is a staff level review process that typically takes between two (2) weeks and
30 days to complete. Site plans are submitted to the Planning Division for purposes of
demonstrating that a proposed development conforms to the development standards regarding
density, height, setbacks, floor area ratios, and the like. The Director is authorized to approve or
deny the site plan. Project applicants may appeal the Director’s decision to the Planning
Commission.
                                              Table A-37
                                           City of Calexico
                         Typical Processing Procedures by Project Type
                                                    Single Family             Multiple Family
                            Single Family Unit      Subdivision               Subdivision
List of Typical             Initial                 Initial                   Initial
Approval                    Administrative          Administrative            Administrative
Requirements                Review                  Review                    Review
                            Zoning Review           Zoning Review             Zoning Review
                            No Site Plan Review     Site Plan Review          Site Plan Review
                            Building Permit         Building Permit           Building Permit
                            and Plan Check          and Plan Check            and Plan Check
Total Estimated             2 Weeks to 2            100-150 Days              100-150 Days
Processing Time             Months
                            No CEQA                 CEQA Environmental        CEQA Environmental
                                                    Review – Time per         Review – Time per
                                                    State law                 State law
Source: Calexico Planning, Building, Safety and Engineering Departments
To reiterate, the sites included in the Sites Inventory and Analysis (part C of Appendix A) are
either approved or zoned for the appropriate residential use at the appropriate density. This
means they are consistent with the General Plan and Zoning Map and only require a site plan
review process. Proposed developments of the lower income housing sites only would be
required to prepare a site plan and have it reviewed by staff.
f. Housing for Disabled Persons
According to HCD:
    Housing element law requires that in addition to the needs analysis for persons with
    disabilities, the housing element must analyze potential governmental constraints to the
    development, improvement and maintenance of housing for persons with disabilities,
    demonstrate local efforts to remove any such constraints and provide for reasonable
    accommodations for persons with disabilities through programs that remove constraints.
Table A-38 presents an analysis of the Zoning Ordinance provisions pertaining to housing for
disabled persons, as follows:
        Reasonable Accommodation Procedure
        Definition of family
        Group homes housing 6 or fewer persons
        Group homes housing 7+ persons
                                                 A-51

             APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
         Siting/Separation Standards for Licensed Group Homes
         Parking Standards for Housing for Disabled Persons
         Permits and Processing
         Building Code
                                             Table A-38
                                          City of Calexico
           Zoning Ordinance Provisions Pertaining to Housing for Disabled Persons
Actual or Potential Constraint      CA State Law                    Zoning/Bldg Code Provision
Reasonable Accommodations           California Attorney General     The Zoning Ordinance does
Procedure (RAP)                     and Federal Dept. of Justice    not contain a reasonable
                                    (DOJ) recommend cities to       accommodation procedure.
                                    adopt a RAP.                    Therefore, Program #12 in
                                    Government Code Section         Section 3 will result in
                                    65583(c(3) requires the City to amending the Zoning
                                    provide reasonable              Ordinance to include such as
                                    accommodation for housing       procedure.
                                    for persons with disabilities.
Definition of Family                CA fair housing laws prohibit   The Zoning Ordinance
                                    definitions that refer only to  includes the following
                                    related persons or establish a  provision: “Family shall also
                                    maximum number of people        mean the persons living
                                    comprising a family.            together in a licensed
                                                                    residential facility as that term
                                                                    is defined in California Health
                                                                    and Safety Code Section
                                                                    1502(a) (1), which services six
                                                                    or fewer persons, including the
                                                                    licensee, the members of the
                                                                    licensee's family, and persons
                                                                    employed as facility staff.”This
                                                                    provision is consistent with fair
                                                                    housing laws.
Group Homes Housing 6 or            Under CA laws group homes       The Zoning Ordinance does
Fewer Persons include:              housing 6 or fewer people and   not define licensed group
  Intermediate Care Facilities     licensed under the Health and   homes or list them as uses
     for People w/Developmental     Safety Code (H & SC) must       permitted in the zones that
     Disabilities-H & SC § 1267.8   be permitted in all zones that  allow single family dwellings.
  Housing for Disabled             permit single family homes.     Program #12 will produce
     People/Children-H & SC §                                       zoning provisions consistent
     1566.3                                                         with State law.
  Residential Care Facilities
     for the Elderly-H & SC §
     1569.85
  Alcoholism/Drug Treatment
     Facilities-H & SC §
     11834.23
  Residential Facilities for
     Persons with Chronic
     Illnesses-H & SC §
     1568.0831
                                                A-52

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                    Table A-38 continued
                                        City of Calexico
           Zoning Ordinance Provisions Pertaining to Housing for Disabled Persons
Actual or Potential Constraint   State Law                       Zoning Code Provision
Group Homes Housing 7+           Case laws allow cities to       The Zoning Ordinance
Persons                          require a conditional use       provides that “group
                                 permit (CUP) for group homes    residential” is a conditionally
                                 housing 7 or more people.1      permitted use in the
                                                                 residential zones. Therefore,
                                                                 group homes housing 7 or
                                                                 more persons would be
                                                                 permitted through the CUP
                                                                 process.
Siting/Separation Standards for  H & SC § 1520.5 requires        The City has not adopted and
Licensed Group Homes             facilities licensed by the CA   therefore does not enforce a
                                 Dept. of Social Services to be  siting/separation standard
                                 300’ away from a like facility. different than the State. The
                                                                 Zoning Ordinance and Land
                                                                 Use Element do no impose
                                                                 siting requirements for special
                                                                 needs housing.
Parking Standards for Housing    CA law does not establish       The City’s parking standards
for Disabled Persons             statewide parking standards.    are established for a use, not
                                                                 the occupants of housing.
                                                                 The Reasonable
                                                                 Accommodations Procedure
                                                                 will allow disabled people or
                                                                 their representatives to
                                                                 request a reduced parking
                                                                 standard.
Permits and Processing           CA law establishes that group   The Zoning Ordinance will be
                                 homes housing for 6 or fewer    amended to permit by right
                                 persons are allowed by right    licensed group homes in all
                                 in zones that permit single     zones that permit single family
                                 family homes.                   homes.
                                               A-53

               APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                              Table A-38 continued
                                                 City of Calexico
             Zoning Ordinance Provisions Pertaining to Housing for Disabled Persons
  Actual or Potential Constraint           State Law                              Zoning Code Provision
  Building Code                            CA State establishes building          The City has adopted and
                                           permit requirements and                enforces the 2010 California
                                           accessible housing unit                Building     Code.     Structural
                                           requirements.                          retrofits require a building
                                           CA State law establishes               permit.
                                           standards for building                 Non-structural retrofits do not
                                           construction.                          require a building permit.
                                                                                  No local amendments have
                                                                                  been made that diminish the
                                                                                  ability of housing to
                                                                                  accommodate disabled
                                                                                  persons. The Reasonable
                                                                                  Accommodations Procedure
                                                                                  will allow requests to modify
                                                                                  the “development and use” of
                                                                                  housing. The City has not
                                                                                  adopted universal design
                                                                                  elements.
1
  Barbara Kautz, Goldfarb & Lipman LLP, Select California Laws Relating to Residential Recovery Facilities and
Group Homes, pg. 3, (presented at the Residential Recovery Facilities Conference, Newport Beach, March 2,
2007)
California law does not prohibit requiring a use permit for facilities of 7 or more persons (e.g., Health and Safety
Code § 11834.23). Alene M. Taber, Esq., AICIP and Michael J. Alti, Esq., Jackson, Demarco, Tidus &
Peckenpaugh, Residential Recovery Homes and Their Local Impacts, page 11, (presented at the Residential
Recovery Facilities Conference, Newport Beach, March 2, 2007)
2
  § 18.100.050 establishes procedures for processing a Minor Use Permit. Applications for Minor Use Permits
are submitted to the Community Development Department for uses allowed as minor uses in the applicable
zone. The Community Development Director may approve a Minor Use Permit, approve with conditions, or
deny the permit. In granting a Minor Use Permit, the Director shall make the following findings:
a. That the proposed use is consistent with the General Plan;
b. That the proposed use is not contrary to the objectives of this Zoning Code or to the objectives of the
applicable regulations;
c. That the proposed use will be located, operated, and maintained in a manner consistent with the policies of
the General Plan and the provisions of this Zoning Code;
d. That the proposed use will not be detrimental to the property or improvements in the surrounding area or the
public health, safety, or general welfare.
If denied, an applicant can file an appeal to the Planning Commission.
                                                       A-54

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
g. Ability to Meet the City’s Share of the Regional Housing Need
The element must describe constraints, if any, that hinder the City from meeting its share of the
regional housing need, which is 3,034 housing units for the 2014-2021 time period. The sites
inventory and analysis demonstrate that there are sufficient sites to accommodate the City’s
share of the regional housing need.
There are no local governmental constraints that would prevent the City from meeting its share
of the regional housing need. The non-governmental constraints such as the cost of land and
construction do create constraints on the development of housing affordable to lower income
levels.
F. PROGRESS REPORT
1. INTRODUCTION
HCD suggests that the Progress Report (officially known as review and revision) discuss:
    "Appropriateness of goals, objectives and policies" (Section 65588(a)(1)): A description
    of how the goals, objectives, policies and programs of the updated element incorporate
    what has been learned from the results of the prior element.
    "Effectiveness of the element" (Section 65588(a)(2)): A comparison of the actual results
    of the earlier element with its goals, objectives, policies and programs. The results
    should be quantified where possible (e.g., rehabilitation), but may be qualitative where
    necessary (e.g., mitigation of constraints).
    "Progress in implementation” (Section 65583(a)(3): An analysis of the significant
    differences between what was projected or planned in the earlier element and what was
    achieved.
2. APPROPRIATENESS OF GOALS AND POLICIES
The 2008-2014 Housing Element includes eight goals and 55 policies in seven categories:
        Housing Availability and Production                 8 policies
        Housing Conservation and Improvement               11 policies
        Opportunities for Energy Conservation               5 policies
        Equal Housing Opportunities                         8 policies
        Removing Constraints                                6 policies
        Housing Affordability                              14 policies
        Preserving Affordability                            3 policies
Generally speaking, the goals and policies remain appropriate for the 2013-2021 planning
period. As a result, the 2013-2021 Housing Element incorporates the vast majority of the goals
and policies and organizes them per the seven Government Code mandated program
categories. Goals and policies which reference the Calexico Redevelopment Agency have been
deleted.
                                                 A-55

             APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
  3. IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE
      2008-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
  Table A-39 (pages A-57 to A-62) describes the implementation progress and effectiveness of
  the 2008-2014 Housing Element.
  The prior element included 55 individual programs many of which were already stated as
  policies. The 2013-2021 Housing Element reduces the number of programs by consolidating
  them and organizing them according to the Government Code mandated program categories.
  As explained in the Sites Inventory and Analysis, the City has approved developments that can
  accommodate the City’s share of the regional housing need. The continued implementation of
  programs to improve the housing stock and to develop affordable housing has been impeded by
  the State mandate to dissolve the Calexico Redevelopment Agency.
                                               Table A-39
                                            City of Calexico
     2008-2014 Housing Element – Evaluation of Program Accomplishments/Effectiveness
Program Description                                    Accomplishments/Effectiveness
                    Program Category 1: Housing Availability and Production
1. Utilize the City’s General Plan and Zoning This program was accomplished for the 2013-
    Ordinance to provide adequate, suitable sites 2021 Housing Element.
    for the construction of new housing, reflecting
    a variety of housing types and densities.
2. Zoning Ordinance revision to revise Second Program #4 in Section 3 states that the City
    Dwelling Unit provisions that will eliminate the will revise the Second Unit zoning provisions
    need for Conditional Use Permit or other to comply with Government Code Section
    discretionary approvals in all residential zones, 65852.2(a)(3) which requires an application for
    in accordance with State law.                      a second-unit permit to be considered
                                                       ministerially without discretionary review.
3. Zoning Ordinance revision to appropriately The Planning Commission on October 28,
    define a “boarding room” and “family” to 2013 approved a zoning text amendment that
    ensure compliance with California Health and eliminated the reference to an occupancy limit.
    Safety Code Section 1502(a)(1).                    The City Council will hold a public hearing on
                                                       the revised definition on December 3, 2013.
                                                       The family definition does not conflict with the
                                                       following definition: "Boarding or rooming
                                                       house" means a building containing a dwelling
                                                       unit where lodging is provided with or without
                                                       meals for compensation for five or more
                                                       persons.
4. Continue to use zoning and other land use Accomplished as an ongoing policy of the City.
    controls to ensure the compatibility of
    residential areas with surrounding commercial
    and other non-residential uses.
5. Revise the Zoning Ordinance to adopt a              Not accomplished. Included in Section 3 –
    Density Bonus Ordinance according to current Housing Program – of the 2013-2021 Housing
    State Law.                                         Element.
                                                  A-56

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                        Table A-39 continued
                                           City of Calexico
     2008-2014 Housing Element – Evaluation of Program Accomplishments/Effectiveness
Program Description                                   Accomplishments/Effectiveness
              Program Category 1: Housing Availability and Production continued
6. Rezone a total of approximately 30 acres to Accomplished through the Estrada re-
    RA, at a minimum density of 20 units per acre, zoning. 33.09 acres re-zoned on October 19,
    and to allow a minimum of 16 units per site.      2010.
7. Apply for grant programs, such as the HOME The City has received both CDBG and
    and CDBG Programs for the reconstruction HOME funds. Two affordable developments
    and/or rehabilitation of lower income, including with a total of 100 housing units were awarded
    extremely low-income owner/renter occupied State HOME funds.
    housing units.
8. Work with LAFCO to expand the City limits to Accomplished as an ongoing policy of the City.
    include acreage prezoned in accordance with The Sites Inventory and Analysis shows that
    the needs for Low Density, Medium Density, there are sufficient sites to meet the RHNA.
    and High Density as needed to satisfy the One site is located in the Sphere of Influence.
    RHNA, as development proposals are
    received.
9. Continue to utilize environmental and other Accomplished as an ongoing policy of the City.
    development review procedures to ensure that
    all new residential developments are provided
    with adequate public and private facilities and
    services.
10. Regularly update and make available to Accomplished as an ongoing policy of the City
    housing developers the inventory of vacant and as a part of the 2013-2021 Housing
    land suitable for residential development Element.
    compiled during this Housing Element Update.
    The data will be continuously posted on the
    City’s web site and available in hard copy on
    request.
11. Continue to update elements of the General General Plan Elements will be updated after
    Plan, as needed.                                  the Sustainable Communities Planning Grant
                                                      is completed.
12. Identify infrastructure and service limitations, Accomplished as part of LAFCO’s Service
    which inhibit housing development and identify Area Plan (SAP) for the City of Calexico.
    programs and sources to address short-term
    and long-term needs.
13. Process a Zoning Ordinance revision to The Zoning Ordinance was not amended to
    increase the height limitation in the RA High increase the height limit in the RA and RC
    Density zoning district to allow for a 3-story zone districts. The City approved a 3-story
    height, not to exceed 45-feet. The allowable affordable housing rental development - El
    height in the RC districts for projects 15 to 20 Quintero. It is located in the Downtown.
    UPA shall also be 3-story, not to exceed 45 Program #2 in Section 3 includes a 3-story
    feet.                                             height limit among the incentives to promote
                                                      infill and mixed-use development in Downtown
                                                      Calexico.
                                                 A-57

             APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                         Table A-39 continued
                                           City of Calexico
    2008-2014 Housing Element – Evaluation of Program Accomplishments/Effectiveness
Program Description                                   Accomplishments/Effectiveness
                  Program Category 2: Housing Conservation and Improvement
1. Continue to publicize and provide financial The City has an active housing rehabilitation
   assistance in the form of low interest and program that is advertised on its website.
   deferred payment loans for the rehabilitation of
   residences owned and/or occupied by lower
   income households.
2. City will design and staff an informational kiosk The staff determined that it was not necessary
   within City Hall to coincide with City bill to establish a kiosk. The community is well
   payment due dates to take advantage of the informed about the City’s housing programs.
   large percentage of people paying bills in
   person at the City Hall location.
3. Continue to allow for the construction of Accomplished as an ongoing policy of the
   bedroom additions with financial assistance City’s housing programs.
   from the City’s residential rehabilitation
   program,       when    needed      to   eliminate
   overcrowding.
4. Continue to monitor housing conditions Another housing condition survey was not
   throughout the City, while periodically (i.e. completed after adoption of the Housing
   every 5 years) conducting formal housing Element (April 20, 2010). This program
   condition surveys.                                 suggests the City would do another survey in
                                                      mid-year 2015. Due to staff cutbacks and the
                                                      lack of financial resources it is not likely that a
                                                      housing condition survey can be conducted in
                                                      2015.
5. Cause the removal of dilapidated units, which The housing code enforcement staff enforces
   cannot be rehabilitated, through enforcement these code provisions.
   of applicable provisions of the Uniform
   Housing and Revenue and Tax Codes.
6. As funding permits, evaluate future No new, additional funding has become
   opportunities to expand code enforcement available to expand code enforcement
   efforts utilizing new methods of eliminating activities.
   unsightly property conditions in residential
   areas.
7. Continue to provide information and technical Technical assistance is provided as part of the
   assistance to local property owners regarding housing code enforcement process.
   housing maintenance.
8. Avoid displacement of residents in carrying out The City has not engaged in CDBG funded
   CDBG funded activities, whenever possible, or activities that cause displacement. Tenant
   otherwise provide appropriate relocation based rental assistance was provided to
   assistance.                                        persons displaced by the April 2010
                                                      earthquake.
9. Continue to utilize the City’s General Plan and Accomplished as an ongoing policy of the
   Zoning       Ordinance      to    prevent     the City’s housing programs.
   encroachment of incompatible uses into
   established residential areas.
                                                 A-58

             APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                       Table A-39 continued
                                          City of Calexico
    2008-2014 Housing Element – Evaluation of Program Accomplishments/Effectiveness
Program Description                                  Accomplishments/Effectiveness
                             Program Category 3: Energy Conservation
1. Utilize the development review process to Accomplished as part of the development
   incorporate energy conservation techniques in review procedures.
   the siting and design of proposed residences.
2. Adopt a green building ordinance to encourage The City has adopted the State code.
   the incorporation of more stringent energy
   conservation techniques in building and
   development projects in the City.
3. Continue to require that all new residential Accomplished as part of the plan check review
   development complies with the energy process.
   conservation requirements of Title 24 of the
   California Administrative Code.
4.  Continue to allow energy conservation Energy conservation improvements are
   measures, as improvements eligible for encouraged as part of the housing
   assistance under the City’s residential rehabilitation effort.
   rehabilitation program, including repairs to
   faulty plumbing, hazardous structural and
   safety improvements, roofing, and windows.
5. Assist in distributing information to the public Information is posted on the City’s website and
   regarding free home energy audits and other on the IID website.
   programs of the Imperial Irrigation District
   (IID).
                         Program Category 4: Equal Housing Opportunity
1. Provide outreach material on state and federal Housing staff is working with the Inland Fair
   fair housing laws and direct complaints of Housing and Mediation Board to obtain
   housing       discrimination   to    appropriate outreach materials.
   enforcement agencies.
2. Continue to allow the removal of architectural Home modifications are an eligible activity
   barriers with funding from the City’s under the provisions of the Housing
   Residential Rehabilitation Program in order to Rehabilitation Loan Program.
   provide barrier-free housing for handicapped
   or disabled persons.
1.  Adopt      by    Resolution    a   Reasonable Not yet adopted. Included as an action
   Accommodation Policy for persons with program of the 2013-2021 Housing Element.
   disabilities that allows for administrative
   approval of handicapped accessible needs.
4.   Continue to enforce the handicapped Accomplished as part of the plan check
   accessibility requirements of Federal fair process.
   housing laws that apply to all new multifamily
   residential projects containing four (4) or more
   units.
                                                A-59

            APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                       Table A-39 continued
                                          City of Calexico
   2008-2014 Housing Element – Evaluation of Program Accomplishments/Effectiveness
Program Description                                    Accomplishments/Effectiveness
                    Program Category 4: Equal Housing Opportunity continued
5. Zoning Ordinance revision shall establish Not yet adopted. Included as an action
    regulations to consider transitional and program of the 2013-2021 Housing Element.
    supportive housing as a residential use and
    only subject to like restrictions on other similar
    residential uses in the same zone.
6. Adopt a Zoning Ordinance amendment to Not yet adopted. Zoning provisions will be
    define emergency shelters, to specify enacted prior to City Council adoption of the
    development and management standards and 2013-2021 Housing Element.
    to permit emergency shelters by right in the
    RA, High Density residential district.
7. Amend the Zoning Code to revise the definition Not yet adopted. Included as an action
    of “Family” to include employee housing for six program of the 2013-2021 Housing Element.
    or fewer persons in accordance with Health
    and Safety Code Section 17021.5.
                            Program Category 5: Removing Constraints
1. Periodically reexamine the Zoning Ordinance Not yet accomplished. Zoning Ordinance
    (i.e., every 5 years) for possible amendments update underway.
    to reduce housing construction costs without
    sacrificing    basic     health     and    safety
    considerations.
2. Periodically review (i.e., every 2 years) the Accomplished as part of the 2013-2021
    performance of local lending institutions with Housing Element.
    regard to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
    (HMDA) and the Community Reinvestment Act
    (CRA).
3. Periodically survey (i.e., every 5 years) other Will be accomplished when the fee schedule is
    cities in the Imperial County area to ensure next updated.
    that Calexico development fees are set to an
    appropriate level.
4. Continue the CRA funded program to allocate Discontinued because the Calexico
    funds to defray the cost of land and/or required Redevelopment Agency was dissolved.
    off-site improvements for lower income,
    extremely low-income housing projects.
5.     Encourage      concurrent     processing     of Accomplished as an ongoing policy of the City.
    entitlements to foster an environment
    conducive to business.
6. Monitor the Site Plan review process to ensure Accomplished as part of the development
    it does not constrain residential development.     review procedure.
7. Adopt a Zoning Ordinance amendment to Density ranges have been established for
    modify the permitted density range in the RC each residential land use designation.
    (Medium Density) district to establish a floor
    density of 6.1 UPA; the new density range will
    be 6.1 to 20 UPA.
                                                 A-60

           APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                      Table A-39 continued
                                         City of Calexico
   2008-2014 Housing Element – Evaluation of Program Accomplishments/Effectiveness
Program Description                                   Accomplishments/Effectiveness
                     Program Category 5: Removing Constraints continued
8. Adopt a Zoning Ordinance amendment to The Zoning Ordinance was not amended. Site
    eliminate discretionary approvals, including plan review is conducted at the staff level for
    Planning Commission and City Council projects that are consistent with the Land Use
    approvals for projects up to the maximum Element, Zoning Map and Zoning Ordinance.
    permitted density of 20 UPA in the R-C zoning The Zoning Ordinance development review
    district and 30 UPA in the R-A zoning district, procedure provides that “The director shall
    other than the regular Site Review procedure.     have the authority to approve, deny or modify
                                                      applications for development review. Within
                                                      fifteen calendar days of the date that
                                                      application is deemed complete by the
                                                      director,   the     director   shall    approve,
                                                      conditionally approve, or disapprove the
                                                      application, or shall request the applicant to
                                                      revise said application.”
                            Program Category 6: Housing Affordability
1. Explore, with local lending institutions, their Not accomplished and not included in the
    possible participation in the creation of a loan 2013-2021 Housing Element because of the
    pool for the construction, rehabilitation and/or lack of City dollars to leverage private dollars.
    purchase of housing affordable to low and
    moderate-income households, as a means for
    them to fulfill their obligations under the
    Federal Community Reinvestment Act.
2. Continue to defer development fees for all Accomplished as an ongoing policy of the City.
    proposed housing units affordable to lower
    income households.
3.    Evaluate for implementation the use of Accomplished as an ongoing policy of the City.
    innovative    land    use     techniques     and
    construction methods, e.g., clustering of units,
    density transfers, zero lot line development,
    etc. to minimize housing development costs
    and to maximize development opportunities.
4. Evaluate a Zoning Ordinance amendment for a Included as a policy in the 2013-2021 Housing
    reduced parking requirement for residential Element.
    projects serving seniors, special needs groups
    or located close to public transportation or
    commercial services.
5. Inform private developers of the below market Staff determined there was no need to
    interest rate mortgage programs operated by pursue this program as private developers are
    the California Housing Finance Agency aware of such programs.
    (CalHFA) and direct interested developers to
    CalHFA, as a means to facilitate the
    construction of new, affordable housing for
    moderate income households.
                                               A-61

          APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS, SITES, CONSTRAINTS & PROGRESS
                                     Table A-39 continued
                                        City of Calexico
2008-2014 Housing Element – Evaluation of Program Accomplishments/Effectiveness
Program Description                                  Accomplishments/Effectiveness
                     Program Category 6: Housing Affordability continued
6. Support the efforts of non-profit organizations, The City has actively applied for CDBG and
   private developers, and the Imperial Valley HOME funds and supported the efforts of the
   Housing Authority to obtain State and/or Calexico Housing Authority and Imperial
   Federal funds for the construction of affordable Valley Housing Authority to obtain additional
   housing for lower income households               funding.
                      Program Category 7: Preserving Affordable Housing
1. Actively support the Calexico and Imperial The City has continuously supported the CHA
   Valley Housing Authorities attempts to secure and IVHA in their efforts to secure additional
   additional Section 8 rental assistance to lower Section 8 Vouchers.
   income households.
2. Adopt a Zoning Ordinance amendment to City staff has requested a legal opinion on
   consider for implementation procedures to whether it is possible to implement this
   prevent the displacement of lower income recommendation.
   residents from units at risk of converting to
   market rate housing within 5- 10 years.
                                              A-62

                APPENDIX B
      PUBLIC CONSULTATION,
DATA SOURCES & DEFINITIONS
                                    City of Calexico
                     2013-2021 Housing Element of the General Plan
             Appendix B-Organizations Consulted, Data Sources & Definitions
                                   Table of Contents
A. Community Stakeholder Interviews                                         B-1
B. Other Organizations Consulted                                            B-1
C. Data Sources                                                             B-2
C. Definitions                                                              B-3
      APPENDIX B – PUBLIC CONSULTATION, DATA SOURCES & DEFINITIONS
A. COMMUNITY STAKEHOLDER INTERVIEWS
    Calexico Chamber of Commerce
    Calexico Housing Authority
    Calexico Senior Center
    Campesinos Unidos, Inc.
    Department of Development Services – San Diego Regional Center
    Imperial County Area Agency on Aging
    Imperial Valley Housing Authority
    Neighborhood House of Calexico, Inc.
    Women Haven – Center for Family Solutions and Domestic Violence Shelter
B. OTHER ORGANIZATIONS CONSULTED
    California Housing Partnership Corporation
     Main Office
     369 Pine Street
     Suite 300
     San Francisco, CA 94104
     415-433-6804
    Southern California Association of Governments
     Main Office
     818 West 7th Street
     12th Floor
     Los Angeles, CA 90017-3435
     213-236-180
    State Employment Development Department
     Labor Market Information Division
     Customer Outreach Unit
     P.O. Box 826880, MIC 57
     Sacramento, CA 94280-0001
     916-262-2162
    State Independent Living Counsel
     1600 K Street, Suite 100
     Sacramento, CA 95814
     866-866-7452
                                           B-1

      APPENDIX B – PUBLIC CONSULTATION, DATA SOURCES & DEFINITIONS
C.   DATA SOURCES
    2000 and 2010 Census
    2005-2009 American Community Survey
    California Department of Housing and Community Development, Year 2013 Income
     Limits, February 25, 2013
    California State Board of Equalization, Assessors’ Handbook Section 531, Residential
     Building Costs, January 2010
    City of Calexico, General Plan
    City of Calexico, 2008-2014 Housing Element
    City of Calexico, Service Area Plan (Final), May 2006
    City of Calexico, Zoning Ordinance
    Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), Home Mortgage Disclosure
     Act (HMDA), Loan Application Register System (LARS), 2011
    HSH Associates, Financial Publishers, Interest Rates
    International Code Council (ICC), Building Valuation Data (BVD), August 2012
    Barbara Kautz, Goldfarb & Lipman LLP, Select California Laws Relating to Residential
     Recovery Facilities and Group Homes, (presented at the Residential Recovery Facilities
     Conference, Newport Beach, March 2, 2007)
    Pacific West Association of Realtors Multiple List Service
    Realist property tax records available from Pacific West Association of Realtors
    Southern California Association of Governments, 5th Cycle Final Regional Housing
     Needs Assessment Allocation Plan, adopted by the Regional Council on October 4,
     2012
    Southern California Association of Governments, Local Housing Element Assistance:
     Existing Housing Needs Data Report, City of Calexico
    Southern California Association of Governments, 2012-2035 Regional Transportation
     Plan/Sustainable Communities Strategy Growth Forecast (adopted by SCAG Regional
     Council on April 4, 2012)
    State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates for
     Cities, Counties, and the State, 2011 and 2013, with 2010 Benchmark Sacramento,
     California, May 2013
                                              B-2

            APPENDIX B – PUBLIC CONSULTATION, DATA SOURCES & DEFINITIONS
      State Independent Living Council, 2009 Statewide Needs Assessment for People Living
           with Disabilities, 40 pages
      Alene M. Taber, Esq., AICP and Michael J. Alti, Esq., Jackson, Demarco, Tidus &
           Peckenpaugh, Residential Recovery Homes and Their Local Impacts, (presented at the
           Residential Recovery Facilities Conference, Newport Beach, March 2, 2007)
      U.S. Department of Housing and Urban                     Development,     2005-2009   CHAS
           (Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy)
D. DEFINITIONS
Above Moderate Income: A household whose annual income is 120% or more of the Imperial
County median income, adjusted by number of persons in the household.
Cost Burden: For lower income households, gross housing costs including utilities that exceed
30% of gross income
Crowding, Overcrowding: A housing unit containing more than one person per room, as defined
by the U.S. Census Bureau, for which data are made available by the Census Bureau.
Developmental Disability: "Developmental disability" means a disability that originates before an
individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely, and
constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. As defined by the Director of
Developmental Services, in consultation with the Superintendent of Public Instruction, this term
shall include mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also
include disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to require
treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall not include
other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Disabled Person: A person who is determined to:
   (1) Have a physical, mental or emotional impairment that:
   (i) Is expected to be of long-continued and indefinite duration;
   (ii) Substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently; and
   (iii) Is of such a nature that the ability could be improved by more suitable housing conditions;
or
   (2) Have a developmental disability, as defined in section 102(7) of the Developmental
Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (42 U.S.C. 6001-6007)
Elderly: Persons 62 years of age or older.
Emergency Shelter: Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is
limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household
may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. (per Health and Safety Code
50801)
Extremely Low Income: A household whose annual income is between 0% and 30% of the
Imperial County median income, adjusted by number of persons in the household.
                                                    B-3

         APPENDIX B – PUBLIC CONSULTATION, DATA SOURCES & DEFINITIONS
Homeless person: According to HUD, a person is considered homeless only when he/she
resides in one of the places described below at the time of the count
     An unsheltered homeless person resides in place not meant for human habitation,
        such as cars, parks, sidewalks, abandoned buildings, or on the street.
     A sheltered homeless person resides in: An emergency shelter or transitional
        housing for homeless persons who originally came from the streets or emergency
        shelters.
Large family: Family of five or more persons.
Low Income: A household whose annual income is between 50% and 80% of the Imperial
County median income, adjusted by number of persons in the household.
Moderate Income: A household whose annual income is between 80% and 120% of the
Imperial County median income, adjusted by number of persons in the household.
Overpaying: Same as cost burden and severe cost burden
Severe Cost Burden: For lower income households, gross housing costs including utilities that
exceed 50% of gross income
Small family: Family of two to four persons.
Supportive Housing: Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the         target
population as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 53260, and that is linked to onsite or  offsite
services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving    his or
her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work       in the
community. (per Health and Safety Code 50675.14(b))
Transitional Housing: Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under
program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted
unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall
be no less than six months. (Per Health and Safety Code 50675.2(h))
Very Low Income: A household whose annual income is between 30% and 50% of the Imperial
County median income, adjusted by number of persons in the household.
                                                B-4





































































































































































                                                                          Resolution: 1761 Adopted : 09/14/16
                                   Land Use Element, Inglewood General Plan
                                                  Amendment Sheet
     1. Insert the following text at the end of the Goals and Objectives section on page 8.
Downtown Transit Oriented District
Goal #1: Downtown is a place to live, work, shop, recreate, and be entertained
Policy 1.1: Mixed Use Development. Encourage a range of residential, retail, office, recreational, and institutional
uses in the Historic Downtown to create a vibrant urban district and support local business.
Policy 1.2: Ground Floor Uses and Storefronts. Require uses that activate pedestrian activity such as retail on major
streets and plaza frontages. Require that storefronts be historically-sensitive, attractive and transparent in the
Historic Downtown.
Goal #2: Downtown is a revitalized yet forward-looking gathering place for the community
Policy 2.1: Public Gathering Places. Create public spaces in key locations in the public right-of-way and on
privately-owned land. In particular, create a central plaza along Market Street between Florence Avenue and
Regent Street and/or in the adjacent parcels suitable for eating, resting and people watching, but also for
festivals, concerts and events at special times.
Policy 2.2: Pedestrian Network. Enhance sidewalks, repurpose alleys and create mid-block passthroughs and
internal courtyards to serve as pedestrian passageways and enjoyable public spaces.
Policy 2.3: Preservation of Historic Fabric. Require the preservation of buildings that have been designated as
historic and encourage the reuse of other historic buildings. Maintain the sense of place in areas with historic
fabric and/or meaning such as Market Street between Regent Street and Hillcrest Avenue and the Hillcrest
neighborhood east of Locust Street.
Goal #3: Downtown provides a unique mix of accessibility options including light rail, pedestrians,
bicycles, autos, buses and advanced technology local transit
Policy 3.1: Complete Streets. Accommodate all modes of transportation on streets, with particular attention to
transit vehicles and pedestrians, but also design streets to serve as open spaces in the urban environment,
places where people gather, communicators of the locality’s culture, vision and values, and generators of
development on adjacent parcels.
Policy 3.2: Green Boulevards. Create Green Boulevards that protect cyclists, infiltrate stormwater and use
vegetation to create a sense of place on Florence Avenue, La Brea Avenue, Manchester Boulevard and Prairie
Avenue.
Policy 3.3: Pedestrian Promenades. Emphasize Market Street and Queen Street as pedestrian promenades that
may be closed to automobiles for special events or as conditions require.
Policy 3.4: Pedestrian Connections to Metro Rail. Establish high-quality at-grade and/or bridge connections from
the Downtown Inglewood Metro station across Florence Avenue to the south. Make every effort to facilitate
a direct pedestrian connection from the station to Beach Avenue to the north.
Policy 3.5: Local Transit Connections to Metro Rail. Provide quality local transit connections from major
destinations such as the NFL Stadium and Forum to Downtown and the Downtown Inglewood Metro
station using existing or emerging technologies.

                                                                        Resolution: 1761 Adopted : 09/14/16
Policy 3.6: Parking District. Establish a parking district with shared parking consolidated in garages, and
manage pricing.
Goal #4: Downtown is a major economic engine providing jobs, sales tax and other revenues
Policy 4.1: Major Sites Development. Develop major sites and create new destinations at the north and south
ends of Market Street, immediately north of the Metro station, and on and around the City Yard that create
jobs, generate revenues for the city through sales and bed tax and provide new opportunities for residents.
Policy 4.2: TechTown. Establish the TechTown district in the area north of Florence Avenue and west of La
Brea Avenue. This district should be focused toward the creation of quality technology-related jobs for
people of differing educational levels.
Policy 4.3: Equitable Development. Implement policies such as a local hire notification requirement for large
employers, Business Improvement District youth guide program and others so that the benefits of growth
accrue to the current population of Inglewood. Encourage educational uses wherever possible to improve the
job-readiness of the local population.
Policy 4.4: Affordable Housing. Promote the creation of covenanted affordable housing at different income
levels. Care should be taken to not inhibit new housing development. Study methods to preserve existing
affordable housing in the City.
Goal #5: Downtown is a model for sustainable development
Policy 5.1: Stormwater Management. Collect, clean and infiltrate stormwater runoff on streetscapes, parking lots
and roofs wherever possible. Create a daylighted stream through TechTown reflecting topography and flow
of water to the treatment plant.
Policy 5.2: Solar Energy. Encourage the use of solar panels on roofs and as coverings on parking lots to
generate renewable energy.
Goal #6: Downtown expresses the unique culture of Inglewood
Policy 6.1: Districts. Define the following unique districts within the Downtown TOD area, each with their
own unifying character or identity that should be preserved and enhanced: Historic Downtown, Civic Center,
TechTown, Beach Avenue, Fairview West, Hillcrest and Queen Street.
Policy 6.2: Performing Arts. Build on assets such as the Fox Theater, Forum and Hollywood Park to establish
Downtown Inglewood as part of an Inglewood entertainment and performing arts hub serving both the City
and the region.
Policy 6.3: Visual Arts. Commission public art to provide an attractive environment for residents, employees
and visitors. Take steps to ensure a continuing role for the Inglewood art community in Downtown’s visual
and performing arts.
Fairview Heights Transit Oriented District
Goal #1: Fairview Heights is a special, historic residential neighborhood
Policy 1.1: Neighborhood Protection. Recognize the Fairview Heights neighborhood as historic and preserve its
historic character.

                                                                       Resolution: 1761 Adopted : 09/14/16
Policy 1.2: Sensitive Development Prototypes. Use form-based development prototypes to encourage a variety of
contextually-sensitive housing options for people throughout their lifecycle.
Policy 1.3: Scale Transitions. Require that taller developments on Redondo Boulevard step down in scale
toward the northern edge of their properties where they abut low-density residential zones.
Goal #2: Fairview Heights is connected to the region via transit
Policy 2.1: Gateway TOD Area. Create an attractive, neighborhood-compatible and walkable gateway to the
City of Inglewood and Fairview Heights adjacent to the Metro station. Encourage the mix of uses to include
community-serving uses such as educational institutions.
Goal #3: Fairview Heights is a historic place for artists to live and work
Policy 3.1: Promotion of Live-Work Spaces. Promote the creation of live-work spaces along Hyde Park Boulevard
and West Boulevard in the Fairview Heights neighborhood.
Goal #4: Fairview Heights enjoys a special connection to Vincent Park
Policy 4.1: Redondo Boulevard Promenade. Establish the Redondo Boulevard Promenade, a street linking the
Fairview Heights Metro station with Vincent Park. Provide ample parking along the promenade for local and
park-and-ride use, and use landscaping to create an attractive gateway for transit patrons and park-goers.
    2. Replace letters “D” and “E” in the Development Factors – Transportation Network section on page
         52 with:
D.       Passenger Train Service
Inglewood is currently connected to the Los Angeles Metro Rail system by Crenshaw Station on the Metro
Green Line. This station is located in the 105 freeway at Crenshaw Boulevard.
The Metro Crenshaw/LAX Line, scheduled to open in 2019, will add three new stations to the City of
Inglewood: Fairview Heights (Florence/West), Downtown Inglewood (Florence/La Brea), and
Westchester/Veterans (Florence/Hindry).
E.       Freight Train Service
The City of Inglewood was served by the Santa Fe Railroad running on the Harbor Subdivision right-of-way.
However, this right-of-way has been repurposed for the Crenshaw/LAX Line. There is no more freight train
service in the City.
    3. Add the following after letter “F” of the Future Land Use chapter on page 76.
G.       Downtown Transit Oriented District
         The Downtown Transit Oriented District consists principally of the half-mile radius around the
Downtown Inglewood Metro Station located near Florence Avenue and Market Street. The Transit Oriented
District should contain a variety of mutually complementary uses, including residential, office, retail,
government and light industrial/creative office, all in a pedestrian-friendly environment that facilitates transit
usage. Concept plans, zoning and design guidelines for this District are given by the TOD Plan for the area. It

                                                                        Resolution: 1761 Adopted : 09/14/16
is divided into seven sub-districts: Historic Downtown, Civic Center, TechTown, Beach Avenue, Fairview
West, Hillcrest and Queen Street.
          Historic Downtown is the heart of Downtown Inglewood. It is pedestrian-oriented and human-
scaled. It will function as a regional destination and gathering space for all in the City of Inglewood that links
residents with the community’s past, present and future. The district should include public space, restaurants,
entertainment, residential uses, hotel and office uses.
          Civic Center is the concentration of government services in Inglewood, encompassing City Hall,
Inglewood Public Library, the Superior Court, Crozier Middle School and Inglewood High School. The Civic
Center should be well connected to Historic Downtown, encouraging employees and students to patronize
the Historic Downtown.
          TechTown will be a vibrant technology business center that provides Inglewood residents
opportunities for entrepreneurship and quality employment. Uses should be consolidated around creative
office, research and development, light industrial and limited retail anchored by a sustainable open space
corridor and Rogers Park.
          Beach Avenue is a unique area with manufacturing uses and packing houses in close proximity to
low-density residences. The topography of the area, which slopes down heavily on both sides to Beach
Avenue, the site of a historic stream, gives the district a very intimate feel. In the future, it will continue to be
a unique neighborhood that stimulates small-scale creative production in the City and complements
TechTown and Historic Downtown.
          Fairview West is a large mostly residential area proximate to the station. It is in reality the western
portion of the Fairview Heights neighborhood. The vision for the district is for it to be a quality, affordable
residential district linked to the Downtown Inglewood station through a welcoming pedestrian connection.
          Hillcrest is the most established residential neighborhood in Downtown. The overall character is
established by the stately homes and churches that flank a large tree-lined median on Hillcrest Boulevard. The
district will retain its general residential character and phase out medical office uses related to the former
Daniel Freeman Hospital. Neighborhood retail uses are located around its edges.
          The portion of Queen Street within the Downtown Transit Oriented District is part of a larger
residential area that extends westward to the 405 freeway. It has a large proportion of apartments. Queen
Street should be a safe and affordable residential district linked to Downtown and transit.
H.        Fairview Heights Transit Oriented District
          The Fairview Heights Transit Oriented District consists principally of the Inglewood side of the half-
mile radius around the Fairview Heights Metro Station located near Redondo Boulevard and West Boulevard.
Much of the Transit Oriented District is the historic, low-density residential neighborhood of Fairview
Heights which should be protected. Development located on bordering mixed-use streets (Hyde Park
Boulevard, West Boulevard, Redondo Boulevard) should be sensitive to the context of the community. The
station-adjacent area that fronts onto West Boulevard, Redondo Boulevard and Florence Avenue should be
an attractive gateway to the City for transit riders and drivers entering from the east. It should provide an
appropriate connection to Vincent Park and may include institutional, residential and/or retail uses.




















































































































































































































































































































































































































