














City of Sausalito
2015-2023 Housing Element
Adopted January 13, 2015

                                      Acknowledgements
  The City Council, Planning Commission, Housing Element Subcommittee, City Staff, and Sausalito
 residents advised a team of consultants to produce this Housing Element. The following individuals
                          participated in the development of this document:
                 City Council                                   Planning Commission
           Thomas Theodores, Mayor                                      Joan Cox, Chair
        Jill James Hoffman, Vice-Mayor                             Bill Werner, Vice-Chair
                  Linda Pfeifer                                   Susan Cleveland-Knowles
                  Herb Weiner                                           Stafford Keegin
                    Ray Withy                                            Vicki Nichols
                           Housing Element Subcommittee
                       Thomas Theodores, Mayor; City Council Representative
                                Ray Withy; City Council Representative
                        Joan Cox, Chair; Planning Commission Representative
                   Susan Cleveland-Knowles; Planning Commission Representative
                                               City Staff
                                       Adam Politzer, City Manager
                           Danny Castro, Community Development Director
                                       Mary Wagner, City Attorney
                                 Lilly Schinsing, Administrative Analyst
                                            Consultants
                          Karen Warner, Principal, Karen Warner Associates
                               Geoff I. Bradley, AICP, Principal, M-Group
                        Dave Javid, AICP, LEED AP, Project Manager, M-Group
                                Blaze Syka, Assistant Planner, M-Group
   And the many residents who attended the numerous meetings and provided input for
                                    shaping the Housing Element.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        Adopted January 13, 2015
Housing Element Update 2015-2023 Adopted January 13, 201
                            Sausalito 2015-2023 Housing Element
                                           Table of Contents
I. Introduction
A. Sausalito Community Context                                                                   I-1
B. Housing Element Overview and Purpose                                                          I-1
C. Housing Element Law and Changes to State Requirements                                         I-2
D. Relationship to the General Plan                                                              I-3
E. Community Participation Survey                                                                I-4
II. Housing Plan
A. Goals and Policies                                                                            II-2
B. Implementing Programs                                                                         II-9
III. Housing Needs Summary
A. Existing Housing Needs                                                                        III-1
         1. Population Projections and Employment Trends                                         III-1
         2. Summary of Housing Needs                                                             III-2
         3. Housing Availability                                                                 III-3
         4. Housing Affordability                                                                III-3
         5. Housing Adequacy                                                                     III-4
         6. Special Needs Households                                                             III-5
B. Future Housing Needs                                                                          III-8
IV. Housing Resources
A. Sites to Accommodate the 2015-2023 RHNA                                                       IV-1
         1. Vacant and Underutilized Land                                                        IV-3
         2. Liveaboards                                                                          IV-7
         3. New and Existing Accessory Dwelling Units                                            IV-12
         4. Residential Development Potential Compared to RHNA                                   IV-15
         5. Availability of Infrastructure and Public Services                                   IV-16
B. Financial Resources                                                                           IV-17
         1. Local Programs                                                                       IV-17
         2. State Programs                                                                       IV-18
C. Administrative Resources                                                                      IV-19
D. Opportunities for Energy Conservation                                                         IV-19
         1. Energy Conservation Programs Offered through Local Utilities and Organizations       IV-21
         2. Pacific Gas & Electric                                                               IV-21
         3. Marin Energy Authority                                                               IV-22
Appendices
         Appendix A: Housing Needs Assessment                                                    A-1
         Appendix B: Housing Constraints                                                         B-1
         Appendix C: Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                                     C-1
         Appendix D: Housing Element Accomplishments                                             D-1
         Appendix E: Community Participation                                                     E-1
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      Adopted January 13, 2015
       Appendix F: Housing Element Glossary                                         F-1
       Technical Appendix G: Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart          G-1
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                           Adopted January 13, 2015
                          Sausalito 2015-2023 Housing Element
                                   List of Tables and Figures
Chapters
Tables
2.1     Implementing Programs – Summary 2015-2023                                              II-29
2.2     Quantified Objectives for Sausalito’s 2015-2023 Housing Element planning period        II-37
3.1     Existing Housing Needs in Sausalito                                                    III-2
3.2     City of Sausalito Regional Housing Needs Allocation 2015-2023                          III-8
4.1     Potential Housing Units during 2015-2023 Planning Period                               IV-2
4.2     Acreage and Number of Parcels by Zoning District                                       IV-3
4.3     Liveaboard Rents and Affordability                                                     IV-9
4.4     Additional Liveaboard Capacity in Permitted Marinas                                    IV-10
4.5     Summary of Liveaboard RHNA Credits                                                     IV-11
4.6     ADU Rents and Affordability                                                            IV-12
4.7     2015-2023 Objectives for New Accessory Dwelling Units                                  IV-13
4.8     July 2014-2023 Objectives for Accessory Dwelling Units under Amnesty Program           IV-14
4.9     Comparison of RHNA and Sites Inventory                                                 IV-15
Figures
4.1     Map of Vacant and Underutilized Sites in Sausalito                                     IV-7
Appendices
Tables
A.1     Sausalito 2014-2022 RHNA Allocation                                                    A-1
A.2     Sausalito’s Population from 1990-2010                                                  A-2
A.3     Projected Countywide Annual Growth Rate (2010-2040): Marin County                      A-3
A.4     Occupation by Industry in Sausalito                                                    A-5
A.5     Bay Area Wages for Select Occupations                                                  A-6
A.6     Regional Housing Growth Trends (1990-2010)                                             A-8
A.7     Change in Housing Types in Sausalito, 2000-2010                                        A-9
A.8     Age of Units Built in Sausalito and Marin County                                       A-9
A.9     Regional Median Sale Price 2000-2013                                                   A-10
A.10    Income Categories in Marin County 2014                                                 A-14
A.11    Households Tenure by Income in Sausalito 2010                                          A-15
A.12    Regional Single-Family Homes and Condominium Sales Jan-Dec 2013                        A-16
A.13    2013 Marin County Maximum Affordable Housing Cost (Moderate Income)                    A-17
A.14    Survey of Vacant Rental Units in Sausalito March 2013                                  A-18
A.15    2013 Maximum Affordable Rents in Marin County                                          A-18
A.16    Housing Cost Burden by Tenure in Sausalito                                             A-19
A.17    Number of Households in Sausalito Living in Overcrowded Units                          A-20
A-18    Estimate of Special Needs Households in Sausalito, 2000 and 2010                       A-21
A-19    Estimate of Developmentally Disabled Residents Served by GGRC within Sausalito
        Zip Code                                                                               A-23
A.20    Marin County Unsheltered Homeless, 2013                                                A-26
A.21    Health Issues of the Homeless Community in Marin County, 2013                          A-27
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     Adopted January 13, 2015

A.22    2013 Homeless Housing Inventory                                                        A-28
B.1     Marin County Jurisdiction Densities Ranked High to Low                                 B-4
B.2     Sausalito’s Residential Density Standards                                              B-6
B.3     Residential Development Standards                                                      B-6
B.4     Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District                                             B-10
B.5     Parking Requirements for Single Family Dwellings                                       B-19
B.6     Parking Requirements for Multi-Family Dwellings                                        B-19
B.7     Required Findings for Approval of a Design Review Permit                               B-22
B.8     Typical Design Review Permit Timeline                                                  B-23
B.9     City of Sausalito Planning and Building Fees                                           B-25
B.10    City and Non-City Fees for Single and Multi-Family Residences                          B-26
C.1     Applied Parameters to Assess Realistic Potential Development                           C-1
C.2     Maximum Zoning Densities                                                               C-4
C.3     Examples of Higher Density Infill Projects                                             C-4
C.4     Examples of Small Infill Projects adding 1-2 units                                     C-6
C.5     Inventory of Sites                                                                     C-7
C.6     Uncounted Liveaboards in 2000 Census and 2000-2010 Department of Finance               C-10
C.7     Comparison of Existing Permitted Liveaboards and 2010 Census                           C-11
D.1     Review of Accomplishments under 2009-2014 Housing Element                              D-2
D.2     Quantified Objectives for Sausalito’s 2009-2014 Housing Element Planning Period        D-12
E.1     Comments Received During Community Outreach                                            E-5
G.1     Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory                                                G-1
Figures
A.1     Age Breakdown of Sausalito Residents (2010)                                            A-3
A.2     Age of Sausalito Residents Compared to Marin County (2010)                             A-4
A.3     Employment by Type in Sausalito                                                        A-5
A.4     Sausalito’s Projected Job Growth, 2010-2040                                            A-7
A.5     Sausalito’s Projected Jobs/Housing Balance, 2010-2040                                  A-7
A.6     Homes Sold in Sausalito, 1998-2012                                                     A-10
A.7     Building Permits Issued for Sausalito Housing Units, 1999-2013                         A-11
A.8     Households by Type, 2010                                                               A-12
A.9     Households by Tenure                                                                   A-12
A.10 Sausalito Average Household Size Comparted to Marin County                                A-13
A.11 Sausalito Vacancy Rates in Rental Units, 2006-2010                                        A-13
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     Adopted January 13, 2015

CHAPTER I – INTRODUCTION
A. Sausalito Community Context
Considered one of the most charming cities in Northern California, Sausalito is nestled between
the bay and protected coastal open space. The City is well known for its beautiful waterfront
with sweeping views of the bay, a historic downtown with numerous restaurants and shops, and
its proximity to the Golden Gate Bridge. The City has roughly 7,000 residents within its densely
populated 2.2 square miles and attracts a large number of visitors all year round.
Sausalito accommodates a variety of housing types that respects its natural setting: a mix of
single family residences, cottages, accessory dwelling units, and small scale multi-family units in
the wooded glens and flats; residential units above ground-floor commercial businesses in the
downtown; houseboats and liveaboards along the waterfront; and view estates and several
larger multi-family complexes stepped down the hillsides. This Housing Element seeks to protect
and enhance the best aspects of the community’s historic patterns of development, while
permitting a balanced, low impact approach to accommodating incremental growth.
This Housing Element acknowledges Sausalito’s unique demographics and identifies solutions
that address those trends and demographics, including the very high percentage of single-
person households, an aging population, and a special needs population of marine workers.
These distinctive and inherent community characteristics have resulted in unique housing types
in the community, and have driven the consideration of housing development potential and
housing policies in this Housing Element.
B. Housing Element Overview and Purpose
Every jurisdiction in California is required to have a Housing Element in its General Plan, to
ensure that appropriate long-range planning measures are in place in response to the
community’s housing conditions and needs.
The purpose of the Housing Element is to achieve an adequate supply of safe, affordable
housing for all economic segments of the community, including individuals with special housing
needs. The desirability of the Bay Area and Marin County in particular has made it one of the
most expensive housing markets in the country, rendering the availability of affordable housing
increasingly scarce. Housing affordable to more modest income households often requires
public assistance, of which there are several successful examples in Sausalito, including Bee
Street Housing (6 very low income units), Rotary Place (10 very low income units), Sausalito
Rotary Senior Housing (22 very low income units), and Galilee Harbor (35 rent and income
restricted berths). The shortage of affordable housing has its impacts: it becomes more difficult
for employers to recruit and retain employees; roadways become congested with workers
traveling longer distances; and many young families, longtime residents and other community
members may relocate because they can no longer afford to live in the community.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page I - 1
  Chapter I – Introduction                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

The housing supply for all economic segments and special groups in Sausalito needs to be
addressed by looking at the unique features of the community, and development constraints
and opportunities. As Sausalito is compact and built out, large tracts of land for new
development are not available, but many opportunities exist for infill in smaller parcels
throughout the community. Additional factors must be considered when looking at sites with
housing potential, including steep slopes, soil stability issues, poor drainage, and narrow roads
limiting access and parking in certain neighborhoods. Sausalito’s proximity to the waterfront has
also influences the types of housing needed in the community. Community members have
expressed a strong desire to preserve the existing small-town character of the community
through the goals and policies of the Housing Element.
Therefore, the goals and policies of this Housing Element recognize the unique housing
opportunities in Sausalito, and enhance the diversity of income and community groups that
comprise the existing community character.
The Housing Element is divided into four chapters:
•    Chapter 1 contains introductory material to the Housing Element, including State Laws and
     requirements;
•    Chapter 2 contains the Housing Plan, including housing goals and objectives, policies and
     implementing programs;
•    Chapter 3 contains a summary of the community’s existing and future housing needs; and
•    Chapter 4 contains an analysis of available sites for housing, and resources available to assist
     in the implementation of Sausalito’s housing programs.
Sausalito’s last approved Housing Element was for the planning period ending in 2014. The City’s
Housing Element is required to fulfill the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the
(2015-2023) RHNA planning period. This 2015-2023 Housing Element covers the RHNA for this
planning period, aiming to accommodate 79 units within this 8 year period.
C. Housing Element Law and Changes to State Requirements
The Housing Element is one of the required seven elements of the General Plan, mandated by
California law. Enacted in 1969, Housing Element law requires all jurisdictions in California to
develop a plan to ensure that all existing and future housing needs of the community will be
adequately met. The law seeks to assure that local governments adopt land use plans and
regulations that do not constrain housing and are permissive to the construction of units to
accommodate housing need. In essence, the Housing Element should identify appropriate
housing types and potential sites to facilitate private market response in providing adequate
housing.
Housing Elements are required by law to be submitted to the California Department of Housing
and Community Development (HCD) for review. HCD is in turn responsible for assessing the
Housing Element to ensure its compliance with state law while also reporting findings to the
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page I - 2
  Chapter I – Introduction                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

jurisdiction. If the submitted Housing Element is found to be compliant with State law, HCD will
“certify” the housing element. Under provisions within State Housing Element law, a Housing
Element that has been certified by HCD will be more secure against litigation challenging the
document’s validity.
State Housing Element law requires Housing Elements to include several components within the
document, some of which have recently been added as part of State law. The previous Housing
Element included policies to comply with several of these laws. These incorporated laws are
described as follows:
     •   Senate Bill 2 (2007): Amended Housing Element law by requiring jurisdictions to support
         local homeless populations by permitting emergency shelters by right within a
         designated zoning district(s).
     •   Assembly Bill 1866 (2002): Facilitates development of Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)
         and allows identification of realistic capacity for second units.
     •   Senate Bill 375 (2008): Established a monitoring program requiring an annual Housing
         Element report to be submitted to HCD. The law also outlines repercussions for
         jurisdictions that fail to adopt a Housing Element.
A Streamlined Update approach is a new procedure established by HCD and designed to
expedite the update process for qualified California jurisdictions. The Streamlined Update
approach template is also applicable to select areas of the Housing Element. However, the
approach may only be utilized by jurisdictions whose existing Housing Element is adopted and
certified and also have amended their Zoning Ordinances to include Density Bonus, SB 2,
Reasonable Accommodation, and Transitional and Supportive Housing ordinances. Cities and
Counties seeking eligibility must also have completed any re-zoning efforts necessary to meet
the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) number from the 2009-2014 cycle. Eligible
jurisdictions will benefit from the Streamlined Update as they will receive priority when
submitting their Draft Housing Elements. HCD will also provide an expedited, 60-day review for
streamlined Housing Element Updates.
Since Sausalito has successfully implemented the aforementioned ordinances and adopted a
certified 2009-2014 Housing Element, the 2015-2023 Housing Element Update for Sausalito will
follow a Streamlined Update approach. The Streamlined Update builds off the existing Housing
Element, updating information, policies, and programs of the existing document.
D. Relationship to the General Plan
The General Plan serves as the “constitution” for development in a jurisdiction. It is a long-range
planning document that describes goals, policies and programs to guide decision-making. All
development-related decisions must be consistent with the General Plan. If a development
proposal is not consistent with the General Plan, the proposal must be revised, or the General
Plan itself must be amended. State law requires a community’s General Plan to be internally
consistent. This means that the Housing Element, although subject to special requirements and
a defined timetable of updates, must function as an integral part of the overall General Plan,
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                        Page I - 3
 Chapter I – Introduction                                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

with consistency between it and the other General Plan elements. This Housing Element is
consistent with Sausalito’s General Plan.
E. Community Participation Summary
In 2009, the City Council established a Housing Element Committee, which subsequently was
transformed into the Housing Element Task Force in 2011. Following the strategy of the 2009-
2014 Housing Element Update process, the City Council continued working with a separately
constituted Housing Element Subcommittee throughout the 2015-2023 Housing Element update
process. The Subcommittee was composed of two representatives of the City Council and two
representatives of the Planning Commission, with all meetings open to the public and live
webcast on the City's website. The public engagement process of the 2015-2023 Housing
Element update was conducted in a manner similar to participation efforts in the 2009-2014
Housing Element update, which involved over 45 public meetings.
During 2014, over 20 public meetings were held pertaining to implementation of the 2009-2014
Housing Element, and update of the 2015-2023 Housing Element. The City maintains an
extensive e-mail notification list for meetings associated with the Housing Element, which in
addition to interested residents, includes non-profit organizations and housing advocacy groups.
The following are among the groups receiving ongoing e-mail notification that represent lower
income and special needs populations in Sausalito: representatives of the liveaboard
community, Rotary Housing, Lilypad Homes, Elderfocus Housing, Marin Workforce Housing
Trust, Public Advocates of Marin, and the Department of Health and Human Services.
In addition to meetings before the Housing Element Subcommittee and public hearings before
the Planning Commission and City Council, two community workshops were conducted as part
of the 2015-2023 Housing Element update to engage community residents and property owners
in the discussion of topics related to the update of the Housing Element. The City sent
informational postcards announcing the workshops to every address in the City.
 The first workshop, conducted in March 2014, was aimed at explaining the purpose and
background of the Housing Element and providing an update on the zoning ordinance
amendments that will implement programs outlined in the 2009-2014 Housing Element. The
second workshop in September 2014 again provided overall background on the Housing
Element and introduced the draft Housing Element for the 2015-2023 planning period.
Community concerns raised at the workshops included the impact of the Housing Element
policies on the development patterns and density in Sausalito, including the Vertical Mixed Use
and Density Bonus regulations in particular. Questions regarding the repercussions of Housing
Element non-compliance, maximizing local control, shared housing units and rent control were
fielded and addressed during the community workshops. Residents supported the Element's low
impact sites strategy, including recognition of liveaboards and support for new and recognition
of existing accessory dwelling units, as a means of maintaining Sausalito's small town character.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page I - 4
  Chapter I – Introduction                                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

More details on community participation are provided in Appendix E.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                  Page I - 5
Chapter I – Introduction                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

CHAPTER II – HOUSING PLAN
The Housing Plan sets forth Sausalito’s goals, policies and programs to be implemented over the
2015-2023 planning period of the Housing Element. The Housing Plan, which has been drafted
with community and decision-maker input, is prepared in the context of 1) Sausalito’s housing
needs; 2) land availability and environmental constraints; 3) funding limitations; and 4)
experience gained from implementation of the City’s adopted 2009-2014 Housing Element. The
first section of the Housing Plan sets forth the Element’s goals and policies, followed by the
second section, which establishes the implementing programs. Each of these two sections are
organized around the following seven goals of the Element:
     •   Preserving housing and neighborhood assets.
         Goal 1.0: Maintain and enhance the quality of existing housing and ensure that new
         residential development is compatible with Sausalito’s small town character.
     •   Encouraging diversity in housing.
         Goal 2.0: Provide opportunities for a range of housing types in a variety of locations and
         densities to meet the diverse needs of the Sausalito community.
     •   Enhancing housing affordability.
         Goal 3.0: Expand and protect opportunities for households of all income levels to find
         housing in Sausalito and afford a greater choice of rental and homeownership
         opportunities.
     •   Reducing governmental constraints.
         Goal 4.0: Reduce governmental constraints on the maintenance, improvement and
         development of housing while maintaining community character.
     •   Promoting equal housing opportunities.
         Goal 5.0: Promote equal housing opportunities for all residents, including Sausalito’s
         special needs populations, so that residents can reside in the housing of their choice.
     •   Implementing environmental sustainability.
         Goal 6.0: Promote environmental sustainability through support of existing and new
         development which minimizes reliance on natural resources.
     •   Promoting community involvement.
         Goal 7.0: Promote the active participation of citizens, community groups, and
         governmental agencies in housing and community development activities.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page II - 1
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

A. Goals and Policies
The following Housing Element goals and policies will guide the City’s actions pertaining to
housing during the planning period.
Preserving Housing and Neighborhood Assets
Goal 1.0: Maintain and enhance the quality of existing housing and ensure that new
residential development is compatible with Sausalito’s small town character.
Policies
Policy 1.1 Housing Design. Review proposed new housing and accessory dwelling units to
achieve excellence in development design. Encourage design that enhances neighborhood
identity with sensitive transition of scale and building bulk, is compatible to the surrounding
neighborhood, and uses quality building materials.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 4 – Residential Design Review
Policy 1.2 Historic Preservation. Support efforts to identify and preserve historic structures.
Ensure the compatibility of infill development in the context of Sausalito’s historic resources.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 3 – Historic Preservation Regulations and Incentives
Policy 1.3 Maintenance and Management of Quality Housing. Support good management
practices and the long-term maintenance and improvement of existing housing through code
enforcement and housing rehabilitation programs.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 1 – Code Enforcement;
       Program 2 – Residential Rehabilitation Loan and Energy Retrofit Programs
Policy 1.4 Rental Housing Conservation. Continue to conserve the existing rental housing stock
by limiting the conversion of rental units to ownership or non-residential uses.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 5 – Condominium Conversion Regulations
Policy 1.5 Protection of Existing Affordable Housing. Ensure the continued affordability of
income-restricted housing for lower and moderate income households.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 6 – Preservation of Existing Affordable Rental Housing
Policy 1.6 Neighborhood Services. Promote neighborhood vitality and reduced reliance on the
automobile by supporting the provision of neighborhood serving uses, such as grocery stores.
       Implementing Programs:
       Land Use Element Program LU-2.13.1 – Zoning Ordinance – Neighborhood Commercial uses
       Economic Development Element Program E-5.1.1 – Permitted Uses (Neighborhood
       Commercial)
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page II - 2
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

Encouraging Diversity in Housing
Goal 2.0: Provide opportunities for a range of housing types in a variety of locations and
densities to meet the diverse needs of the Sausalito community.
Policies
Policy 2.1 Variety of Housing Choices. Encourage diversity in the type, size, price and tenure of
residential development in Sausalito, while maintaining quality of life goals.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 8 – Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial Districts
       Program 9 – Non-Traditional Housing Types
       Program 10 – Accessory Dwelling Units
       Program 11 - Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
       Program 12 – Liveaboard Housing
Policy 2.2 Adequate Sites. Provide adequate housing sites through appropriate land use and
zoning designations, consistent with Sausalito’s regional housing growth needs.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 7 – Residential and Mixed- Use Site Inventory
Policy 2.3 Adaptive Reuse.
Support innovative strategies for the adaptive reuse of commercial structures to provide for a
range of housing types and residential uses, for example, the residential use of upper floors of
commercial buildings.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 8 – Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial Districts
Policy 2.4 Legalization of Existing Accessory Dwelling Units.
Provide amnesty for existing accessory dwelling units by establishing a period of time for owners
of un-permitted units to register their units and make them legal.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 10 – Accessory Dwelling Units
Policy 2.5 Creation of New Accessory Dwelling Units.
Enable the construction and/or creation of new accessory dwelling units in residential zoning
districts to increase the supply of affordable housing and address a portion of Sausalito’s
regional housing needs. Ensure accessory dwelling units are designed to be compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 4 – Residential Design Review
       Program 10 – Accessory Dwelling Units
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page II - 3
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

Policy 2.6 Liveaboard Housing.
Protect liveaboards as a source of affordable housing and officially recognize them as part of the
community’s housing stock. Work with residents, marine operators and owners, agencies and
non-profit groups to identify ways to assist in the long-term affordability and maintenance of
this unique form of housing in Sausalito.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 12 – Liveaboard Housing
Enhancing Housing Affordability
Goal 3.0: Expand and protect opportunities for households of all income levels to find housing
in Sausalito and afford a greater choice of rental and homeownership opportunities.
Policies
Policy 3.1 Incentives.
Facilitate the development of affordable housing through site assembly, financial assistance, and
regulatory incentives. Implement new models and approaches in the provision of affordable
housing.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 13 – Affordable Housing Development Assistance;
       Program 14 – Local Affordable Housing Fund
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page II - 4
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

Policy 3.2 Partnerships.
Explore collaborative partnerships with nonprofit organizations, developers, governmental
agencies and the business community to develop, rehabilitate and preserve affordable housing.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 15 – Partnerships for Affordable Housing
Policy 3.3 Homeownership Assistance.
Encourage the provision of financial assistance to low and moderate income first-time
homebuyers through County and State programs.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 16 – Homebuyer Assistance
Policy 3.4 Rental Assistance.
Support and publicize available rental assistance programs for lower income and special needs
households.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 17 – Section 8 Rental Assistance
Policy 3.5 Inclusionary Housing.
Evaluate requiring new residential developments and residential land divisions above a certain
size to provide a percentage of affordable units, or contribute proportionately to the
development of affordable units.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 18 – Inclusionary Housing Regulations
Reducing Governmental Constraints
Goal 4.0: Reduce governmental constraints on the maintenance, improvement and
development of housing while maintaining community character.
Policies
Policy 4.1 Regulatory Incentives for Affordable Housing.
Support the use of various incentives to offset the costs of affordable housing while ensuring
that potential impacts are addressed.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 19 – Fee Deferrals and/or Waivers for Affordable Housing
       Program 20 – Density Bonus and Other Incentives for Affordable Housing
Policy 4.2 Flexible Development Standards.
Provide flexibility in development standards to accommodate new models and approaches to
providing housing, such as transit-oriented development, mixed use and co-housing.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 8 – Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial Districts
       Program 9 – Non-Traditional Housing Types
       Program 10 – Accessory Dwelling Units
       Program 13 – Affordable Housing Development Assistance
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page II - 5
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

Policy 4.3 Efficient Use of Multi-Family Zoning.
Encourage the sustainable use of land and promote affordability by encouraging development of
two-family and multi-family housing within the City’s multi-family zoning districts (R-2-5, R-2-2.5,
R-3).
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 4 – Residential Design Review
       Adopted Zoning Code Section 10.44.330 (Development Standards for Dwelling Units in
       Two-Family and Multi-Family Residential Zone Districts)
Policy 4.4 Development Review.
Explore continued improvements to the entitlement process to streamline and coordinate the
processing of development permits, design review and environmental clearance.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 3 – Historic Preservation Regulations and Incentives
Policy 4.5 Zoning for Special Needs.
Provide for transitional and supportive housing, emergency shelters, and single room occupancy
uses, consistent with State law.
       Implementing Programs:
       Adopted Special Needs Zoning
Promoting Equal Housing Opportunities
Goal 5.0: Promote equal housing opportunities for all residents, including Sausalito’s special
needs populations, so that residents can reside in the housing of their choice.
Policies
Policy 5.1 Fair Housing.
Seek to ensure that individuals and families pursuing housing in Sausalito do not experience
discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, marital status, disability, age, sex, familial
status, national origin, sexual preference or other arbitrary factors, identified in the Fair Housing
Act.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 21 – Fair Housing Program
Policy 5.2 Senior Housing.
Support development and maintenance of affordable senior rental and ownership housing and
supportive services to facilitate maximum independence and the ability of seniors to remain in
their homes and/or in the community.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 6 – Preservation of Existing Affordable Rental Housing
       Program 13 – Affordable Housing Development Assistance
       Program 22 – Sausalito Senior Services
       Program 23 – Home Sharing and Tenant Matching Opportunities
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                           Page II - 6
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                     Adopted January 13, 2015

Policy 5.3 Family Housing.
Support families by encouraging the development of larger rental and ownership housing units
for families with children, and the provision of family support services such as childcare and
after-school care.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 8 – Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial Districts
       Program 13 – Affordable Housing Development Assistance
Policy 5.4 Housing for Persons with Disabilities.
Address the special housing needs of persons with disabilities through provision of supportive
housing, homeowner accessibility grants, zoning for group housing, and adoption of reasonable
accommodation procedures.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 2 – Residential Rehabilitation Loan and Energy Retrofit Programs
       Program 24 – Reasonable Accommodation Procedures
       Program 25 – Universal Design/Visitability
Policy 5.5 Housing for Marine Workers.
Support affordable housing options for persons employed in Sausalito’s waterfront to allow
them to live in the community in which they work.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 12 – Liveaboard Housing
       Program 26 – Housing for Marine Workers
Policy 5.6 Homeless Housing and Services.
Work cooperatively with Marin County and other applicable agencies to provide a continuum of
care for the homeless, including emergency shelter, transitional housing, supportive housing
and permanent affordable housing.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 27 – Homeless Continuum of Care
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page II - 7
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

Implementing Environmental Sustainability
Goal 6.0: Promote environmental sustainability through support of existing and new
development which minimizes reliance on natural resources.
Policies
Policy 6.1 Green Building.
Develop a local Green Building Program to implement practices focused on reducing Sausalito’s
greenhouse gas emissions and consumption of natural resources.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 28 – Local Green Building Regulations
Policy 6.2 Sustainable Construction.
Promote the use of sustainable construction techniques and environmentally sensitive design
for housing.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 28 – Local Green Building Regulations
Policy 6.3 Alternative Energy.
Promote the use of alternative energy sources such as solar energy, cogeneration, and non-fossil
fuels.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 29 – Climate Action Plan and Sustainability
Policy 6.4 Transportation Alternatives.
Incorporate transit and other transportation alternatives such as walking and bicycling into the
design of new development.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 28 – Local Green Building Regulations
Policy 6.5 Jobs/Housing Balance.
Encourage a closer link between housing and jobs in the community, including housing
opportunities for Sausalito workers.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 8 – Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial Districts
       Program 29 – Climate Action Plan and Sustainability
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page II - 8
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

Promoting Community Involvement
Goal 7.0: Promote the active participation of citizens, community groups, and governmental
agencies in housing and community development activities.
Policies
Policy 7.1 Community Participation.
Take an active role in fostering community participation from all economic segments and special
needs groups in the formulation and review of housing needs, issues and programs.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 30 – Ongoing Community Education and Outreach
Policy 7.2 Public Review of Development.
Encourage public awareness and involvement in housing development proposals to facilitate the
design of new housing that fits within the neighborhood context.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 30 – Ongoing Community Education and Outreach
Policy 7.3 Housing Element Implementation.
Ensure the timely follow through of actions identified in the Housing Element.
       Implementing Programs:
       Program 31 – Housing Element Monitoring/Annual Report
       Program 32 – Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) Housing Needs Process
       Program 33 – Staff Affordable Housing Training and Education
B. Implementing Programs
The goals and policies contained in the Housing Element are implemented through a series of
housing programs. The housing programs described on the following pages include existing
programs, as well as new measures and programs developed to address identified needs. The
overall strategy for addressing housing needs is structured around the Element’s seven goals,
addressing the following themes:
     •   Preserving housing and neighborhood assets
     •   Encouraging diversity in housing
     •   Enhancing housing affordability
     •   Reducing governmental constraints
     •   Promoting equal housing opportunities
     •   Implementing environmental sustainability
     •   Promoting community involvement
The Summary Table 2.1 located near the end of this section specifies the following for each
implementing program: program summary, 2015-2023 program objective; funding sources;
entities responsible for implementation; and implementation time frame.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                    Page II - 9
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

The Programs below are followed by the Policy (or Policies) that they implement in parentheses.
Housing Element statutes now require an analysis of the needs of extremely low income (<30%
AMI) households, and programs to assist in the creation of housing for this population. Sausalito’s
Housing Element sets forth several programs which help to address the needs of extremely low
income households, including: Accessory Dwelling Units (Program 10); Affordable Housing
Development Assistance (Program 12); Section 8 Rental Assistance (Program 16); Fee Deferrals or
Waivers for Affordable Housing (Program 18); Density Bonus and Other Incentives for Affordable
Housing (Program 19); Zoning Text Amendments for Special Needs Housing (Program 21); and
Home Sharing and Tenant Matching Opportunities (Program 24).
Goal 1.0: Preserving Housing and Neighborhood Assets
1. Code Enforcement and Public Information
(Policy 1.3 Maintenance and Management of Quality Housing)
The existing code enforcement program seeks to protect and preserve the existing housing stock
and the overall quality of neighborhoods. Enforcement of regulatory codes is fundamental to
the protection of life safety within the community. Coordination of housing, building and fire
code compliance can streamline compliance and improve living conditions. The opportunity
exists to move beyond a pure compliance approach and begin to offer information on how
qualifying property owners can utilize existing resources for improving housing conditions.
Coordination with Marin Housing and PG&E would be increased under this program. The
purpose of this implementation program is to expand the City’s current Code Enforcement
program to include the offering of useful referral information. The City will provide information
to property owners on rehabilitation assistance available through the Marin Housing for lower
income homeowners, and energy retrofit programs available through PG&E. This will also
include information about community service clubs and other organizations that provide
volunteer labor assistance housing improvement programs for homeowners physically or
financially unable to maintain their homes. The City will support such programs through public
outreach and coordination.
       2015-2023 Objectives: Continue to provide informational handouts on available
       rehabilitation assistance and energy retrofit programs for distribution as part of the
       normal code enforcement process. Provide information about volunteer labor
       organizations on the City’s website.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page II - 10
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

2. Residential Rehabilitation Loan and Energy Retrofit Programs
(Policy 1.3 Maintenance of Quality Housing, Policy 5.4 Housing for Persons with Disabilities)
As a participating city in Marin County’s Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) program, very low
income Sausalito residents are eligible to participate in
the Residential Rehabilitation Loan Program administered
by Marin Housing. This program provides technical
assistance to homeowners and makes low interest
property improvement loans of up to $35,000 for
correction of substandard conditions, elimination of
health and safety hazards, energy conservation measures, and accessibility improvements.
Loans are available for owner-occupied single-family homes, accessory dwelling units, and
houseboats and liveaboards in approved berths. Applicants apply directly through Marin
Housing.
Sausalito homeowners and renters are eligible for a variety of financial incentives through PG&E
and Marin Clean Energy for making energy efficiency improvements to their homes, including
rebates for home energy assessments, energy efficiency updates, and solar energy
improvements. The Energy Savings Assistance Program provides free minor home
improvements and replacement of old space and water heating systems for income-qualified
residents. PG&E also offers rebates on hundreds of energy efficient appliances and products.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Pro-actively publicize the Marin Housing Residential
         Rehabilitation Loan Program, and Marin Clean Energy and PG&E energy retrofit
         programs on the City’s website, through Sausalito Village and through brochures at City
         Hall and other community locations, and strive to assist eight households during the
         planning period. Specifically promote available rehabilitation assistance among the
         liveaboard community in permitted marinas.
3. Historic Preservation Regulations and Incentives
(Policy 1.2 Historic Preservation, Policy 4.4 Development Review)
The City places a strong emphasis on preserving its historic resources and maintaining a unique
sense of place and community. Preservation of historic buildings contributes to the high
standards of the community’s housing and neighborhoods. The City staff, Historic Landmarks
Board, Planning Commission and City Council all work closely with property owners to preserve
historic buildings. The City’s Historic Overlay Zoning District provides the following incentives for
preservation:
    • Design Review application fees may be waived;
    • The City utilizes the State of California Historic Building Code;
    • Exceptions to development standards including setbacks, height, parking, coverage and
         FAR may be granted; and
    • Uses otherwise not allowed may be approved through a conditional use permit.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page II - 11
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

The City will update the Historic Preservation regulations based on the adopted Historic
Preservation Regulations and recently completed Historic Context Statement. The City will
utilize the recently obtained Certified Local Government status to pursue funds for historic
preservation, including funding for preservation of historic wooden boats being used as housing.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Update the Historic Preservation regulations contained within the
         Zoning Ordinance in 2015. Disseminate the City’s brochure on available sources of funds
         including loans and grants for historic preservation. The City will also make the Historic
         Context Statement available for viewing on the City's website.
4. Residential Design Review
(Policy 1.1 Housing Design, Policy 2.5 Creation of New Accessory Dwelling Units)
The City is committed to maintaining its small-town character. The Design Review process
ensures proposed projects and modifications to existing buildings are consistent with the
General Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and design guidelines. The Design Review process also checks
whether the proposed development is compatible with its surroundings and the neighborhood.
The City of Sausalito seeks to foster creativity and innovation in project design and exerts
minimal control over project architecture, and hence has chosen not to adopt prescriptive
design guidelines.
          2015-2023 Objectives: Continue to provide design review in accordance with Chapter
          10.54 of the Sausalito Municipal Code which provides for an Administrative and Planning
          Commission process for design review to ensure that new projects and modifications of
          existing buildings are consistent with the small-town character of Sausalito.
5. Condominium Conversion Regulations
(Policy 1.4 Rental Housing Conservation)
As a means of maintaining the supply of rental units and preserving the affordable housing
stock, multi-family rental units proposed for conversion to condominium ownership are subject
to Condominium Conversion regulations (Zoning Ordinance Chapter 10.66). These regulations
set forth a series of tenant protections including tenant noticing, relocation compensation and
right of first purchase, and prohibit the eviction of senior citizen tenants and conversion of low
and moderate income rentals. The regulations limit the number of conversions to no greater
than 5% of the City’s potentially convertible rental stock in any given year. Conversions involving
five or more units are subject to a 15% low and moderate income inclusionary requirement
(with not less than one affordable unit provided), with resale restrictions to assure long-term
affordability.
In recent years, the primary requests for condominium conversions have involved small projects
(e.g., projects with four or fewer units). In order to mitigate the loss of rentals from these
smaller projects, the City will evaluate strengthening its current regulations to extend the low
and moderate income inclusionary requirement to projects with 3 and 4 units, providing smaller
projects an option to pay an in-lieu housing fee as supported by a nexus study. In order to assure
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page II - 12
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

that long-term homeowners of small projects are not adversely affected, relief may be provided
to projects which are primarily homeowner occupied. The City will also evaluate prohibiting
conversions when the rental vacancy rate falls below a certain level (e.g., 5%).
         2015-2023 Objectives: Continue to assure that the requirements of the Condominium
         Conversion regulations are met. By 2018: 1) evaluate strengthening the current
         regulations by extending inclusionary requirements to projects with 3 or 4 units and
         prohibiting conversions during periods of low rental vacancy rates, and 2) examine
         options for providing relief for condominium conversion projects with 3 or 4 units which
         are primarily occupied by long-term homeowners.
6. Preservation of Existing Affordable Rental Housing
(Policy 1.5 Protection of Existing Affordable Housing, Policy 5.2 Senior Housing)
Currently three income-restricted affordable rental projects are located in the City: Bee Street
Housing (6 very low income units); Rotary Place (10 very low income units); and Sausalito Rotary
Senior Housing (22 very low income units). In addition, of the 38 berths in Galilee Harbor, five
berths are reserved for extremely low income, 7 for very low income, 15 for low income, and 7
for moderate income houseboat and liveaboard tenants at affordable rents. In total, 72 rent-
restricted affordable housing opportunities are available, none of which are at risk of conversion
to market rate.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Ensure the preservation of 5 extremely low income, 45 very low
         income, 15 low income and 7 moderate income housing opportunities. Require long-
         term affordability controls on all future affordable housing projects.
Goal 2.0: Encouraging Diversity in Housing
7. Residential and Mixed-Use Site Inventory
(Policy 2.2 Adequate Sites)
As part of this Housing Element, a detailed analysis of all vacant and underutilized residential
and commercial parcels in Sausalito was conducted. The analysis used the Marin Map GIS
system and was confirmed by review of aerial photographs and site visits. A number of filters
were applied in order to identify only those parcels that truly have realistic development
potential. The analysis determined that under existing zoning designations, approximately 140
additional units can be accommodated within the City’s residential zoning districts and
approximately 50 units within the City’s commercial zones. Only limited vacant sites remain,
with the majority of future residential development opportunities on underutilized parcels that
are more challenging to develop.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Maintain a current inventory of vacant and underutilized
         residential sites, and mixed-use sites within the City’s commercial district, and update
         annually concurrently with the Annual Housing Element Progress Report. Make the site
         inventory available at the Community Development Department to interested parties.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page II - 13
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

8. Mixed Use Zoning in Commercial Districts
(Policy 2.1 Variety of Housing Choices, Policy 2.3 Adaptive Reuse, Policy 4.2 Flexible Development
Standards, Policy 5.3 Family Housing, Policy 6.5 Jobs/Housing Balance)
With approximately one-quarter of the City’s residential infill potential occurring within its
commercial districts, it will be important that the City’s standards facilitate residential mixed
use. The adopted VMU ordinance will be implemented in order to facilitate the provision of
mixed-income, upper-story residential use above ground-floor commercial within the CN-1, CC
and CR zoning districts. The program also calls for the City to monitor the ordinance’s
effectiveness in providing housing and will be tracked as a part of the Annual Housing Element
progress report.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Implement VMU requirements in designated commercial
         districts.
9. Non-Traditional Housing Types
(Policy 2.1 Variety of Housing Choices, Policy 4.2 Flexible Development Standards)
The community recognizes the changing housing needs of its population, including a growing
number of non-family households, aging seniors in need of supportive services, and single-
parent families in need of childcare and other services. To address such needs, the City can
support the provision of non-traditional and innovative housing types to meet the unique needs
of residents, including co-housing, shared housing, and assisted living for seniors, among others.
Co-housing is an innovative type of collaborative housing originated in Denmark in the 1960s.
Co-housing communities consist of individually owned, private homes clustered around
common facilities and amenities in a walkable, sustainable environment. Common features may
include a community garden, recreational areas, and a common house where day care and
meals can be shared. The communities are managed by the residents who have chosen to live
in a close-knit neighborhood. Hundreds of co-housing communities currently exist throughout
the country in a variety of settings, including communities in Berkeley, Oakland, Pleasant Hill,
Cotati, Grass Valley, Davis and Santa Barbara.
Given the economic downturn, shared housing living situations are becoming more common.
Homeowners are taking in renters, and renters are advertising for roommates to share in
housing costs. Bringing in a tenant can be particularly helpful to the community’s elderly
homeowners to provide the necessary support to allow them to remain in their homes. The City
supports these types of shared living situations.
Assisted living facilities are designed for elderly individuals needing assistance with certain
activities of daily living - such as eating, bathing, and transportation - but desiring to live as
independently as possible. Such facilities bridge the gap between independent living and
nursing homes. With 7% of Sausalito’s population over the age of 75, assisted living can help
meet the housing and supportive service needs of the community’s more frail senior residents.
The Zoning Ordinance currently provides reduced parking standards for senior housing facilities.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                         Page II - 14
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

          2015-2023 Objectives: Evaluate the modification of zoning regulations to allow for the
          development of alternative housing models suited to the community.
10. Accessory Dwelling Units
(Policy 2.1 Variety of Housing Choices, Policy 2.5 Accessory Dwelling Units, Policy 4.2 Flexible
Development Standards)
An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is a self-contained living unit with cooking, eating, sleeping,
and full sanitation facilities, either attached to or detached from the primary residential unit on
a single lot. ADUs offer several benefits. First, they typically rent for less than apartments of
comparable size, and can offer affordable rental options for seniors, single persons and even
small families. Second, the primary homeowner receives supplementary income by renting out
the ADU, which can help many modest income and elderly homeowners afford to remain in
their homes. ADUs can offer an important opportunity to help Sausalito address its regional
housing needs while maintaining the community’s small town character.
The City adopted regulations in 1984 prohibiting the development of ADUs in all residential zoning
districts. As part of the 2009-2014 Housing Element update, the City conducted a survey of
residential property owners which indicated 15% of the 700+ survey respondents had an ADU on
their property, and another 19% of respondents would be inclined to build an ADU if the City’s
regulations permitted. The community has come to recognize ADUs as a low impact approach to
addressing a portion of the community’s very low and low income housing needs, and in
November 2012, the Sausalito City Council adopted Accessory Dwelling Unit Regulations (Zoning
Code Section 10.44.080) to encourage the provision of new ADUs through a ministerial approval
process, and establishment of standards that promote quality design and neighborhood
compatibility. Between January 2013 and July 2014, six new ADUs were issued building permits
under the City's new regulations.
In addition to new ADUs, the City's adopted regulations implemented an amnesty program
enabling the legalization of existing non-permitted ADUs. The City's amnesty program was in
effect from January 2013-March 2014, and was highly successful, with 14 previously unpermitted
units being brought up to Code. At the conclusion of the amnesty program on March 31, 2014,
an additional 44 units had submitted applications for amnesty and were going through the
permitting process.
          2015-2023 Objectives: Implement the City’s recently adopted accessory dwelling unit
          (ADU) regulations to facilitate the provision of ADUs for seniors, caregivers, and other
          lower and extremely low income households. Seek to create an average of two new
          ADUs annually, for a total of 16 ADUs during the eight-year planning period. Initiate
          another amnesty program in 2015 1. Seek to legalize a minimum of 24 ADUs, bringing
          them into the City’s official housing stock, reporting to the State Department of Finance,
1 To receive RHNA credit, ADUs under the future amnesty program would be subject to the same provisions
as the initial program, as applied to the 2015-2023 planning period: documentation the unit did not have
an individual address as of the 2010 census, does not have a permit of record, and was constructed prior to
January 1, 2012.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                          Page II - 15
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                     Adopted January 13, 2015

          and crediting towards the City’s RHNA. Monitor the City’s progress in conjunction with
          the Annual Housing Element Progress Report. If ADU permitting falls below two units for
          more than two consecutive years, re-evaluate the City's ADU standards and procedures
          and modify accordingly.
11. Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
(Policy 2.1 Variety of Housing Choices, Policy 2.5 Accessory Dwelling Units, Policy 4.2 Flexible
Development Standards)
As identified in the Housing Element Needs Assessment, a significant number of Sausalito's
senior citizens are living alone in single-family homes. As these seniors continue to age, their
ability to live independently can become more of a challenge. One zoning tool being explored by
many Marin jurisdictions which can help to support elderly homeowners remain in their homes
is the concept of allowing "Junior Accessory Dwelling Units" created from existing underutilized
space, such as an unused bedroom, which can be improved as an independent rental unit.
Because these junior units are established within the existing improved square footage of the
home, additional parking may not be necessary.
Sausalito will coordinate with other Marin jurisdictions in evaluating appropriate zoning
regulations to support in the creation of Junior Accessory Dwelling Units of less than 500 square
feet in size. Such units would be created through the repurposing of existing space within a
single-family dwelling to create a semi-private living situation for a renter or caregiver in
conjunction with the owner-occupied unit. Junior Accessory Dwelling Units would be required to
have exterior access, and meet the U.S. Census definition of a housing unit 2 to qualify for credit
towards the City's regional housing needs (RHNA).
          2015-2023 Objectives: Explore and evaluate development standards to facilitate the
          provision of Junior Accessory Dwelling Units, while addressing issues of neighborhood
          compatibility.
12. Liveaboards and Houseboats
(Policy 2.1 Variety of Housing, Policy 2.6 Liveaboards, Policy 5.5 Housing for Marine Workers)
Sausalito has a well-established and vibrant marine culture that plays an important role in
shaping the character of the community. There are eight marinas in the City where many boat
owners reside in their boats as permanent housing. The San Francisco Bay Conservation and
Development Commission (BCDC) 3 and Sausalito Zoning Ordinance both allow for up to 10% of
marina berths to be used as liveaboard housing. Liveaboards provide a valuable source of
2
  The 2010 U.S. Census defines a "housing unit" as a house, an apartment, a mobile home, a group of homes,
  or a single room that is occupied (of if vacant, is intended for occupancy) as separate living quarters.
  Separate living quarters are those in which the occupants live and eat separately from any other persons
  in the building and which have direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall.
3
  While Sausalito fronts on Richardson’s Bay and its waterfront is subject to regulation by the San Francisco
Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC), the City does not fall within the California Coastal
Zone.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                             Page II - 16
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                        Adopted January 13, 2015

affordable housing in Sausalito, offering one of the few local housing options for marine workers
employed in Sausalito’s waterfront. Both the Environmental Protection Agency and the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration support the provision of liveaboards in well-managed
marinas as an environmentally sustainable housing option.
The Housing Element recognizes liveaboards as a low impact approach to addressing a key
segment of the City’s affordable housing needs, and establishes the following actions to
maintain and enhance liveaboards as a permanent form of housing in the community:
     •   Maintain zoning provisions which allow up to 10% of berths in recreational marinas in
         the C-W and W Zoning Districts to be occupied by liveaboards and houseboats.
     •   While five marinas have recorded permits with BCDC authorizing 146 liveaboards and
         have various permits on file with the City, only Galilee Harbor has a conditional use
         permit (CUP) which explicitly permits liveaboards. The City has recognized liveaboards
         established by Schoonmaker Marina and Clipper Yacht Harbor in the Waterfront
         Marinship zone as a legal non-conforming use. The City will coordinate with the other
         two BCDC-permitted marinas (Sausalito Yacht Harbor and Pelican Harbor) to obtain the
         necessary local CUP to officially bring these marina's liveaboards into Sausalito’s housing
         stock.
     •   Coordinate with Sausalito Yacht Harbor to facilitate amendment of its BCDC permit, and
         provide guidance on the Conditional Use Permit process to increase liveaboard capacity
         from 5% to the maximum of 10%.
     •   Zoning Ordinance Section 10.44.170.H regarding liveaboards states: “As vacancies occur,
         marina operators shall give preference to qualified low and moderate income tenants
         until such tenants constitute at least 50% of the liveaboard vessels in the marina.” The
         City will coordinate with marina operators to determine the best way to implement
         these provisions as part of the local permitting process.
     •   The majority of the City’s liveaboard community does not receive mail on-site. The City
         will coordinate with marine operators to establish a bulletin board at each marina for
         the posting of public notices, and pursue the establishment of mailboxes for liveaboard
         tenants.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Coordinate with Pelican Harbor and Sausalito Yacht Harbor to
         obtain a local CUP for existing BCDC approved liveaboards. Coordinate with Sausalito
         Yacht Harbor to facilitate BCDC and City permitting for increased liveaboard capacity
         from 5% to 10%, and complete required permitting by 2016 to accommodate 31
         additional liveaboards 4. Establish procedures for implementation of low and moderate
         income occupancy requirements. Pursue means to improve mail service and public
         communication with the liveaboard community.
4
  The unused liveaboard capacity in Sausalito's other two marinas with the necessary permits in place
(Clipper Yacht and Schoonmaker Marina) has already been credited towards the RHNA in the City's 2009-
2014 Housing Element.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page II - 17
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

Goal 3.0: Enhancing Housing Affordability
13. Affordable Housing Development Assistance
(Policy 3.1 Incentives, Policy 4.2 Flexible Development Standards, Policy 5.2 Senior Housing,
Policy 5.3 Family Housing)
The City can play an important role in facilitating the development of quality, affordable housing
in the community through provision of regulatory incentives; and direct financial assistance. By
utilizing various tools to facilitate infill development, the City can help to address the housing
needs of its extremely low, very low, low and moderate income households. The following are
among the types of incentives that will be considered upon request:
     •   Reduction in development fees
     •   Flexible development standards
     •   Density bonuses as described in Implementing Program 20
     •   City support in affordable housing funding applications
     •   Financial assistance through future Affordable Housing Fund resources (refer to
         following program)
         2015-2023 Objectives: Provide financial and regulatory incentives to private developers
         for the development of high quality affordable housing for families and seniors.
14. Local Affordable Housing Fund
(Policy 3.1 Incentives)
Because Sausalito does not have a Redevelopment Agency and has limited access to state and
federal housing resources, the City faces practical and financial constraints in its ability to
facilitate the construction of affordable housing. To create a more viable funding source, the
City proposes to establish an Affordable Housing Fund that will be used to construct or help
leverage construction of affordable housing. Potential Fund resources include: in-lieu fees from
an Inclusionary Housing Program; in-lieu fees on small condominium conversions (three to four
units); in-lieu fees for development of single-family units in multi-family districts; and
commercial in-lieu fees. Implementing regulations will be established to manage the Fund and
establish parameters for allocation of funds towards projects. This program will move forward
once a funding source has been identified, and will coincide with the collection of fees.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Upon adoption of a program that generates in-lieu housing fees,
         establish a dedicated Affordable Housing Fund for deposit of in-lieu fee revenues.
         Consult with Marin County on their Housing Fund, and establish implementing
         regulations to govern Fund oversight and expenditures.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                        Page II - 18
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                   Adopted January 13, 2015

15. Partnerships for Affordable Housing
(Policy 3.2 Partnerships)
The Bay Area is home to numerous nonprofit housing developers who have produced thousands
of high-quality affordable housing projects over the past 40 years. In Sausalito, two non-profits
have a track record of developing and managing successful affordable housing projects – Rotary
Housing and the Ecumenical Association for Housing (EAH). The key to the success of non-profits
lies in three areas: 1) their ability to access a diversity of funding sources; 2) their commitment
to working cooperatively with the local community; and 3) their long-term dedication to their
projects. The Nonprofit Housing Association of Northern California serves as a resource
organization for affordable housing developers in the Bay Area.
          2015-2023 Objectives: Explore partnerships with a variety of affordable housing
          providers, utilizing the Nonprofit Housing Association of Northern California as a
          resource to identify nonprofits with experience in developing small scale infill projects
          consistent with Sausalito’s character.
16. Homebuyer Assistance
(Policy 3.3 Homeownership Assistance)
First-time homebuyers in Sausalito have access to several homebuyer assistance programs
offered through Marin Housing.
The Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program administered by Marin Housing provides
qualified first time homebuyers with a federal income tax credit of up to 15% of the annual
interest paid on the homebuyer’s mortgage. This enables homebuyers to have more disposable
income available to qualify for a mortgage loan and make the monthly mortgage payments.
Eligibility includes maximum household incomes of approximately $100,000 (for 2 person
household), and sales price limits of approximately $400,000.
Marin Housing also administers a Below Market Rate (BMR) first-time homebuyer program on
behalf of jurisdictions in the County with inclusionary housing requirements. The BMR program
includes over 300 affordable ownership units within the unincorporated County and seven
participating cities. Any inclusionary units generated through Sausalito’s condominium
conversion regulations or potential future inclusionary housing regulations could also be
administered by Marin Housing, thereby reducing the administrative burden to the City.
          2015-2023 Objectives: Continue participation in the Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC)
          program and potential as MCCs become available on an annual basis, actively publicize
          availability through local media and on the City’s website.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page II - 19
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

17. Section 8 Rental Assistance
(Policy 3.4 Rental Assistance)
The Section 8 Rental Assistance Program extends rental subsidies to very low-income
households (50% area median income or AMI2), including families, seniors, and the disabled.
The Section 8 Program offers a voucher that pays the difference between the current fair
market rent (FMR) and what a tenant can afford to pay (i.e. 30% of household income). The
voucher allows a tenant to choose housing that costs above the payment standard, provided the
tenant pays the extra cost. Given the significant gap between market rents and what very low
income households can afford to pay for housing, Section 8 plays a critical role in allowing such
households to remain in the community, and is a key program to address the needs of extremely
low and very low income households. The City will offer tenants information regarding Section 8
rental subsidies and referrals to Marin Housing for assistance. The City will also encourage
landlords to register units with the Housing Authority by providing informational brochures to
rental property owners.
         2015-2023 Objectives: The City will continue to provide brochures at City Hall and
         information on the City’s website regarding Section 8 rental subsidies and refer inquiring
         parties to Marin Housing for assistance. The City will also encourage landlords to register
         their units with the Housing Authority and direct to www.GoSection8.com, Marin
         Housing’s new enhanced program for on-line listing of rental properties.
18. Inclusionary Housing Regulations
(Policy 3.5 Inclusionary Housing)
Inclusionary zoning is a tool used by cities to integrate affordable units within market rate
developments. One-third of cities in California have adopted some form of inclusionary zoning,
requiring a stated percentage (typically 10 to 20%) of affordable units to be provided within
newly constructed housing projects. The majority of these regulations allow for payment of a
housing in-lieu fee as an alternative to providing the required affordable units on-site. Within
Marin, seven cities and the county have adopted inclusionary zoning requirements to help
address local affordable housing needs and contribute towards housing element production
requirements.
The City will pursue adoption of inclusionary housing regulations to require a minimum
percentage of units within new residential development above an established size threshold to
be price-restricted as affordable to lower and moderate income households. 5 The City will
consider granting in-lieu fees where there are hardships or site-specific constraints to the
provision of on-site or off-site affordable housing, and the City will conduct an Inclusionary
Housing Nexus Study to document the relationship between residential development and
demand for affordable housing, and to determine both the maximum supportable and
2
  Freddie Mac, Glossary of Finance and Economic Terms, http://www.freddiemac.com/smm/a_f.htm
5
  Current case law (Palmer/Sixth Street Properties v. City of Los Angeles) limits the application of inclusionary
requirements to: 1) rental projects receiving financial or regulatory assistance from the City subject to a
written development agreement; and 2) for-sale housing projects.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                                 Page II - 20
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

recommended in-lieu fee amount. In-lieu fees generated from the program will be placed in an
Affordable Housing Fund to support affordable housing activities.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Within the first four years of the planning period, conduct an
         Inclusionary Housing Nexus and In-Lieu Fee Study including an analysis of alternative
         strategies to address inclusionary requirements, such as the provision of an ADU above a
         detached garage. Develop and adopt inclusionary housing regulations structured to help
         offset the cost of providing affordable units as appropriate.
Goal 4.0: Reducing Governmental Constraints
19. Fee Deferrals and/or Waivers for Affordable Housing
(Policy 4.1 Regulatory Incentives for Affordable Housing)
The City collects various fees from development projects to cover the costs of processing
permits and providing services and facilities. While these fees are assessed on a pro rata share
basis, they are an element in the cost of housing and could potentially constrain the provision of
affordable housing. The deferral, reduction or waiver of City fees can lower the production costs
of affordable housing.
The City will continue to offer a reduction in City fees as an incentive for affordable housing. In
order to specifically encourage the provision of housing affordable to extremely low income
(ELI) households (<30% AMI), the City will waive 100% of application processing fees for
projects with a minimum of 5% ELI units.
In addition, the California legislature passed AB 641 in 2007, which helps to address the cash
flow challenges inherent in many affordable housing projects during the construction phase. For
affordable housing developments in which at least 49 percent of the units are affordable to low
or very low-income households, AB 641 prohibits local governments from requiring the payment
of local developer fees prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Provide information to the affordable housing community that
         fee deferrals, reductions and waivers may be requested for affordable housing projects.
         By 2016, adopt a resolution waiving 100% of application processing fees for projects
         with a minimum of 5% ELI units.
20. Density Bonus and Other Incentives and Concessions for Affordable Housing
(Policy 4.1 Regulatory Incentives for Affordable Housing)
Under Government Code section 65915-65918, for housing projects of at least five units cities
must grant density bonuses ranging from 5% to 35% (depending on the affordability provided by
the housing project) when requested by the project sponsor, and provide up to three incentives
or concessions unless specific findings can be made The City is also required to establish
procedures for waiving or modifying development and zoning standards that would otherwise
inhibit the utilization of the density bonus on specific sites. These procedures must include, but
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page II - 21
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

not be limited to, such items as minimum lot size, side yard setbacks, and placement of public
works improvements.
In 2014, the Sausalito City Council adopted updated residential density bonus provisions (Zoning
Ordinance Chapter 10.40.130), consistent with State law. The City's local ordinance breaks down
required incentives/concessions into two tiers, with applicants encouraged to select
incentives/concessions identified in Tier 1 before selecting incentives/concessions in Tier 2.
Incentives/concessions with an anticipated greater level of impact are identified as Tier 2 and
are less preferred, and thus require a higher level of review and approval by the City. The
overall goal of this hierarchy is choose incentives/concessions that reduce neighborhood
impacts, further the project's consistency with the General Plan, and promote affordability.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Implement the City’s updated residential density bonus
         provisions, and encourage applicants to utilize Tier 1 incentives/concessions to minimize
         neighborhood impacts.
Goal 5.0: Promoting Equal Housing Opportunities
21. Fair Housing Program
(Policy 5.1 Fair Housing)
Fair Housing of Marin (FROM) is the designated provider of fair housing and tenant-landlord
information in Marin County. FROM provides fair housing investigation and coordinates referral
services to assist individuals who may have been the victims of discrimination. Many of the
people who contact FROM have basic questions about landlord and tenant rights and
responsibilities; FROM’s housing counselors provide clients with comprehensive information to
help resolve tenant/landlord issues. FROM conducts extensive fair housing education and
outreach throughout Marin County, and is a certified HUD Foreclosure Counseling agency.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Continue to promote fair housing practices, and refer fair housing
         complaints to Fair Housing of Marin. As a means of furthering fair housing education
         and outreach in the local community, publicize the fair housing program through
         placement of fair housing services brochures at the public counter, on the City’s website
         and in other community locations.
22. Sausalito Senior Services
(Policy 5.2 Senior Housing)
Sausalito Village is a non-profit membership organization dedicated to providing resources and
assistance to enable seniors to remain in their own homes as they age. Since its establishment in
2010, Sausalito Village has recruited a growing team of Sausalito volunteers to help members
with occasional transportation assistance, household tasks, home visits and phone check-ins. In
addition to home support services, Sausalito Village hosts social events, cultural programs, and
educational and fitness classes to support seniors in remaining active and connected to their
community. The organization publishes two electronic newsletters – Sausalito Village Update is
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page II - 22
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

a bi-weekly community calendar of meetings and events, and Sausalito Village Voice is a more
in-depth quarterly publication; both can be accessed at www.sausalitovillage.org.
In 2013 the City Council created the Age-Friendly Sausalito Task Force in response to the fact that
Sausalito has one of the fastest aging populations in Marin County. The purpose of the Task Force
is to assess the current age-friendliness of the City to develop a strategic plan which will assist the
City in future planning.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Support the efforts of Sausalito Village and Age Friendly Sausalito
         Task Force to allow seniors to age in place and utilize as a resource to help promote
         available housing assistance programs for seniors. Explore options to develop a citywide
         plan of action for seniors.
23. Home Sharing and Tenant Matching Opportunities
(Policy 5.2 Senior Housing)
Sharing a home promotes independent living, provides additional income for the provider, an
affordable rent for the seeker, and the potential for deeper relationships for both. The average
age of community members in Sausalito is growing older, and over 330 seniors currently live
alone in single-family homes in the City. Shared housing promotes the efficient use of the
housing stock, and can help address the housing needs of seniors in our community.
Homesharing programs match lower income home seekers with homeowners with excess space
who are interested in sharing their homes.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Support organizations that facilitate house sharing, and actively
         promote through senior citizen organizations, such as Sausalito Village Senior Services
         and Age-Friendly Sausalito Task Force. Work with the Age Friendly Task Force to explore
         establishing a local shared housing program, which may include a process for matching
         home seekers and home providers.
24. Reasonable Accommodation Procedures
(Policy 5.4 Housing for Persons with Disabilities)
Sausalito has adopted an ordinance through which the City can grant reasonable modifications
to the requirements of the zoning code where necessary to avoid discrimination on the basis of
disability, and to ensure persons with disabilities have the same opportunity to enjoy the rights
and privileges available to residents or property owners in the same zoning district. This
ordinance establishes the process for requesting and granting reasonable modifications to
zoning and development regulations, building codes, and land use.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Continue to implement the Reasonable Accommodation
         ordinance. Periodically analyze the City’s process to determine any constraints to the
         development, maintenance, and improvement of housing for persons with disabilities
         and take measures to remove these constraints.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page II - 23
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

25. Universal Design/Visitability
(Policy 5.4 Housing for Persons with Disabilities)
As the community’s population continues to age, providing housing that is accessible to people
of all abilities becomes increasingly important. The majority the City’s housing stock was built
prior to 1991 when current ADA accessibility standards took effect, and thus it is important for
the City to facilitate the retrofit of existing housing to provide greater accessibility, as well as to
promote accessibility in new construction. The goal of universal design is to accommodate a
wide range of abilities including children, aging populations, and persons with disabilities by
providing features in residential construction that enhance accessibility. Examples of universal
design features include:
         •     Entrances without steps that make it easier for persons to enter the home;
         •     Wider doorways that enhance interior circulation and accommodate strollers and
               wheelchairs;
         •     Lever door handles that are easier to use, especially by parents with an infant or
               persons with arthritis; and
         •     Light switches and electrical outlets that are located at a height more convenient
               and accessible to the elderly.
Housing that is “visitable” is accessible at a basic level, enabling persons with disabilities to visit
the homes of their friends, relatives, and neighbors. Visitability can be achieved in new
construction by utilizing two simple design standards: (1) providing a 32-inch clear opening in all
interior and bathroom doorways; and (2) providing at least one accessible means of ingress and
egress for each unit.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Distribute the City’s recently prepared brochure on universal
         design and visitability at City Hall, through Sausalito Village, and on the City’s website.
26. Housing for Marine Workers
(Policy 5.5 Housing for Marine Workers)
Marine workers are an integral part of Sausalito’s history and the community’s working
waterfront. Marine-related occupations include boat builders and boat repair and restoration
works, sailmakers, canvas workers, marine surveyors, harbor masters, ship mates, captains, and
merchant marines, among numerous other maritime occupations.. Many of Sausalito’s marine
workers reside on liveaboards, and the majority are lower income. The Galilee Harbor co-op was
specifically established to provide an affordable liveaboard community for Sausalito’s artists and
maritime workers, and since the opening of its new marina in 2003, has provided 38 rent- and
income-restricted berths. Support of similar and other affordable housing options would help
workers to locate in Sausalito, and showcase the skills of local marine workers.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Support liveaboard and other affordable housing options, which
         address the housing needs of local marine workers and allow them to live in the
         community in which they work. Work with marina operators to establish procedures for
         implementation of low and moderate income occupancy requirements.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                        Page II - 24
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                   Adopted January 13, 2015

27. Homeless Continuum of Care
(Policy 5.6 Homeless Housing and Services)
Support Countywide programs and the Marin Continuum of Care in the provision of resources to
address the needs of the homeless and persons at risk of homelessness, including emergency
shelter, transitional housing, supportive housing and permanent housing. Continue to provide
flyers and information on the City’s website about the emergency 211 toll-free call system for
information and referral.
Senate Bill 2 establishes requirements for emergency shelter ordinances. During the State HCDs
review of Sausalito's draft 2015-2023 Housing Element, the State requested specific changes to the
City's Emergency Shelter Ordinance that was adopted in July 2014. To address this issue, the City will
amend Section 10.28.080 of the Municipal Code as follows: a) amend Sausalito Municipal Code
Section 10.28.080.I.3 (Management Plan) to remove the words "for approval" in the sentence "Prior
to commencing operation, the shelter operator shall provide a written management plan to the
Director for approval" and add the words "(to the extent such services are required)" after the phrase
"The management plan shall address"; and b) eliminate Sausalito Municipal Code Section
10.28.080.I.4 (Annual Report).
         2015-2023 Objectives: Support implementation of the Homeless Countywide Continuum
         of Care and continue to publicize the emergency 211 call system. In 2015, amend
         Sausalito Municipal Code Section 10.28.080.I.3 and Sausalito Municipal Code Section
         10.28.080.I.4 as specified in Program 27.
Goal 6.0: Implementing Environmental Sustainability
28. Local Green Building Regulations
(Policy 6.1 Green Building, Policy 6.2 Sustainable Construction, Policy 6.4 Transportation
Alternatives)
Green building is also known as green construction or sustainable building, and refers to using
environmentally responsible and resource-efficient processes throughout the life cycle of a
building, from its conceptual phases to deconstruction. Local Green Building regulations (e.g.,
Marin County “Green Building, Energy Retrofit, & Solar Transformation” or BERST) aim to reduce
the overall impact of the built environment on human health, the environment, and resources.
Community Development Department staff will be tasked with the development of local Green
Building regulations consistent with the State Green Building Code, to require and encourage
residents and the development sector to build green.
Examples of green regulations include:
         •     Incorporating sustainable materials in new construction or remodels;
         •     Creating healthy indoor environments with minimal pollutants; and
         •     Landscaping that utilizes native plants to reduce water usage.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page II - 25
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

The City will include community participation by residents and the construction sector in the
preparation of the Green Building regulations, and market the information upon completion.
          2015-2023 Objectives: The City will adopt local Green Building regulations, including
          appropriate policies and programs in 2015. The preparation process will include
          community input from City residents and the construction sector. The completed
          documents will be provided to residents, developers, and architects who wish to build in
          Sausalito.
29. Climate Action Plan and Sustainability
(Policy 6.3 Alternative Energy, Policy 6.5 Jobs/Housing Balance)
As the State of California continues to develop environmental laws and increased mandatory
reporting requirements of greenhouse gas emissions, the City would benefit from integrating
greenhouse gas reduction measures into its General Plan and City infrastructure. The City
Council adopted Resolution No. 4935 in 2008, to join ICLEI – Local Governments for
Sustainability (International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives) as a full member, and
participation in the Cities for Climate Protection Campaign. As a participant, the City pledged to
take a leadership role in promoting public awareness about the causes and impacts of climate
change.
In collaboration with ABAG, the Marin Climate & Energy Partnership (MCEP) and PG&E, the City
has completed both municipal and community-wide Greenhouse Gas Emissions Inventories.
These inventories give an accounting of greenhouse gases emitted by residents and businesses,
as well as the City’s municipal operations. It also establishes a baseline for tracking the
community’s emission trends.
The Climate Action Plan will encourage and require, to the extent required by State law, the
City, its residents, and businesses, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in many sectors and
aspects of their daily activities. The Plan would identify emission reduction targets and strategies
to accomplish those targets. These areas include building energy use, transportation, land use,
green purchasing, waste and water use. Energy use, in particular, may be significantly reduced in
the community by defining emissions reduction strategies related to building construction and
operation. The mandatory and encouraged measures would include the local Green Building
regulations, to achieve a wider net reduction in emissions.
Sausalito's Sustainability Commission is spearheading a comprehensive educational campaign on
sustainability, and will be formulating plans and policies for consideration by the City Council.
Topic areas addressed by the Sustainability Commission include: 1) Waste reduction, collection,
and disposal; 2) Recycling and reuse; 3) Alternative energy sources and energy efficiency; 4)
Pollution and hazardous waste; 5) Ways to minimize environmental degradation.
          2015-2023 Objectives: Adopt the Climate Action Plan in 2015. Provide community
          outreach and education to residents and the development sector to include their inputs
          on sustainability in new and existing building structures.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page II - 26
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

Goal 7.0: Promoting Community Involvement
30. Ongoing Community Education and Outreach
(Policy 7.1 Community Participation, Policy 7.2 Public Review of Development)
In late 2009, the City Council appointed the Housing Element Task Force, comprised of City
Council and Planning Commission representatives, as well as City residents. The Task Force has
held over 45 public meetings, including three publicly noticed Community Workshops to engage
residents and property owners in the decision-making process.
In addition to the City’s direct efforts, Sausalito residents have also formed grassroots
organizations to forward their concerns with regards to the potential impacts of specific
strategies proposed in the draft Housing Element.
Following adoption of the 2009-2014 Housing Element, several programs began implementation
through City staff work and initiatives by various agencies. The public meetings held by the
Planning Commission and City Council continued to serve as platforms for residents to comment
and provide input on specific items discussed for implementation. In addition, and the Annual
Housing Element Progress Report is presented at City Council meetings where public comment
may be given.
As part of an effective implementation program, City staff members will post information and
assistance programs on affordable housing on the City’s website to provide resources for
homeowners, renters, and property owners.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Continue to include residents and community organizations in the
         implementation of this Housing Element, by publicizing public meetings through the local
         newspapers, City website, and email lists, and taking public comment and feedback at
         such meetings.
31. Housing Element Monitoring/Annual Report
(Policy 7.3 Housing Element Implementation)
The Community Development Department is responsible for establishing the regular monitoring
of the Housing Element, and preparing an Annual Progress Report for review by the public, City
decision-makers and submittal to State HCD, by April 1 of each year.
The reports need to show:
     •   A report of Sausalito’s annual building activity, including moderate, low, and very low-
         income units and mixed-income multi-family projects;
     •   A report summary for above moderate income units;
     •   Progress on the Regional Housing Needs Allocation; and
     •   The implementation status of various programs.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page II - 27
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

         2015-2023 Objectives: The Community Development Department will review the
         Housing Element annually and provide opportunities for public participation, in
         conjunction with the submission of the City’s Annual Progress Report to the State
         Department of Housing and Community Development by April 1st of each year.
32. Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) Housing Needs Process
(Policy 7.3 Housing Element Implementation)
Actively monitor and participate in ABAG’s future Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA)
planning process, and provide ongoing reporting to Council.
The City Council has appointed an ABAG delegate, and has participated at the ABAG RHNA
planning meetings for the next housing planning cycle to bring perspective and actual data from
Sausalito for ABAG’s consideration, and will continue to provide reports to the City Council on
the projected and confirmed RHNA numbers, until the end of the planning cycle.
         2015-2023 Objectives: The City Council’s ABAG delegate will continue to monitor,
         participate and provide reports to the City Council on the preparation and confirmation
         of the RHNA for the next Housing Element planning cycle.
33. Staff Affordable Housing Training and Education
(Policy 7.3 Housing Element Implementation)
In order to effectively administer available housing programs to residents, designated City staff
needs to be responsible for providing information, responding to questions, and making
referrals to appropriate programs. A budget should also be set aside for the designated staff to
receive training. Training could include attendance at relevant sessions held by public agencies,
or meetings with local organizations such Marin Housing, to gain familiarity with the
implementation of existing and new offered programs.
         2015-2023 Objectives: Designated City staff members shall attend training sessions and
         provide on-going assistance to homeowners, renters, and developers by posting
         information on the City’s website and taking public queries.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page II - 28
 Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

Table 2.1: Implementing Programs – Summary 2015-2023
 Implementing           Program             2015-2023           Funding Responsible     Time
 Program                Summary             Objective           Source  Entity          Frame
 PRESERVING HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD ASSETS
 1. Code                As part of the      Continue to provide General Community
 Enforcement and        City’s normal       informational       Fund    Development     Provide
 Public Information     Code                handouts on                 Department;     information on
                        Enforcement         available                   Marin Housing   volunteer
                        process, offer      rehabilitation and                          service
                        useful referral     energy retrofit                             organizations
                        information from    assistance. Provide                         beginning in
                        Marin Housing,      information on                              2015.
                        P&E, and            volunteer service
                        community           organizations on
                        service clubs.      City website.
 2. Residential         Provide             Publicize the Marin County  Community
 Rehabilitation Loan    information on      Housing Rehab       CDBG    Development     Ongoing
 and Energy Retrofit    available financial program, Marin      funds;  Department;
 Programs               assistance for      Clean Energy, and   PG&E;   Marin
                        home repairs to     PG&E energy         Marin   Housing;
                        very low income     retrofit programs   Clean   PG&E; Marin
                        households,         on City website and Energy  Clean Energy
                        including           through brochures
                        liveaboard          at City Hall and
                        residents, and      other community
                        information on      locations. Seek to
                        energy retrofit     assist eight very
                        programs.           low income
                                            households.
 3. Historic Design     Preserve and        Disseminate the     General Community       Update
 Preservation           maintain historic   City's brochure on  Fund    Development     regulations in
 Regulations and        structures, and     funding sources for         Department      2015.
 Incentives             revitalize older    historic
                        housing and         preservation.
                        neighborhoods.      Update Historic
                        Pursue state        Preservation
                        grants for historic regulations in
                        preservation        Municipal Code and
                        actions.            Zoning Ordinance.
 4. Residential         Ensure future       Continue to provide Fees    Community
 Design Review          development         design review to            Development     Ongoing
                        projects maintain   ensure that new             Department;
                        the small-town      projects and                Planning
                        character of the    modifications of            Commission
                        community.          existing buildings
                                            are consistent with
                                            the small-town
                                            character of
                                            Sausalito.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                 Page II - 29
Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

 Implementing           Program           2015-2023           Funding     Responsible     Time
 Program                Summary           Objective           Source      Entity          Frame
 5. Condominium         Provide           Evaluate            General     Community       Evaluate Zoning
 Conversion             protections for   strengthening       Fund;       Development     Ordinance text
 Regulations            tenants in        regulations to      Potential   Department;     amendments by
                        apartments        extend inclusionary In-Lieu Fee Planning        2018.
                        proposed for      requirements to     revenues    Commission;
                        conversion to     smaller projects                City Council
                        condominiums.     and prohibit
                                          conversions during
                                          periods of low
                                          rental vacancy
                                          rates. Examine
                                          relief options for
                                          long-term
                                          homeowners.
 6. Preservation of     Maintain          Preserve 5          General     Community       Within 2015-
 Existing Rental        affordability in  extremely low, 45   Fund        Development     2023 planning
 Housing                income-restricted very low, 15 low                Department      period.
                        housing for low   income and 7
                        and moderate      moderate income
                        income            housing units.
                        households.       Require long-term
                                          affordability
                                          controls in future
                                          affordable housing
                                          projects.
 ENCOURAGING DIVERSITY IN HOUSING
 7. Residential and     Provide adequate  Maintain site       General     Community       Update annually
 Mixed Use Site         sites to meet     inventory. Provide  Fund        Development     concurrently
 Inventory              Sausalito’s share inventory and                   Department      with Annual
                        of regional       development                                     Housing Element
                        housing needs.    incentive                                       Progress
                                          information to                                  Report..
                                          developers.
 8. Mixed Use           Facilitate        Implement VMU       General     Community       Monitor as part
 Zoning in              provision of      requirements in     Fund        Development     of Annual
 Commercial             mixed income,     designated                      Department;     Housing Element
 Districts              upper story       commercial                      Planning        progress report.
                        residential use   districts and                   Commission
                        above ground      monitor
                        floor commercial. effectiveness in
                                          providing housing .
 9. Non-Traditional     Support the       Evaluate the        General     Community       Evaluate zoning
 Housing Types          provision of non- modification of     Fund        Development     modifications by
                        traditional,      zoning regulations              Department;     2017.
                        innovative        to allow for the                Planning
                        housing types to  development of                  Commission;
                        meet unique       alternative housing             City Council
                        needs.            models suited to
                                          the community.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                   Page II - 30
Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

 Implementing           Program          2015-2023              Funding Responsible     Time
 Program                Summary          Objective              Source  Entity          Frame
 10. Accessory          Provide a         Implement the         General Community       Initiate amnesty
 Dwelling Units         streamlined       City’s ADU            Fund    Development     program in
                        process for       regulations and               Department;     2015. Monitor
                        property owners   seek to create an             Planning        progress in
                        to establish new  average of two                Commission;     conjunction with
                        ADUs on their     new ADUs                      City Council    Annual Housing
                        property, and to  annually, for a total                         Element
                        bring existing    of 16 ADUs during                             progress report,
                        ADUs up to code.  the planning                                  and re-evaluate
                                          period. Initiate                              standards if
                                          another amnesty                               permitting falls
                                          program, and seek                             below 2 ADUs
                                          to legalize a                                 for more than 2
                                          minimum of 24                                 consecutive
                                          existing ADUs.                                years.
 11. Junior             Explore Junior   Evaluate and, as       General Community       Evaluate and
 Accessory Dwelling     Accessory        appropriate, adopt     Fund    Development     adopt standards,
 Units                  Dwelling Units   standards to                   Department;     as appropriate,
                        created through  facilitate Junior              Planning        by 2018
                        repurposing of   Accessory Dwelling             Commission;
                        underutilized    Units.                         City Council
                        space within
                        single-family
                        homes.
 12. Liveaboard         Maintain and     Coordinate with        General Community       Complete local
 Housing                enhance          Pelican Harbor and     Fund    Development     permitting
                        liveaboards as a Sausalito Yacht to             Department      processes, and
                        permanent form   obtain CUP for                                 increase of
                        of affordable    existing                                       liveaboard
                        housing in       liveaboards.                                   capacity in
                        Sausalito.       Coordinate with                                Sausalito Yacht
                                         Sausalito Yacht in                             Harbor by 2016.
                                         amendment of                                   Monitor
                                         BCDC permit to                                 progress in
                                         increase capacity to                           conjunction with
                                         10% to                                         Annual Housing
                                         accommodate 31                                 Element
                                         additional                                     progress report.
                                         liveaboards.
                                         Establish
                                         procedures for
                                         implementation of
                                         local low/mod
                                         income occupancy
                                         requirements.
                                         Pursue improved
                                         mail service and
                                         communication
                                         with liveaboard
                                         residents.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                  Page II - 31
Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

 Implementing           Program           2015-2023            Funding    Responsible     Time
 Program                Summary           Objective            Source     Entity          Frame
 ENHANCING HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
 13. Affordable         Facilitate        Consider financial   Potential  Community       Within 2015-
 Housing                development of    and regulatory       Affordable Development     2023 planning
 Development            high quality      incentives to        Housing    Department;     period.
 Assistance             affordable        private developers   Fund       City Council
                        housing with      upon request, for    revenues
                        financial and     the development of
                        regulatory        high quality
                        incentives.       affordable housing
                                          for families and
                                          seniors.
 14. Local              Establish a local Upon adoption of a   Potential  Community       Upon adoption
 Affordable Housing     fund to receive   program that         Affordable Development     of program
 Fund                   monies which will generates in-lieu    Housing    Department;     generating in-
                        be used to        housing fees,        Fund       City Council    lieu housing
                        provide           establish a          revenues                   fees.
                        affordable        dedicated
                        housing.          Affordable Housing
                                          Fund. Consult with
                                          Marin County in
                                          developing
                                          Regulations to
                                          govern Fund
                                          oversight and
                                          expenditures.
 15. Partnerships       Partner with      Explore              Potential  Community       Within 2015-
 for Affordable         affordable        partnerships with a  Affordable Development     2023 planning
 Housing                housing           variety of           Housing    Department;     period.
                        developers to     affordable housing   Fund       City Council
                        leverage their    providers, utilizing revenues
                        expertise and     the Nonprofit
                        access to funds.  Housing
                                          Association of
                                          Northern California
                                          as a resource.
 16. Homebuyer          Explore financial Continue             Federal    Community       MCC's - Ongoing
 Assistance             assistance        participation in     funds      Development     outreach. BMR's
                        programs for low  MCC program and                 Department;     - pending
                        and moderate      publicize MCCs as               Marin Housing   adoption of
                        income            they become                                     inclusionary
                        homebuyers.       available. Pending                              program.
                                          adoption of local
                                          inclusionary
                                          program, contact
                                          Marin Housing re:
                                          BMR program.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                   Page II - 32
Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

 Implementing           Program            2015-2023             Funding    Responsible     Time
 Program                Summary            Objective             Source     Entity          Frame
 17. Section 8          Assist extremely   Continue to provide   HUD        Community       Ongoing.
 Rental Assistance      low and very low   information and       Section 8  Development
                        income             refer tenants to                 Department;
                        households with    Marin Housing for                Marin
                        rental payments.   Section 8                        Housing
                                           assistance.                      Authority
                                           Encourage rental
                                           property owners to
                                           register units with
                                           Marin Housing.
 18. Inclusionary       Utilize local      Prepare an            General    Community       Initiate Nexus
 Housing                zoning to require  Inclusionary          Fund; In-  Development     Study by 2018
 Regulations            affordable units   Housing Nexus and     Lieu Fee   Department;     and develop
                        within market      In-Lieu Fee Study     revenues   Planning        inclusionary
                        rate development   and develop                      Commission;     regulations as
                        and/or generate    incentive-based                  City Council    appropriate.
                        in-lieu housing    inclusionary
                        fees.              housing regulations
                                           as appropriate.
 REDUCING GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
 19.                    Reduce             Adopt resolution to   General    Community       By 2016..
 Fee Deferrals          production costs   waive 100%            Fund;      Development
 and/or Waivers for     of affordable      application           Potential  Department;
 Affordable Housing     housing.           processing fees for   Affordable City Council
                                           projects with min.    Housing
                                           5% ELI units.         Fund
                                           Provide               Revenues
                                           information to
                                           affordable housing
                                           community
                                           regarding fee
                                           deferrals,
                                           reductions, and
                                           waivers.
 20. Density Bonus      Grant density      Implement City's      General    Community
 and Other              bonuses for        density bonus         Fund       Development     Ongoing.
 Incentives and         projects of at     provisions, and                  Department;
 Concessions for        least 5 units,     encourage                        Planning
 Affordable Housing     according to State applicants to utilize            Commission;
                        law, and reduce    Tier 1 incentives/               City Council
                        barriers for       concessions to
                        utilizing density  minimize
                        bonuses.           neighborhood
                                           impacts.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page II - 33
Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

 Implementing           Program           2015-2023             Funding    Responsible     Time
 Program                Summary           Objective             Source     Entity          Frame
 PROMOTING EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
 21. Fair Housing       Promote fair      Refer fair housing    General    Community       Ongoing.
 Program                housing practices complaints to Fair    Fund;      Development
                        and prevent       Housing of Marin.     CDBG       Department;
                        housing           Publicize the fair               Fair Housing
                        discrimination.   housing program.                 of Marin
 22. Sausalito          Support Sausalito Support the efforts   General    Community       Adopt Plan of
 Senior Services        Village and Age   of Sausalito Village  Fund       Development     Action by 2018.
                        Friendly Task     to allow seniors to              Department
                        Force programs    age in place and
                        for seniors,      promote housing
                        including support assistance for
                        services and      seniors. Develop a
                        volunteers.       Citywide Plan of
                                          Action for seniors
                                          with Age-Friendly
                                          Sausalito Task
                                          Force.
 23. Home Sharing       Facilitate        Support               General    Community       Beginning in
 and Tenant             homesharing and   organizations that    Fund;      Development     2015.
 Matching               tenant matching   facilitate house      CDBG       Department;
 Opportunities          programs for      sharing; actively
                        seniors and other promote through
                        single person     senior citizen
                        households.       organizations.
                                          Work with Age
                                          Friendly Task Force
                                          to explore
                                          establishing a local
                                          shared housing
                                          program.
 24. Reasonable         Ensure accessible Implement City's      General    Community
 Accommodation          housing is        adopted               Fund       Development     Ongoing.
 Procedures             available to      procedures to allow              Department;
                        persons with      reasonable                       Planning
                        disabilities.     accessibility                    Commission;
                                          accommodations.                  City Council
 25. Universal          Increase          Distribute City's     General    Community
 Design / Visitability  accessibility in  Universal Design      Fund       Development     Ongoing.
                        housing through   and Visitability                 Department
                        Universal Design  Principals brochure
                        and Visitability. at City Hall, through
                                          Sausalito Village
                                          and on City
                                          website.
 26. Housing for        Recognize the     Support liveaboard    General    Community        By 2017.
 Marine Workers         special housing   & other affordable    Fund;      Development
                        needs of local    housing which         Potential  Department;
                        marine workers.   address the needs     Affordable City Council
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                    Page II - 34
Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

 Implementing           Program             2015-2023            Funding  Responsible       Time
 Program                Summary             Objective            Source   Entity            Frame
                                            of marine workers.   Housing
                                            Est. procedures for  Fund
                                            implementation of    revenues
                                            local low/mod
                                            income occupancy
                                            requirements.
 27. Homeless           Support the         Support              General  Community         Amend the Code
 Continuum of Care      homeless and        implementation of    Fund     Development       in 2015.
                        persons at risk of  the Homeless                  Department
                        homelessness in     Countywide
                        obtaining shelter   Continuum of Care
                        and services.       and continue to
                                            publicize the
                                            emergency 211 call
                                            system. Amend
                                            Sausalito Municipal
                                            Code Section
                                            10.28.080.I.3 and
                                            Sausalito Municipal
                                            code Section
                                            10.28.080.I.4 as
                                            specified in
                                            Program 27.
 IMPLEMENTING ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
 28. Local Green        Update the local    Adopt local Green    General  Community         By 2015
 Building               building            Building             Fund     Development
 Regulations            regulations to      regulations,                  Department;
                        require             including                     City Council
                        sustainable and     appropriate policies
                        building practices. and programs.
 29. Climate Action     Track City’s        Adopt and            General  Community          Adopt Climate
 Plan and               greenhouse gas      implement the        Fund     Development       Action Plan by in
 Sustainability         emissions and       Climate Action                Department;       2015.
                        implement           Plan. Conduct                 Sustainability
                        strategies to       education and                 Commission;
                        reduce emissions.   outreach on                   Planning
                        Educate the         sustainability.               Commission;
                        community on                                      City Council
                        sustainability
                        practices.
 PROMOTING COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
 30. Ongoing            Ensure ongoing      Continue to involve  General  Community         Provide public
 Community              community           residents and        Fund     Development       review of
 Education and          involvement in      community                     Department        Housing Element
 Outreach               the Housing         organizations in                                progress in
                        Element through     Housing Element                                 conjunction with
                        dissemination of    implementation..                                Annual Housing
                        information after   Provide input on
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page II - 35
Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

 Implementing           Program            2015-2023             Funding Responsible     Time
 Program                Summary            Objective             Source  Entity          Frame
                        the Housing        Housing Element                               Element
                        Element is         progress through                              progress report.
                        adopted.           the Annual Report.
 31. Housing            Provide            The Community         General Community       By April 1st
 Element                monitoring and     Development           Fund    Development     every year.
 Monitoring/            annual reporting   Department will               Department
 Annual Report          of the Housing     review the Housing
                        Element            Element annually,
                        implementation     provide
                        progress, in       opportunities for
                        compliance with    public participation,
                        State law.         and submit an
                                           annual report to
                                           the State.
 32. Association of     Actively monitor   The City Council’s    General City Council    Through the end
 Bay Area               and participate in Sausalito ABAG        Fund                    of the planning
 Governments            ABAG’s future      delegate will                                 cycle in 2023.
 (ABAG) Housing         Regional Housing   continue to
 Needs Process          Needs Allocation   monitor and
                        (RHNA) planning    provide reports to
                        process, and       the City Council on
                        provide ongoing    the preparation
                        reporting to       and confirmation of
                        Council.           the RHNA for the
                                           next Housing
                                           Element cycle.
 33. Staff Affordable   Designate City     Designated City       General Community       Beginning in
 Housing Training       staff responsible  staff members shall   Fund    Development     2015.
 and Education          for addressing     begin training                Department;
                        housing issues     sessions and                  City Council
                        and administering  provide on-going
                        housing            assistance to
                        programs.          homeowners,
                                           renters, and
                                           developers.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                   Page II - 36
Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

Summary of Quantified Objectives: 2015-2023
The following table summarizes the City’s quantified objectives for the 2015-2023 Housing
Element planning period. The City’s new construction objectives reflect Sausalito’s regional
housing needs allocation (RHNA) for 2015-2023; the rehabilitation objectives reflect Marin
Housing’s Rehabilitation Loan Program; and the conservation objectives reflect conserving
affordable units within the three affordable rental projects and conserving the 34 rent and
income-restricted berths in Galilee Harbor. The Area Median Income (AMI) is the midpoint in the
family-income range for Marin County and is used as the basis to stratify incomes into very-low,
low, moderate and above moderate ranges.
Table 2.2: Quantified Objectives for Sausalito’s 2015-2023 Housing Element planning period
                                          RHNA                   Rehabilitation          Conservation
Income Level
                                        Objectives               Objectives**            Objectives***
Extremely Low*
                                            13                        --                       5
(0-30% AMI)
Very Low
                                            13                        5                       45
(31-50% AMI)
Low
                                            14                        --                      15
(51-80% AMI)
Moderate
                                            16                        --                       7
(81-120% AMI)
Above Moderate
                                            23                        --                       --
(>120% AMI)
Totals                                      79                        5                       72
*Of the City’s total 26 unit very low income RHNA allocation, half is allocated to extremely-low income
households, and half to very low income households.
** The Rehabilitation Objectives are based on Program 2 described in Section B. Implementing Programs
in this Chapter. The City will strive to assist eight very-low income households during the 2009-2014
planning period to participate in the Residential Rehabilitation Loan Program administered by Marin
Housing.
*** Conservation Objectives: 34 berths in Galilee Harbor are income and rent restricted. Based on Galilee
Harbor Community Association use restrictions, 5 berths are reserved for extremely low income, 7 for
very low, 15 for low, and 7 for moderate income. All 38 units of the three senior housing projects in
Sausalito (Rotary Village with 22 units, Rotary Place with 10 units, and Bee Street Housing with 6 units) are
at the very low income level, as published on Marin County’s list of affordable projects.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                             Page II - 37
  Chapter II – Housing Plan                                                                        Adopted January 13, 2015

CHAPTER III – HOUSING NEEDS SUMMARY
A. Existing Housing Needs
State Housing Element Law requires the City to consider a wide range of factors that have an
impact on housing supply, demand, and affordability, such as population and employment
growth, the condition of the housing stock, and the needs of segments of the population with
special needs, such as the elderly, persons with disabilities, and large families or single parent
households. This chapter summarizes the key points of the City’s existing housing needs;
additional information is available in Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment.
1. Population Projections and Employment Trends
Sausalito’s population has remained relatively constant from 7,152 people in 1990 to 7,061
people in 2010. The age breakdown of the community’s population in 2010 was strongly skewed
towards those aged 25 and older. According to the Marin Commission on Aging 1, the greatest
increases in population age groups in Marin County from 2000 to 2020 are expected to be
persons 60 years or older. The 2010 Census shows that one quarter of Marin residents are 60
years of age or older, and about two-thirds of those aged 85 and older are women.
According to data compiled by ABAG for Bay Area Housing Elements (and based on the 2007-
2011 American Community Survey 2), 4,581 of Sausalito's 7,061 residents are employed, with
approximately one-quarter employed in professional, management, scientific or administrative
occupations. Other primary industries include education services (17%), finance and real estate
(15%), manufacturing (8%), retail trade (6%), wholesale trade (6%), and other services (6%).
information. The majority of employed Sausalito residents were employed by for-profit
organizations (54%) or self-employed (23%).
The 2013 ABAG projections anticipate a slowing rate of job growth in Sausalito, with a projected
660 new jobs to be added between 2010-2020 to the existing employment base of 6,200 jobs,
and just 320 new jobs to be added in the following 2020-2030 decade. In contrast, the ratio of
jobs per households is expected to increase in Sausalito from 1:1.51 in 2010 to 1:1.63 in 2020. A
highly skewed ratio often implies that workers must commute far from where they live,
although a balanced ratio towards 1:1 does not necessarily guarantee a reduction in commute
trips. Therefore, one focus of the Housing Element is to address the issue of matching housing
costs and types to the needs and incomes of the community’s employed residents.
1
  Marin Commission on Aging, Marin County Area Plan for Aging 2009-2012
2The American Community Survey (ACS) is a relatively new survey conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. It
uses a series of monthly samples to produce annually updated estimates formerly surveyed via the
decennial census long-form sample. Because the ACS represents a sample rather than a complete census
of the population, use of a five year average provides the most accurate data.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                            Page III - 1
  Chapter III – Housing Needs Summary                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

2. Summary of Housing Needs
The summary of existing housing needs is organized into four areas: housing availability, housing
affordability, housing adequacy and special needs households. These needs are summarized in
Table 3.1. Items 3 through 6 in this section explain the four areas in detail.
 Table 3.1: Existing Housing Needs in Sausalito
 Housing Availability                                   Housing Affordability
 Total Housing Units               4,536                Overpaying Households (>30% Income on Rent)
 Total Occupied Units              4,112                Total                                  1,655     40%
 Owner-Occupied                    2,088          51%
 Renter-Occupied                   2,044          49%   Renters                                  865     41%
                                                           - Low Income Renters                  555     76%
 Total Vacant Units                  424         9.3%        (<80% AMI)
 Owner Vacancy Rate                    50        2.1%
 Rental Vacancy Rate                 140         5.8%   Owners                                   790     39%
 Seasonal, Recreational              158                   - Low Income Owners                   360     64%
 Other Vacant                          76                    (<80% AMI)
 Housing Adequacy                                       Special Needs Households/Persons
 Overcrowded Households (>1.01
 Persons/Room)                                          Households with Seniors (65+)          1,083     26%
       Renter                           0          0%      - Senior Homeowners                    820  (75%)
       Owner*                          15         <1%      - Senior Renters                       263  (25%)
                                                           - Seniors Living Alone                 480  (45%)
                                                        Disabled Persons                       1,166     16%
 Est. Substandard Units                 5               Female-Headed Families                    146     4%
                                                        Large Households (5+ persons)              41     1%
                                                        Farm/fishery workers                       19    <1%
 *Severely Overcrowded (> 1.5 persons per               Homeless Persons                           23    <1%
 room)
Sources: 2010 U.S. Census; 2013 ABAG Data for Bay Area Housing Elements; Sausalito Building Department
(Substandard housing units); 2013 Marin Point in Time Homeless Count.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                                    Page III - 2
  Chapter III – Housing Needs Summary                                                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

3. Housing Availability
Sausalito’s 2010 housing stock consists of 4,536 housing units, of which roughly half are single-
family attached and detached homes and condominiums, and half are multi-family apartment
units, duplexes and triplexes. Residential growth is limited -- the 2010 Census recorded a net
increase of only 25 units during the past decade, with the 22 unit affordable senior project
developed by Rotary Housing comprising the bulk of these new units. Two important forms of
affordable housing in Sausalito – accessory dwelling units and liveaboards – have historically
been undercounted by the Census, and are integral to the City’s Housing Element sites strategy.
Sausalito is the only community in Marin County which evidenced a decline in its population
between 2000 and 2010, decreasing four percent from 7,330 to 7,061. Today, 47 percent of
Sausalito’s households are single person households, and 26 percent of households are seniors
(age 65 and above), contributing to an average household size of just 1.7 persons.
Housing tenure in Sausalito is a balance between owners (51%) and renters (49%). While the
2010 Census identifies 424 units as vacant (9.3%), over one-third of the vacant units are
seasonal or vacation homes. The vacancy rate among the City’s owner housing is 2.1 percent,
and 5.8 percent among the City’s rental housing (2010 Census).
4. Housing Affordability
The level of overpayment is commonly used as a measure of housing affordability.
Overpayment is defined by State and Federal standards as spending more than 30 percent of
gross household income on housing. By this standard, an estimated 41 percent of renters and 39
percent of homeowners in Sausalito overpaid for housing in 2010. Among low income
households (those earning less than 80 percent of the area median income, or AMI), 76 percent
of low income renters overpaid and 64 percent of low income owners overpaid.
An assessment of the affordability of current market rents and housing prices in Sausalito
reveals the following. Citywide apartment rents are above the level affordable to very low and
low income households, making it difficult for lower income occupations such as home-health
care providers, retail and restaurant workers, and childcare providers to rent in Sausalito. For-
sale housing prices in Sausalito are well beyond the reach of moderate income households,
impacting the ability of occupations such as school teachers, marine workers, and public safety
personnel to purchase housing where they work.
Survey data on liveaboards and accessory dwelling units (ADUs) collected by the City in 2010
document that these forms of housing provide an important source of affordable housing in the
community. Total liveaboard housing costs (including berth rents; liveaboard, parking and
storage fees; utility costs; and pump out charges) fall well within the levels affordable to low
income households in Marin County. And rental information on nearly 100 accessory dwelling
units in Sausalito indicates 28 percent of rented ADUs are affordable to very low income
households, 57 percent are affordable to low income households, and 15 percent are affordable
to moderate income households. (Refer to Chapter IV – Housing Resources for the more
detailed discussion of liveaboard and ADU rents.)
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                           Page III - 3
  Chapter III – Housing Needs Summary                                                           Adopted January 13, 2015

5. Housing Adequacy
A common measure of housing adequacy and quality is the age distribution of the housing stock.
Approximately 83 percent of the 4,396 housing units in Sausalito in 2010 were built before
1980. Of these units, more than 50 percent were built before 1960 and 25 percent were built
before 1940. As a result, Sausalito’s housing stock is old. A general rule in the housing industry is
that structures over 30 years typically begin to show signs of deterioration and require
reinvestment to maintain or upgrade their quality. However, despite the advanced age of the
housing stock in Sausalito, the general condition of the units is very good due to ongoing repairs,
maintenance, rehabilitation, and reconstruction. The City’s Building Division has reported that
there are five dwellings in Sausalito that are substandard and in need of repair and not currently
under permit.
The incidence of overcrowded housing is a general measure of whether there is an available
supply of adequately sized housing units. The State defines an overcrowded unit as one
occupied by more than 1.01 persons per room excluding bathrooms and kitchens. A unit with
more than 1.5 persons per room is considered severely overcrowded. According to the 2007-
2011 American Community Survey, there were an estimated 15 overcrowded housing units in
Sausalito, all of which are owner occupied and classified as severely overcrowded (more than
1.5 persons per room). 3
3 The American Community Survey generates household data based on sampling, and in instances
where the universe being sampled is quite small, (such as overcrowded households in Sausalito), the
results are subject to a high margin of error.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                           Page III - 4
  Chapter III – Housing Needs Summary                                                           Adopted January 13, 2015

6. Special Needs Households
Certain segments of the community may have particular difficulties in finding decent, affordable
housing because of their special needs and circumstances. In Sausalito, these special needs
groups include seniors, persons with disabilities, single-parent and female-headed households,
large households, farmworker households, marine workers, and the homeless.
a. Seniors
Seniors are a significant special needs group in Sausalito, with 21 percent of the City’s
population age 65 and above in 2010, nearly double the 11 percent share of seniors statewide.
Over one-quarter of Sausalito’s households are headed by seniors, with homeowners comprising
three-quarters of the community’s 1,083 senior households and renters comprising the
remaining one-quarter. An estimated 480 seniors live alone (44% of senior households),
approximately 40 percent are low income (<80% AMI) and 8 percent live in poverty.
With the overall aging of society and the community in Sausalito, the need for affordable and
specialized housing for older residents will grow. The particular housing needs of this group
include the need for smaller and more efficient housing, for barrier-free and accessible housing,
and for a wide variety of housing with health care and/or personal services, including the
provision of a continuum of care as elderly households become less self-reliant. Typical forms of
housing to meet the needs of seniors include smaller attached or detached housing for
independent living (both market rate and below-market rate); “granny” or “in-law” ADUs and
housing where an in-home care-giver may reside; shared housing; age-restricted subsidized
rental developments; assisted living facilities; and skilled nursing homes.
Low- and very-low-income seniors often cannot afford the cost of assisted living facilities in
Marin. According to a report in 2009 by the Marin County Division of Aging, the average basic
rent for assisted living was between $3,500 to $4,000 per month for a single bed (room,
bathroom, and three meals a day). Personal care was an additional cost above the basic housing
charge.
Sausalito has three small affordable housing projects for seniors. Bee Street Housing is owned
and managed by the non-profit Ecumenical Association for Housing (EAH), and Rotary Village
and Rotary Place are owned by Rotary Housing. The three facilities provide a total of 38 units of
affordable rental housing for very-low income seniors.
b. Persons with Disabilities
Physical and mental disabilities can hinder access to traditionally designed housing units as well
as potentially limit the ability to earn income. Disabilities refer to mental, physical, or health
conditions that last over six months. The most recent available data from the 2000 Census
documented 1,166 persons with one or more disabilities in Sausalito, representing 16 percent of
the population. Among the City’s senior citizens (age 65 and over), 300, or one third, were
identified as having a disability. Depending on the type and severity of disabilities, as well as
personal preference and lifestyle, this group requires a wide range of housing types to serve its
needs. The design of housing, accessibility modifications, proximity to services and transit, and
group living opportunities represent some of the considerations and accommodations important
in serving the disabled population.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                              Page III - 5
  Chapter III – Housing Needs Summary                                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

The Golden Gate Regional Center (GGRC) currently provides services to eight persons with
developmental disabilities residing in the 94965 zip code, generating an estimated need for
three housing units. The GGRC has identified a number of community-based housing types
appropriate for persons living with a developmental disability: licensed community care facilities
and group homes; supervised apartment settings with support services; SB 962 homes (for
persons with special health care and intensive support needs); and for persons able to live more
independently, rent subsidized homes; inclusionary housing, and Section 8 rental vouchers.
Sausalito’s Housing Element set forth several programs which seek to encourage and facilitate
housing for persons with disabilities, enable group homes and ensure reasonable
accommodation (9. Non-Traditional Housing Types, 10. Accessory Dwelling Units, 11. Junior
Accessory Dwelling Units, 24. Reasonable Accommodation Procedures, 25. Universal
Design/Visitability).
c. Large Households
Large households, defined as households with five or more persons, typically consist of families
with children. The 2010 Census identifies 41 large households in Sausalito - 22 homeowners and
19 renters – representing just one percent of all households. The limited number of large
households is not surprising as families with children comprise only ten percent of Sausalito’s
households. While large households are not a significant special needs group, the City is
interested in providing a greater range of housing options to allow families to reside in the
community.
d. Single Parent and Female-Headed Households
Single parent and female-headed households may have difficulty finding appropriately sized
housing and need affordable housing with day care and recreation programs on-site or nearby,
in proximity to schools and with access to services. Also, despite fair housing laws,
discrimination against children may make it more difficult for this group to find adequate
housing. Women in the housing market, especially the elderly, lower and moderate income
individuals, and single-parents, face significant difficulties finding housing, and both ownership
and rental units are extremely expensive relative to the incomes of many people in this
population category. In 2010 there were 146 female headed householders in family households
with no husband present, which amounted to 3.6 percent of the total number of households in
Sausalito. Nearly half of these female-headed families (62 households) included children under
the age of 18.
e. Farmworker (and Fishery Worker) Households
State law requires that jurisdictions evaluate the need for farmworker housing in the housing
element. According to the US Census, the “farmworker” occupational category includes those
working in the farming, fishing and forestry industries. In Sausalito, farmworkers are reflective of
persons working in the fishing industry, and overlaps with the community’s marine industry.
There are no agricultural uses in Sausalito and, because lots tend to be small, the demand for
landscape maintenance workers is small. Based on data from the 2007-2011 American
Community Survey, ABAG identifies just nineteen persons employed in agriculture, forestry,
fishing and hunting, which were likely those working within the fishing industry. Sausalito has a
diversity of housing types, including houseboats and liveaboards that could serve the needs of
this special needs group.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                           Page III - 6
  Chapter III – Housing Needs Summary                                                           Adopted January 13, 2015

f. Marine Workers
Marine workers are an integral part of the community’s history and the working waterfront.
Marine-related occupations including boat builders and boat repair workers, sailmakers, canvas
workers, marine surveyors, harbor masters, ship mates, captains and merchant marines, among
others. Many of Sausalito’s marine workers reside on liveaboards, and the majority are lower
income. The Galilee Harbor co-op was specifically established to provide an affordable
liveaboard community for Sausalito’s artists and maritime workers, and since 2003 has provided
38 rent- and income-restricted berths. Support of similar and other affordable housing options
consistent with existing zoning would help workers to locate in Sausalito, and showcase the skills
of local marine workers.
g. Individuals and Families who are Homeless
Homelessness continues to be one of most visible reminders of the pressing needs facing
families and individuals in marginal economic, housing, and health conditions. This population
consists of a wide range of persons and families suffering from domestic violence, mental illness,
substance abuse, and joblessness among a number of other conditions.
According to the 2013 Marin County Point in Time Count of Homeless Persons, there were 23
persons counted in Sausalito that met the Marin County Health and Human Services definition
of “unsheltered” homeless. 4 The Point in Time Count identified 368 unsheltered homeless
Countywide, and a total of 933 sheltered and unsheltered homeless persons.
The nearest emergency shelters to Sausalito are located in Novato and San Rafael. The Fireside
Apartments, located less than a mile away in Mill Valley, offers ten of its fifty units as permanent
supportive housing for homeless families.
4
  The County defines unsheltered as any person that resides in a place not meant for human habitation,
such as a car, park, sidewalk, open space or on the street.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                               Page III - 7
  Chapter III – Housing Needs Summary                                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

B. Future Housing Needs
State Housing Element law 5 requires that each city and county develop local housing programs
to meet its respective “fair share” of existing and future housing needs for all income groups, as
determined by the jurisdiction’s council of governments. This “fair share” allocation concept
seeks to ensure that each jurisdiction accepts responsibility for the housing needs of its resident
population across all income categories, as well as the jurisdiction’s projected share of regional
housing growth. Regional growth needs are units that need to be added in each jurisdiction to
accommodate the forecasted number of households, as well as the number of units that would
need to be added to compensate for anticipated demolitions and changes to achieve an “ideal”
vacancy rate.
The “fair share” allocations for Sausalito and other Bay Area jurisdictions are determined by the
Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), based upon a regional housing need projection
established by the State for the 2015-2023 Housing Element cycle. Using the state’s projection,
ABAG distributed “fair share” allocations by income categories to each jurisdiction in the Bay
Area. These allocations are referred to as the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA). The
RHNA represents the minimum number of housing units each jurisdiction is required to
accommodate. The jurisdiction needs to demonstrate in its housing element that is has
“adequate sites” to accommodate its RHNA. The adequate sites analysis is one of the primary
criteria necessary to achieve certification of a housing element by the State Department of
Housing and Community Development (HCD).
Sausalito’s RHNA for the 2015-2023 planning cycle was established by ABAG at 79 housing units
(refer to Table 3.2), allocated among the four income categories. State Housing Element law
also requires an estimate of the future housing needs of “extremely low income households” (0-
30% AMI) as a subset of very low income households (0-50% AMI). Extremely low income
households comprise an estimated half of Sausalito’s very low income households, translating to
13 extremely low income housing units.
    Table 3.2: City of Sausalito Regional Housing Needs Allocation 2015-2023
    Income Level                         Percent AMI                   Housing Unit Growth Needs
    Extremely Low                         0-30% AMI                                  13
       Very Low                          31-50% AMI                                  13
    Low                                  51-80% AMI                                  14
    Moderate                             81-120% AMI                                 16
    Above Moderate                        120%+ AMI                                  23
    TOTAL                                                                            79
    * Of the total 26 unit very low income RHNA allocation, half is allocated to extremely low income
    households, and half to very low income households.
5 Government Code 65580 et seq.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                                 Page III - 8
  Chapter III – Housing Needs Summary                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

Housing Element Update 2015-2023                 Page III - 9
Chapter III – Housing Needs Summary Adopted January 13, 2015

CHAPTER IV – HOUSING RESOURCES
An important component of the Housing Element is the identification of sites for future housing
development, and an evaluation of the adequacy of these sites in fulfilling the City’s share of
regional housing needs (RHNA). This “Housing Resources” chapter describes the resources
available for development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing in Sausalito, including
sites for new housing; financial and administrative resources available to facilitate housing
production and housing-related services; and opportunities for energy conservation in existing
and new residential development as a means of reducing housing costs.
A. Sites to Accommodate the 2015-2023 RHNA
This section documents the methodology used to demonstrate the capacity of the City’s land
supply for the 2015-2023 Housing Element planning period. The methodology recognizes
Sausalito’s unique small-town character and the residents’ strong desire to preserve and
strengthen the community’s history, character and overall sense of place.
The methodology for meeting the City’s regional housing needs allocation (RHNA) employs a
balanced approach utilizing the full range of options allowed under State Housing Element law.
HCD recommends that jurisdictions provide extra capacity in their site inventory to offset sites
that may be developed at lower densities, and therefore a “buffer” is provided above the
required RHNA. Sausalito’s sites strategy includes housing units built or issued building permits
during the planning period, accessory dwelling units, liveaboards, and potential housing units on
vacant and under-utilized parcels.
This strategy acknowledges the built-out, dense development pattern of the City, its unique
demographics (very high percentage of single-person households), and significant physical
constraints to the development of new residential and mixed-use projects (e.g., steep slopes,
small lots, proximity to watercourses). Table 4.1 summarizes the potential housing units and
provides a comparison with Sausalito’s 2015-2023 RHNA. A list of sites with potential housing
units is provided in Appendix C – Residential Sites Analysis.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page IV - 1
 Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

Table 4.1: Potential Housing Units during 2015-2023 Planning Period
                                            Very                             Above                  % Total
Income Levels                                          Low      Moderate                 Totals
                                             Low                            Moderate                 Units
RHNA Targets                                  26        14          16         23          79
    R-1 District Capacity                      0         0           0         19          19          8%
    R-2-2.5 District Capacity                  0         0          50          0          50         20%
    R-3 District Capacity                     21        11          27          0          59         24%
    Commercial District Capacity (VMU)        20        10          21          0          51         20%
    Future Liveaboards1                        0        17          14          0          31         12%
    Accessory Dwelling Units2                 12        23           5          0          40         16%
Totals                                        53        61         117         19         250
Buffer (Over/under RHNA):                     27        47         101         -4         171
     1
       Represents additional liveaboard capacity in Sausalito Yacht Harbor pending issuance of BCDC
     permit and CUP by the City (refer to Housing Element Program #12)
     2
       Represents 16 new ADUs and 24 amnesty ADUs (refer to Housing Element Program #10).
       Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                    Page IV - 2
       Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                         Adopted January 13, 2015

1. Vacant and Underutilized Land
State Housing Element law requires local governments to prepare an inventory of land suitable
for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having the potential for
redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and public facilities and services to
these sites. The inventory of land suitable for residential development must be used to identify
sites that can be developed for housing within the planning period. In terms of evaluating the
adequacy of these sites to address the affordability targets established by the RHNA, State
Housing Element law provides for use of “default densities” to assess affordability. Based on its
population, Sausalito falls within the default density of 20 units/acre for providing sites
affordable to very low and low income households. For moderate income households, a
threshold of 12 units/acre is used to reflect a reasonable density for achieving moderate income
development.
Table 4.2: Acreage and Number of Parcels by Zoning District
                                                                                            Projected
              Land Use                           No. of
                                      Zoning                Acreage   Average Density       Dwelling
              Category                           Parcels
                                                                                              Units
  VACANT RESIDENTIAL SITES
  Very Low Density Residential         R-1-20         13        5.58         3.3 du/acre             13
  Low Density Residential               R-1-8           1       0.22         4.6 du/acre              1
  Medium Low Density Residential        R-1-6           5       0.65         7.8 du/acre              5
  Medium High Density Residential     R-2-2.5           7       0.91        17.5 du/acre             14
  High Density Residential                R-3           1       0.41        26.7 du/acre             11
                                    Subtotal          27       7.76                                 44
  UNDERUTILIZED TWO-FAMILY & MULTI-FAMILY SITES
  Medium High Density Residential     R-2-2.5         25        3.66        18.6 du/acre             36
  High Density Residential                R-3         16        3.08        27.0 du/acre             48
                                    Subtotal          41       6.74                                 84
  UNDERUTILIZED MIXED USE SITES
  Neighborhood Commercial               CN-1          10        1.35      20.47 du/acre              25
  Mixed Residential & Commercial           CR           9       1.12        25.3 du/acre             26
                                    Subtotal          19       2.47                                 51
  TOTAL                                               87      16.97                                179
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                         Page IV - 3
 Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

a. Residential Infill Sites
A review of all parcels within the City with residential zoning in place yields a total of 68 parcels
that are considered good candidates for infill residential development (refer to Table 4.2). On
these parcels, it is estimated that 128 new residential units could be built in the future under
existing zoning regulations.
In order to assure a meaningful analysis, a number of filters were developed in order to identify
only those properties that truly have realistic development potential. The filters indicate
parameters below which development would likely be challenging and less feasible. Please see
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis for a more detailed explanation of each
filter.
     • Parcels of 40%% average slope or more were excluded for R-2 and R-3 Districts as
          steeper slopes create more development constraints 1;
     • All landlocked parcels were removed as access would be a challenge;
     • Underutilized parcels with existing homes built after 1980 were removed;
     • All parcels less than 3,000 square feet (s.f.) in size were removed as parcels that are too
          small present challenges meeting development standards;
     • All parcels on the City’s List of Noteworthy Historic Structures were removed;
     • All parcels on the City’s list of Constructed and Approved projects were removed to
          avoid double-counting;
     • All parcels that could take on only one additional unit were included if there was
          relatively straightforward development potential. Lots that were included had
          underutilized portions, or had existing buildings where another floor could be added
          without conflicting with development standards, or had existing buildings that were
          dilapidated or abandoned;
     • All parcels that had obvious parking constraints preventing the addition of units were
          removed; and
     • Visual checks were made using Google Earth and Google Streetview, and site visits were
          made to all parcels listed, to ascertain the actual build out and visual conditions of
          buildings.
The City allows a fairly dense development pattern through the application of the zoning
regulations which allow floor area ratios of 35% and 50%, front yard setbacks of zero feet
(including corner lots), five foot side yard setbacks typically, and a height limit of 32 feet.
1 One R-3 parcel with an average slope just slightly above the 40% threshold (40.7%) has been included in
the sites inventory due to its larger size (.75 acres) and site access from two streets.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                            Page IV - 4
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

b. Commercial Infill Sites
As approximately one-quarter of the City’s residential infill potential occurs within its
commercial districts, it will be important that the City’s standards facilitate residential mixed
use. The following provisions currently encourage the integration of residential use within the
CC, CR and CN commercial zoning districts:
       • Allowances for residential housing on upper stories, up to the City’s height limit of 32
            feet, with commercial uses at ground level;
       • Prohibition against conversion of existing residential uses to commercial (except in CC
            district where permitted with Minor Use Permit);
       • Allowances for commercial and residential users to share their parking with a
            conditional use permit (CUP); and
       • Allowances for tandem parking with a CUP.
The allowance for residential uses on upper floors of commercially-zoned property presents an
ideal form of mixed-use infill development for the City to utilize its existing stock of parcels
currently served by existing roads and utilities. Residents over ground-floor commercial provide
passive security for the area, provide a built-in customer base, and create increased activity and
vitality within commercial areas. This form of traditional mixed-use enhances the historic
development pattern found in the commercial areas of the City where a number of apartments
and flats exist above street level retail spaces.
Parcels with residential development potential in the CC, CN-1, and CR Zoning Districts were
identified based on the following filters:
     • Parcels of 40% slope were excluded as steeper slopes create more development
         constraints;
     • All landlocked parcels were removed as access would be a challenge;
     • All parcels less than 3,000 square feet (s.f.) in size were removed as parcels that are too
         small present challenges meeting development standards;
     • All parcels that were deemed infeasible due to size, age and condition of existing
         buildings were removed;
     • All parcels on the City’s List of Noteworthy Historic Structures were removed;
     • All parcels that had obvious parking constraints preventing the addition of units were
         removed;
     • All parcels that were on the City’s list of Constructed and Approved projects were
         removed to avoid double-counting; and
     • Visual checks were made using Google Earth and Google Streetview, and site visits were
         made to all parcels listed, to ascertain the actual build out and visual conditions of
         buildings.
As depicted in Table 4.2, 19 parcels were identified as good candidates for mixed-use
development under existing zoning designations. There are 51 potential units in this category.
Some sites would support adding new residences by converting existing commercial space,
constructing new upper levels, or above existing buildings, where other sites would involve a
redevelopment of the site by demolishing existing buildings and erecting new buildings.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                        Page IV - 5
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

To better facilitate the provision of upper-story residential use above ground floor commercial,
and encourage the integration of affordable units within market-rate projects, Sausalito's 2009-
2014 Housing Element established new Vertical Mixed Use (VMU) requirements to be applied
throughout the CN-1, CR and CC zoning districts. In July 2014, City Council adopted the following
provisions within its Zoning Code to implement the VMU program:
    • New construction of 2nd and 3rd stories is limited to residential use.
    • A minimum of one unit must be affordable. Projects with 6 or more units must provide
        20% affordable units.
    • For rental units, the affordability is targeted at low income (up to 80% county median
        income) households.
    • For ownership units, affordability targeted to moderate income (up to 120% county
        median income) households.
    • Affordable units must have a minimum of two bedrooms to accommodate families.
    • The affordable units must be deed-restricted for a period of not less than forty years.
    • The conversion of existing upper story residential uses to commercial uses is prohibited.
    • The Planning Commission may consider the following exceptions to the requirement
        that all uses located above the first level of existing and new structures be residential:
         a. To allow the expansion of an existing business within the same or adjacent site
         b. To provide for small commercial uses of less than 1,000 square feet
    • The Planning Commission may consider the following exception to the requirement that
        all affordable units provide a minimum of two bedrooms:
        a. To address physical site constraints which make units with two or more bedrooms
        infeasible whether affordable or market rate.
Incentives to foster the creation of upper story residential VMU units include:
    • Raising the current Conditional Use Permit requirement for 4 or more residential units
        to 7 or more residential units.
    • Allowance for commercial and residential users to share parking, and for tandem and
        off-site parking leases with a Minor Use Permit.
    • Allowance for affordable units to vary in square footage, design and interior amenity
        within reason from non-affordable units.
    • Reduction or waiver of certain application and development review fees for the
        affordable units.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page IV - 6
 Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

An additional visual survey of all commercial parcels in the City in December 2011 showed that
there were at least eight existing upper-floor commercial units with lease signs, and were
suitable for conversion into housing.
None of the Commercial Infill Sites are located within the Marinship. Changes in land use within
the Marinship are subject to the Fair Traffic Initiative, which may require a city-wide vote.
City Of Sausalito Residential and Commercial Sites Map
2. Liveaboards
Sausalito has a long-standing tradition as a working waterfront with a vibrant marine culture
that has defined the community for over 100 years. There are eight marinas in the City with over
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                        Page IV - 7
 Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

1,500 vessels where several hundred boat owners reside on their boats as permanent
“liveaboard” housing. In recognition of the important role liveaboards play in providing
affordable housing for the community’s marine workers and other modest income residents, the
San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC) and Sausalito Zoning
Ordinance both allow for up to 10% of marina berths to be used as permanent liveaboard
housing. The Environmental Protection Agency and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration support the provision of liveaboards in well-managed marinas as an
environmentally sustainable housing option.
In order to document the nature and affordability of liveaboards in Sausalito, the City conducted
an anonymous survey of liveaboard tenants in Sausalito’s marinas in 2009. A total of 42 written
surveys were completed, providing the following insights into Sausalito’s liveaboard
population2:
     • Liveaboard residents are generally not transient and tend to stay on their boats for
         extended periods of time. The average tenure of those surveyed was over 10 years, with
         73% of respondents living on their boats at least the last five years.
     • The overwhelming majority of liveaboards consider themselves permanent residents of
         their boats, and when asked whether they would prefer to spend their money on a boat
         or an apartment, 94% expressed a preference for living on board.
     • In addition to lifestyle preference, many liveaboard tenants earn modest incomes and
         are only able to afford to live in Sausalito by living on their boats. The survey documents
         a median income of $42,500 among liveaboards and the median cost of a berth at $660,
         well below the $2,400 average rent for a one-bedroom apartment in Sausalito.
     • Nearly half of those surveyed (46%) were unsure whether they were “legal” liveaboards.
     • While the majority (62%) of liveaboards are single-person households, 33% of survey
         respondents are two person households, and 5% are three person households.
         Roommates, couples and single-parent households typify Sausalito’s multi-person
         liveaboards.
     • A large number of liveaboard residents are employed in marine-related occupations,
         and include boat builders and repair, sail makers, restorers of historic boats, maritime
         artists, marine surveyors, harbor masters, shipmates and boat captains, among others.
         Living on the water allows these marine workers to showcase their skills and to live near
         work opportunities.
For purposes of the 2015-2023 Housing Element site inventory, future liveaboard “sites” can be
identified based on any unused liveaboard capacity within each marina as authorized under
BCDC and City permits. Pursuant to direction provided by the State Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD), only that liveaboard capacity not previously counted in
Sausalito's prior Housing Element can be credited towards the City's 2015-2023 RHNA. In
addition, HCD has clarified that the "legalization" of existing liveaboards through issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit (CUP) in marinas without City permits for liveaboards does not count
towards the City's RHNA.
2
  The complete results of the survey are published in the Liveaboard Technical Report dated May 25, 2011
and available at the Community Development Department and on the City’s website under the Housing
Element link.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                           Page IV - 8
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

a. Liveaboard Affordability
The City’s liveaboard survey confirms that many liveaboard tenants earn very modest incomes
(median income of $42,500 among survey respondents) and are only able to afford to live in
Sausalito by living on their boats. When asked what caused them to decide to become a
liveaboard, 45% of survey respondents cited affordability as a primary factor.
In order to assess the affordability of liveaboard rents, the City compiled data on monthly berth
rents as reported in the survey of liveaboard residents, and conducted follow-up interviews with
marina operators to more precisely define total monthly housing costs (liveaboard, parking and
storage fees; utility and propane costs; and pump out charges). 3 Adding these additional
housing costs to the berth rents identified in the liveaboard surveys results in total monthly
housing costs ranging from $825-$1,415 for one person households, and from $1,000-$1,675 for
two person households. As indicated in Table 4.3, these total liveaboard housing costs fall well
within the levels affordable to low income households in Marin County. In order to provide a
conservative estimate of affordability for the RHNA and account for other potential costs such as
boat maintenance, taxes and insurance, a portion of the projected new liveaboards in Sausalito
will be assumed to be affordable at the moderate income level.
   Table 4.3: Liveaboard Rents and Affordability
                                 Total Monthly Housing Costs
                          (e.g., berth rent, liveaboard fee, parking,      Max Affordable Housing
   Household Size              storage, pump out, and utilities)              Cost to Low Income
                                  Range                     Median
           1                  $825 - $1,415                 $1,000                    $1,500
           2                $1,000 - $1,675                 $1,500                    $1,710
   Source: City of Sausalito Liveaboard Technical Report, May 25, 2011;
   State Income Limits for 2011 (Marin County).
   Note: Does not include rent restricted berths in Galilee Harbor.
One of the City’s marinas – Galilee Harbor – is a member-run cooperative maintained as an
affordable housing community with rent and income restrictions. The Galilee Harbor
Community Association (GHCA) was formed in 1980 by boatworkers and artists who lived in
vessels on and near the historic Napa Street Pier in response to development proposals which
would uproot their long-term liveaboard community. After prolonged negotiations, GHCA
received BCDC and City permits for a live-aboard marina providing low-cost housing to artists
and maritime workers, thereby helping to preserve the working Sausalito waterfront. As
member boats moved in to the 38-slip marina in 2003, Galilee is counted as an approved project
under the prior planning period (refer to Table 4.1).
Income and affordability restrictions at Galilee Harbor are governed by the Memorandum of
Understanding between GHCA, BCDC and the City, as well as affordability restrictions imposed
by the various sources of public funds used to build the marina, including Federal Home Loan
3
  Mortgage costs were not included as the majority of liveaboards own their boats, as confirmed by the
liveaboard survey which documents 90% of respondents own their boats.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                           Page IV - 9
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

Bank AHP funds, Marin County CDBG funds, and Marin Community Foundation funds. In
aggregate, the income restrictions at Galilee are as follows:
                   Minimum 5 berths – extremely low income (<30% AMI)
                   Minimum 7 berths – very low income (<50% AMI)
                   Minimum 15 berths – low income (<80% AMI)
                   Up to 7 berths – moderate income (<120% AMI)
                   Up to 4 berths - unrestricted
While 11 of Galilee’s 38 berths are not restricted to low income occupancy (either moderate
income or unrestricted income), based on discussions with Galilee’s marina manager and market
rents at other marinas, rent levels still fall within levels affordable to low income households.
The non-profit housing corporation EAH conducts annual income certification of tenants in
Galilee to ensure continued compliance with the Memorandum of Understanding.
Zoning Ordinance Section 10.44.170.H regarding liveaboards states: “As vacancies occur, marina
operators shall give preference to qualified low and moderate income tenants until such tenants
constitute at least 50% of the liveaboard vessels in the marina.” The liveaboard program in the
Housing Element calls for monitoring and enforcement of these provisions as part of the
liveaboard Conditional Use Permit.
b. Future Liveaboard Capacity
Similar to residential sites capacity under zoning, several marinas have additional capacity within
their existing berths for liveaboards as authorized by BCDC and the City. As illustrated in Table
4.4, BCDC has authorized 201 liveaboards within five marinas in the City whereas 146 permitted
liveaboards currently exist in these marinas, providing capacity for 55 additional liveaboards.
Given the rent structure in these marinas, it can be assumed the majority of future liveaboards
will continue to provide affordability to low income households, with the balance falling well
within the levels affordable to moderate income households in Marin County.
     Table 4.4: Additional Liveaboard Capacity in Permitted Marinas
                                                Authorized
                                                                    Existing          Additional
                                               Liveaboards
         Marinas with BCDC Permits                                 Permitted         Liveaboard
                                               under BCDC
                                                                  Liveaboards          Capacity
                                                   Permit
     Pelican Harbor                                   9                 9                  0
     Sausalito Yacht Harbor                          62                31                  31
     Galilee Harbor                                  38                38                  0
     Schoonmaker Marina*                             20                16                  4
     Clipper Yacht Harbor*                           72                52                  20
     Totals                                         201               146                  55
         Additional Liveaboard capacity included in 2015-2023 Housing
                                                                                           31
                               Element sites inventory
     Source: San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC) December 2011;
     City of Sausalito Liveaboard Technical Report, May 25, 2011.
     *The unused liveaboard capacity in these two marinas has been counted in Sausalito's 2009-2014
     Housing Element and can not therefore be counted again in the 2015-2023 Housing Element.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                         Page IV - 10
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

Two of the marinas with unused liveaboard capacity (Clipper Yacht Harbor and Schoonmaker
Marina) have the necessary permits in place and can accommodate a combined total of 24
additional liveaboards at any time; the unused liveaboard capacity in these two marinas has
already been credited towards the RHNA in Sausalito's prior Housing Element and can not be
counted again in the current Element. The BCDC permit for the third marina with additional
liveaboard capacity (Sausalito Yacht Harbor) currently authorizes 5%, or 31, liveaboard berths;
BCDC indicates the permit can be amended to increase liveaboard berths to 10% upon the
owner’s request and demonstration of compliance with the San Francisco Bay Plan and
Richardson’s Bay Plan policies and requirements. The City has reviewed the requirements of
these Plans with representatives of Sausalito Yacht Harbor, and they believe they can meet the
requirements and have indicated they will be moving forward with an amendment to their BCDC
permit to increase their liveaboard capacity to 10%, and in conjunction, will obtain the necessary
CUP from the City. (Refer to Housing Element Program #12 that sets forth the City's objective to
complete the required BCDC and City permitting by 2016 to accommodate 31 additional
liveaboards in Sausalito Yacht Harbor).
c. Summary of Liveaboard RHNA Credits
Based on the preceding analysis, Table 4.5 summarizes the number and affordability of
liveaboards that can be credited towards the 2015-2023 RHNA:
          Table 4.5: Summary of Liveaboard RHNA Credits
                                                    Total        Affordability Category
                                                 Liveaboard
                                                                    Low         Moderate
                                                    Units
          Additional Liveaboard Capacity             31              17            14
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                    Page IV - 11
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

  3. New and Existing Accessory Dwelling Units
  The Housing Element continues to allow the creation of new accessory dwelling units (ADUs) as
  a form of small scale, contextual infill development that will provide an affordable housing type
  throughout the City. Due to the City’s very high percentage (47%) of single person households,
  this strategy is ideally suited to Sausalito.
  a. Accessory Dwelling Unit Survey
  ADUs, also referred to as second units, are small, self-contained dwelling units that provide a
  kitchen, bathroom and sleeping area. The unit can be attached to the main home with a separate
  entrance or can be a small detached unit located in the rear yard or above a garage. ADUs can
  provide affordable rental options for smaller households, such as caregivers or the elderly parents
  of the primary homeowner, and can provide rental income for the homeowner.
  While Sausalito adopted a zoning regulation in 1984 prohibiting the development of ADUs in all
  residential zone districts, the City recognizes the existence of hundreds of ADUs in the
  community illegally built without permits. In order to collect information on the extent and
  nature of ADUs for the Housing Element, in 2010 the City mailed surveys to all 3,200+ residential
  property owners in the City. A total of 715 of these postage-paid, anonymous questionnaires
  were completed and returned. The results of the ADU survey can be summarized as follows
  (refer to March 28, 2011 ADU Single-Family and Multi-Family Technical Reports on City website):
  Property Owners with an Existing ADU
       • 108 respondents (15% of total) indicated they currently have an ADU on their property
       • Nearly half (46%) of respondents with an ADU said they would apply for amnesty if the
           City adopted an amnesty program to legalize unpermitted ADUs, 6% said they would not
           apply for amnesty, 26% said they were not sure, and 22% said amnesty did not apply
           (ADU likely built prior to the 1984 regulation prohibiting ADUs)
       • Two-thirds of respondents indicated their ADU was currently occupied, and three-
           quarters of respondents indicated their ADU was rented to a tenant.
       • 97 respondents provided information on the rents charged for the ADU. 28% of rents
           were within the level affordable to very low income households, 57% were affordable to
           low income households, and 15% were affordable to moderate income households.
       • While the majority of existing ADUs (88%) are suitable for one and two person
           households, 12% of respondents identified their ADU as having two or more bedrooms,
           a suitable size for small family households.
Table 4.6: ADU Rents and Affordability
                            Very Low Income               Low Income             Moderate Income
                            Max                        Max                       Max
     Bedrooms            Affordable      # ADUs     Affordable      # ADUs    Affordable      # ADUs
                            Rent                       Rent                      Rent
Studio/One                  $935            26        $1,500           52       $2,135           13
Two                        $1,070           1         $1,710            3       $2,440           2
Total                                       27                         55                        15
Rent Distribution                          28%                        57%                       15%
    Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page IV - 12
    Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                           Adopted January 13, 2015

Property Owners without an Existing ADU
     • 606 survey respondents indicated they do not currently have an ADU on their property.
     • 62 (10%) of respondents indicated they have an existing structure on their property that
          could potentially be converted into an ADU.
     • 186 respondents (31%) indicated they have at least 500 square feet of undeveloped
          space on their lot which could potentially accommodate an ADU.
     • 115 respondents said they would be inclined to build an ADU if City regulations
          permitted, representing 19% of non-ADU property owners.
     • Among those respondents who had considered building an ADU or incorporating one
          into their house, the primary reason was for extra income, followed by having a location
          for relatives to live. Other responses included having space for a live-in caregiver and
          space for relatives visiting from out of town.
In summary, the community has come to recognize ADUs as a low impact approach to
addressing a portion of the community’s lower income housing needs, and in November 2012,
the Sausalito City Council adopted Accessory Dwelling Unit Regulations (Zoning Code Section
10.44.080) to encourage the provision of new ADUs through a ministerial approval process, and
to enable the legalization of existing ADUs through an amnesty program.
b. New Construction of Accessory Dwelling Units
The City’s survey indicated a strong interest by property owners in building an ADU, and
illustrates the physical capacity of adding a detached unit on nearly one-third of respondents’
parcels. Given the City’s very high percentage (47%) of single person households, combined with
the high incidence of senior households (26%), ADUs are a good match for the City’s housing
needs; allowance for two bedroom ADUs also helps to address the needs of small families. The
City’s adopted Accessory Dwelling Unit regulations, described in detail in Appendix B - Housing
Constraints, both encourage and facilitate the provision of ADUs and promote quality design and
neighborhood compatibility.
Given the strong demand for ADUs, the demonstrated capacity to provide such units, and the
City's recent track record (six new ADUs received building permits in the first 18 months of
Sausalito's ADU ordinance), the City’s objective will be to achieve the creation of a minimum of
16 new ADUs (two per year) during the 2015-2023 planning period. The affordability of the
projected 16 ADUs is based on rent levels from the City’s ADU survey as follows:
  Table 4.7: 2015-2023 Objectives for New Accessory Dwelling Units
                                                                   Income Category
                                          Total
                                                       Very Low           Low            Moderate
  Number of New ADUs                       16              5                9                2
  % by Income Category                     --            28%              57%               15%
c. Registration and Amnesty for Existing Accessory Dwelling Units
Given the existence of possibly hundreds of accessory dwelling units in the community built
illegally which may or may not meet basic health and safety guidelines, the City’s adopted
Accessory Dwelling Unit regulations included provisions for an amnesty program to legalize
these units, bring them into the official housing stock to contribute towards meeting regional
housing needs allocation (RHNA), and make them safe and sanitary for current and future
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                        Page IV - 13
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

 tenants. The City's amnesty program was in effect from January 2013-March 2014, and was
 highly successful, with 14 previously unpermitted units not counted in the 2000 Census being
 brought up to Code and credited towards Sausalito's 2009-2014 RHNA. At the conclusion of the
 amnesty program on March 31, 2014, an additional 44 units had submitted applications for
 amnesty and were going through the staff review and permitting process. To the extent these
 existing ADUs can be brought up to Code and meet the City's amnesty requirements, including
 documentation that they were not counted in the Census, they will be credited towards
 Sausalito's future 2015-2023 RHNA.
 Even with the success of Sausalito's first amnesty program, the City is aware that a significant
 number of unpermitted ADUs remain in the community. The City's goal is to legalize and bring as
 many unpermitted ADUs up to Code as possible, and has thus included a program in the Housing
 Element to initiate a second amnesty program in 2015. The objective for the 2015-2023 Housing
 Element is to legalize a minimum of 24 existing ADUs, bringing them into the City's official
 housing stock, reporting them to the State Department of Finance, and crediting towards the
 City's RHNA 4. The affordability of the projected 24 amnesty ADUs is based on rent levels from
 the City’s ADU survey as follows:
Table 4.8: July 2014-2023 Objectives for Accessory Dwelling Units under Amnesty Program
                                                                       Income Category
                                              Total
                                                           Very Low           Low           Moderate
Amnesty Permits                                24             7                14                3
% by Income Category                            --           28%              57%              15%
 4
   To receive RHNA credit, ADUs under the future amnesty program would be subject to the same
 provisions as the initial program, as applied to the 2015-2023 planning period: documentation the unit did
 not have an individual address as of the 2010 census, does not have a permit of record, and was
 constructed prior to January 1, 2014.
   Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                           Page IV - 14
   Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

4. Residential Development Potential Compared to the RHNA
As detailed earlier in Table 4.1, the City’s residential development potential during the planning
period is comprised of the following:
     • 128 residential units from unmet capacity in residential zoning districts, within the
         current General Plan and zoning framework,
     • 51 residential units from unmet capacity in mixed-use zoning districts, within the
         current General Plan and zoning framework,
     • 31 liveaboards from the unused capacity in Sausalito Yacht Harbor,
     • 16 new Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs), and
     • 24 existing ADUs legalized and permitted under an amnesty program.
In total, the City’s site inventory provides for 250 units. In terms of evaluating the adequacy of
these sites to address the affordability targets established by the RHNA, affordability for vacant
and underutilized sites is based on “default densities” of 20 units/acre for very low and low
income households for sites that can accommodate a minimum of six units, with smaller 20+
unit/acre sites and sites with minimum 12 unit/acre densities attributed to moderate income
households; affordability for liveaboards is based on the surveys of liveaboard tenants and
marina rents, with a portion of future liveaboards attributed towards moderate income; and
affordability for accessory dwelling units is based on rents levels documented in the City’s ADU
survey. As summarized in Table 4.9 below, the City has provided adequate sites to address its
2015-2023 RHNA of 79 units, for all income categories, providing a 215% buffer above its
minimum RHNA requirement. The City aims to further encourage and facilitate the production
of affordable units throughout the community through implementation of the policies and
programs set forth in Chapter II – Housing Plan.
  Table 4.9 Comparison of RHNA and Sites Inventory
                                                                              Above
                               Very Low          Low          Moderate                      TOTALS
                                                                             Moderate
  2015-2023 RHNA                  26              14              16             23           79
  Residential Sites
                                  53              61             117             19           250
  Inventory
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page IV - 15
 Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

5. Availability of Infrastructure and Public Services
Sausalito is an urbanized community therefore land designated for residential use can be linked
up to the existing infrastructure grid easily, including sewer and water lines, streets, storm
drains, telephone, electrical and gas lines. The Sausalito-Marin City Sanitary District provides the
City’s sewer needs, and Bay Cities Refuse serves the garbage removal function, with fees based
on volume. The Marin Municipal Water District provides Sausalito with its water supply, with
most of the water coming from rainfall collected in Marin reservoirs. There is no shortfall
anticipated during the 2015-2023 planning period in the ability of these districts to provide
these necessary public services.
However, Sausalito’s sewer infrastructure system is old and in need of repair. The City has over
27 miles of sewer pipe, some over 60 years old. In recent years, the antiquated pipes have
caused sewage spills, releasing raw sewage into Richardson’s Bay. In April 2008, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued an Administrative Order mandating that the City
assess, repair, or replace its aging sewer pipes. In addition, the City was sued by Northern
California River Watch for violations under the Clean Water Act. In November 2008, the City
reached a settlement with River Watch. The City is implementing plans to upgrade its
antiquated sewer system, complying with terms laid out by EPA and River Watch. To fund the
estimated $7.6 million upgrade, sewer fees were increased in 2009.
In addition to improving the City’s sewer lines, the City must also explore strategies to hasten
the repair of private lateral sewer pipes on private property. Every residence has a private
lateral sewer line connecting to a city sewer line. Unfortunately, many of these private laterals
are also in need of repair, and add stress to the current sewer system.
The City has put various programs in place, such as assessment and mandated repair of private
sewer lateral lines when a property is sold. Still, by some estimates this strategy alone would
take 60 years or more to adequately address the private lateral sewer line problem. As a result,
the City continues to explore additional programs and options for private lateral sewer pipe
repair.
Research is also on-going regarding the sanitation conditions and practices of marinas in the
City. Detailed documentation on these practices is not readily available at the time of writing,
however, the City recognizes the importance of preventing pollution to the waterways and the
Bay, and will continue working with relevant agencies such as BCDC to ensure that the marina
and harbor activities remain sustainable. Direct discharge of effluent into Richardson’s Bay is a
misdemeanor. There are also organizations that seek to provide environmentally clean facilities
to the boating community and protect waterways from pollution. The Richardson’s Bay Regional
Agency (RBRA), in co-operation with the Department of Boating and Waterways, operates
sewage pump-out services for Richardson’s Bay area marinas and anchored vessels. Another
example is Clean Marina, and the Clipper Yacht Harbor is a certified Clean Marina under their
program. It is in the City’s interest to ensure that the new implementing program to permit the
marinas would involve conditions for meeting certain sanitary standards.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page IV - 16
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

B. Financial Resources
The extent to which the City can achieve its Housing Element goals and objectives is due in some
part to the availability of financial resources for implementation. Below is a summary of major
sources of existing and potential funding available to carry out housing activities.
1. Local Programs
a. Affordable Housing Fund
Chapter II of the Housing Element sets forth an implementing program to establish an
Affordable Housing Fund that will be used to construct or help leverage construction of
affordable housing. Potential Fund resources include: in-lieu fees from an Inclusionary Housing
Program; in-lieu fees on small condominium conversions (three to four units); in-lieu fees for
development of single-family units in multi-family zones; and commercial in-lieu fees.
Implementing regulations will be established to manage the Fund and establish parameters for
allocation of funds towards projects. This program will move forward once a funding source
have been identified, and will coincide with the collection of fees.
b. Marin Workforce Housing Trust
The Marin Workforce Housing Trust is a public/private partnership that has been created to
meet the challenges of housing affordability for workers in Marin County. Through a revolving
loan fund, the Trust provides low‐interest rate loans to nonprofit and for‐profit developers who
are constructing homes affordable to lower income families, as well as special needs
populations. Every dollar that is contributed to the Housing Trust is matched by both the Marin
Community Foundation and the County of Marin, thereby tripling the value of each donation.
c. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
Sausalito is a participating city in Marin County’s Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
program, and is thus income qualified residents are eligible for participation in several of the
County’s CDBG programs, including the Residential Rehabilitation Loan Program and Home
Connection of Marin matching services for home seekers and people interested in sharing their
homes.
d. Section 8 Rental Assistance Program
The Section 8 Rental Assistance Program extends rental subsidies to very low-income
households (50% AMI), offering a voucher that pays the difference between the current fair
market rent and what a tenant can afford to pay (i.e., 30% of household income). The program is
administered by Marin Housing. Given the significant gap between market rents and what very
low income households can afford to pay for housing in the City, Section 8 plays a critical role in
allowing such households to remain in the community. Several of liveaboard residents receive
Section 8 assistance.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page IV - 17
 Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

2. State Programs
The State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) administers more than
20 programs that award loans and grants for the construction, acquisition, rehabilitation and
preservation of affordable rental and ownership housing, homeless shelters and transitional
housing, public facilities and infrastructure, and the development of jobs for lower income
workers Most of these programs award points for jurisdictions with an adopted housing
element found in substantial compliance by HCD. The following highlights several of the State’s
programs with potential relevance in Sausalito:
a. Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods (BEGIN) Program
The BEGIN Program is a homeownership program providing grants to local governments that
reduce regulatory constraints to housing. Grants are provided for down payment assistance to
low‐ and moderate‐income first‐time homebuyers.
b. Infill Incentive Grant (IIG) Program
The IIG Program provides funds for infrastructure improvements necessary to facilitate new infill
housing development.
c. HOME Investment Partnership Programs (HOME)
The HOME Program provides grants to cities, counties, and Community Housing Development
Organizations (CHDOs) for housing rehabilitation, new construction, and acquisition and
rehabilitation for both single‐family and multi‐family housing projects serving lower income
renters and owners.
d. Housing Enabled by Local Partnerships (HELP) Program, California Housing Finance Agency
The HELP Program and the Residential Development Loan Program (RDLP) offer reduced rate
loans to local government entities for locally determined affordable housing activities and
priorities (acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, single‐family homeownership, or
preservation of multi‐family and special needs units).
e. Local Housing Trust Funds (LHTF)
State funding is available to assist existing and new Local Housing Trust Funds (LHTFs). The State
will provide matching grant funds to LHTFs. Approved activities include development of
affordable multi‐family rental and ownership housing and emergency shelters. New Local
Housing Trust Funds that are in a county with a population of less than 425,000 persons will be
given priority for receiving funding during each of the NOFA rounds.
f. Multifamily Housing Program (MHP)
Provides deferred payment loans to assist the new construction, rehabilitation and preservation
of permanent and transitional rental housing for lower income households. The conversion of
non-residential structures to rental housing are also eligible.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                    Page IV - 18
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

C. Administrative Resources
The Bay Area is home to numerous nonprofit housing developers who have produced thousands
of high-quality affordable housing projects over the past 40 years. These non-profit agencies can
serve as resources in helping Sausalito to address its housing needs, and in the implementation
of its Housing Element programs.
In Sausalito, two non-profits have a track record of developing and managing successful
affordable housing projects – Rotary Housing and EAH. The recently incorporated Sausalito
Village can also serve as a resource to the City in implementing its senior-oriented housing
programs. The Nonprofit Housing Association of Northern California (NPH) serves as a local
networking agency, advocacy group and resource organization for affordable housing
developers in the Bay Area.
The key to the success of non-profit developers lies in three areas: first, in their ability to draw
upon a diversity of funding sources and mechanisms to make their developments work
financially; second, in their commitment to working cooperatively and constructively with the
local community, including local officials as well as neighborhood residents; and third, in their
long-term commitment to ensuring excellence in design, construction and management of their
developments, creating assets that are valued by the people who live in the developments as
well as their neighbors and others in the community.
D. Opportunities for Energy Conservation
Conventional building construction, use and demolition along with the manufacturing of
building materials have multiple impacts on our environment. Nationwide, the building industry
accounts for:
             65 percent of electricity consumption
             30 percent of greenhouse gas emissions
             30 percent of raw materials use
             30 percent of landfill waste
             12 percent of potable water consumption
Interest in addressing these impacts at all levels of government has been growing. In 2004, the
State of California adopted legislation requiring LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design) certification for new and renovated public buildings. Some local jurisdictions have not
only adopted similar standards for their public buildings, but have also required LEED
certification for larger commercial and residential developments.
LEED certification building standards are one piece of a coordinated green building program. In
an effort to promote green buildings, cities are adopting green building programs. Most local
building standards already consider energy and stormwater issues. In addition, many
jurisdictions have programs related to energy, recycling, water conservation, stormwater
management, land use, and public health. However, these programs are often overlapping and
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                         Page IV - 19
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

uncoordinated. One of the primary goals behind establishing a green building program is to
create a holistic and integrated design approach to green building.
A green building program considers a broad range of issues, including community and site
design, energy efficiency, water conservation, resource-efficient material selection, indoor
environmental quality, construction management, and building maintenance. The end result will
be buildings that minimize the use of resources, are healthier for people, and reduce harm to
the environment.
Both the public and private sectors currently offer grants, refunds, and other funding for green
building. In addition, developments built to green standards assist both the owners and tenants
with energy and maintenance costs over time. The following presents a variety of ways in which
Sausalito can promote energy conservation and green building:
      Develop green (energy-efficient and environmentally-sensitive) building standards for
        public buildings.
      Provide incentives, such as expedited plan check, for private developments that are
        building green.
      Encourage higher densities and mixed use development within walking distance of
        commercial, thereby reducing vehicular trips and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
      Promote financial resources available through the California Energy Commission for use of
        solar panels.
      Provide resource materials and training opportunities regarding green building and energy
        conservation.
      Apply green building criteria to rehabilitation of single and multi-family buildings.
As part of the Housing Element, Sausalito will adopt and implement green building regulations
consistent with the State Green Building Code in 2015. The adoption of these measures
emphasizes the City’s leadership role in encouraging “green” building techniques.
In addition, the City’s Sustainability Committee will serve as an advising body to provide
guidance to advise property owners, architects, designers, and builders of the green building
regulations and other similar construction practices. The Sustainability Committee will continue
its role as a resource for waste, recycling, energy conservation, and various environmental
concerns while establishing environmental health goals for the City.
The City also plans to adopt a Climate Action Plan (CAP) that will work with the City’s existing
policies to address greenhouse gas emissions. The CAP should specifically identify policies
applicable to existing housing types and unique conditions present in Sausalito.
The community will continue to emphasize liveaboards and accessory dwelling units, both of
which create a reduced environmental footprint in comparison to larger types of housing. These
housing types are recognized by the Environmental Protection Agency and the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration as environmentally sustainable housing options.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page IV - 20
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

1. Energy Conservation Programs Offered through Local Utilities and Organizations
Utility rebate programs and energy audits are available through Marin County and Pacific Gas
and Electric, particularly connected to housing rehabilitation programs. Lower-income
households are also eligible for State sponsored energy and weatherization programs. The City
will be pro-actively publicizing these programs on the City’s website to promote rehabilitation
assistance in the City, and also among the liveaboard community in permitted marinas.
Some non-profit organizations also provide free energy audits. Berkeley-based Rising Sun Energy
organization offers free home energy audits to Marin County residents. This program hires
youth professional Energy Specialists to conduct the audits and offer tips and suggestions for
improving energy efficiency.
2. Pacific Gas & Electric
Pacific Gas & Electric (www.pge.com) provides both natural gas and electricity to residential
consumers in Marin County, including Sausalito. The company provides a variety of energy
conservation services for residents and PG&E also participates in several other energy assistance
programs for lower-income households, which help qualified homeowners and renters conserve
energy and control electricity costs. These include the following:
     •   The California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) Program – Provides a 20 percent
         monthly discount on gas and electric rates to income qualified households, certain non-
         profits, facilities housing agricultural employees, homeless shelters, hospices and other
         qualified non-profit group living facilities.
     •   The Relief for Energy Assistance through Community Help (REACH) Program – Provides
         one-time emergency energy assistance to low income customers who have no other way
         to pay their energy bill. REACH aims to assist who are in jeopardy of losing their electricity
         services, particularly the elderly, disabled, sick, working poor, and the unemployed, who
         experience severe hardships and are unable to pay for their necessary energy needs.
         Customers who have experienced an uncontrollable or unforeseen hardship may receive
         an energy credit up to $200.
     •   The Balanced Payment Plan (BPP) – Designed to eliminate big swings in a customer’s
         monthly payments by averaging energy costs over the year. On enrollment, PG&E
         averages the amount of energy used by the household in the past year to derive the
         monthly BPP amount. PG&E checks the household’s account every four months to make
         sure that its estimated average is on target. If the household’s energy use has increased
         or decreased dramatically, PG&E will change the amount of monthly payment so that the
         household does not overpay or underpay too much over the course of a year.
     •   The Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) Block Grant – Funded by
         the federal Department of Health and Human Services, it provides two basic types of
         services. Eligible low-income persons, via local governmental and nonprofit organizations,
         can receive financial assistance to offset the costs of heating and/or cooling dwellings,
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                        Page IV - 21
 Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

         and/or have their dwellings weatherized to make them more energy efficient. This is
         accomplished through these three program components:
              o   The Weatherization Program provides free weatherization services to improve
                  the energy efficiency of homes, including attic insulation, weather-stripping,
                  minor home repairs, and related energy conservation measures.
              o   The Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP) provides financial assistance to
                  eligible households to offset the costs of heating and/or cooling dwellings.
              o   The Energy Crisis Intervention Program (ECIP) provides payments for weather-
                  related or energy-related emergencies.
     •   The Family Electric Rate Assistance (FERA) Program – PG&E’s rate reduction program for
         large households of three or more people with low- to middle-income. It enables low
         income large households to receive a Tier 3 (131 percent to 200 percent of baseline)
         electric rate reduction on their PG&E bill every month.
     •   Medical Baseline Allowance Program – PG&E offers additional quantities of energy at the
         lowest (baseline) price for residential customers that have special medical or
         heating/cooling needs.
In addition, PG&E launched a campaign to hand out one million compact fluorescent light bulbs
(CFLs) as part of Energy Star’s “Change a Light, Change the World” campaign in October 2007
(http://www.pge-cfl.com/). PG&E is also educating its customers on how to work directly with
manufacturers and retailers to discount the bulbs at the point of sale and are working with state
and local governments to promote fluorescent lamp recycling through the California Take-It-
Back Partnership (http://www.dtsc.ca.gov/TIB/index.cfm).
3. Marin Energy Authority
The Marin Energy Authority (MEA) is a not-for-profit public agency formed by the County of
Marin and eight other towns and cities. MEA administers the Marin Clean Energy program by
partnering with PG&E, to deliver green energy and reduce greenhouse gas emissions in Marin
County. MEA purchases power from clean, renewable sources, and the power is delivered to
residential and business customers through PG&E’s power distribution system.
Marin Clean Energy is offered at two tiers. The first is known as ‘Light Green’, which delivers
State certified 27% renewable energy procured from wind, solar, and biomass projects in
northern California, Oregon, and Washington. The second tier is called ‘Deep Green’ and offers
100% renewable energy, produced entirely by non-polluting, renewable sources such as water,
wind, and sunlight by projects in California and the western United States.
Marin Clean Energy was launched in 2010 and is rolling out in phases. Residents, commercial
and municipal customers in Marin County incorporated jurisdictions, including those in
Sausalito, are automatically signed up for the program. These customers will receive notices
informing them of their pending enrollment, but may also choose to opt out.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page IV - 22
  Chapter IV – Housing Resources                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

APPENDIX A – HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
A. Introduction
The Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) is a state-mandated process which determines
the quantity and affordability of housing for which a community must plan. The California
Department of Housing and Community Development assigned the Bay Area a housing needs
allocation of 187,990 for the 2015-2023 planning period. Of this figure, 2,298 units were
allocated to Marin County for the planning period (roughly 287 a year) through distribution
formula developed by the Association of Bay Area Governments. Of this figure, 79 units were
allocated to the City of Sausalito. Table A.1 presents Sausalito’s RHNA allocation allocated
among the four income categories.
Table A.1: Sausalito 2014-2022 RHNA Allocation
                                       Housing Income Limits and Needs
                                    (Based on Median Income of $103,000)
                                                                          Housing Units
 Very Low (<50% Median Income)*                                                 26
 Low (<80% Median Income)                                                       14
 Moderate (<120% Median Income)                                                 16
 Above Moderate (> 120% Median Income)                                          23
 Total Allocation                                                               79
*Of the City’s total 26 unit very low income RHNA allocation, half is allocated to extremely-low income
households (13 units), and half to very low income households (13 units).
Source: ABAG 2013
Assembly Bill 1233, which took effect on January 1, 2006, requires local governments which
failed to identify or make adequate sites available in the prior planning period to “carry over”
any unaccommodated RHNA need.
Sausalito has fully addressed its prior 2009-2014 RHNA for 165 units and thus has no RHNA
carry-over into the 2015-2023 planning period. It should be stressed that Sausalito is required to
demonstrate that 79 units in various income categories can be accommodated.
In developing its plan the city is required to consider a wide range of factors that have an impact
on housing supply, demand, and affordability, such as population and employment growth, the
condition of the housing stock, and the needs of segments of the population with special needs,
such as the elderly, persons with disabilities, and large families or single parent households.
Much of the data in this report is taken from the 2010 US Census, with 2008-2012 American
Community Survey (ACS) information incorporated as available, and projections and estimates
by the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG). Some projections extend 25 years into the
future, to 2040.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                        Page A - 1
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                      Adopted January 13, 2015

B. Existing Housing Need
1. Population and Employment
a. Population Trends and Projections
The census documents that the population of Sausalito has declined slightly, it has remained
relatively constant between 1990 and 2010. (see Table A.2).
Table A.2: Sausalito’s Population from 1990-2010
  20%
  15%
  10%
    5%
    0%
   -5%
                                                                                     % Change
          Jurisdiction             1990           2000             2010
                                                                                    1990-2010
 Sausalito                         7,152          7,330             7,061               -1%
 Belvedere                         2,147          2,125             2,068               -4%
 Corte Madera                      8,272          9,100             9,253               12%
 Fairfax                           6,931          7,319             7,441                7%
 Larkspur                         11,070         12,014            11,926                8%
 Mill Valley                      13,038         13,600            13,903                7%
 Novato                           47,585         47,630            51,904                9%
 Ross                              2,123          2,329             2,415               14%
 San Anselmo                      11,743         12,378            12,336                5%
 San Rafael                       48,404         56,063            57,713               19%
 Tiburon                           7,532          8,666             8,962               19%
 Marin County                    230,096        247,289           252,409               10%
Source: US Census 1990, 2000, 2010
While Marin County’s population is projected to grow at a slightly faster pace in the next 30
years than it has in the past decade, the growth will be uneven, with some jurisdictions
anticipated to yield higher growth rates than others. See Table A.3 below for the population
figures and projected annual growth rates for 2010 to 2040.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                               Page A - 2
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

Table A.3: Projected Countywide Annual Growth Rate (2010-2040): Marin County
 20%
 15%
 10%
   5%
   0%
                                                                                 2010-2020         2020-2030       2030-2040
   Jurisdiction          2010        2020         2030       2040               Growth Rate       Growth Rate     Growth Rate
   Sausalito             7,061       7,300        7,600      7,900          3%                    4%              4%
   Belvedere             2,068       2,100        2,200      2,200          2%                    5%              0%
   Corte Madera          9,253       9,500        9,800      10,200         3%                    3%              4%
   Fairfax               7,441       7,600        7,900      8,200          2%                    4%              4%
   Larkspur              11,926      12,400       12,900     13,500         4%                    4%              5%
   Mill Valley           13,903      14,300       14,800     15,400         3%                    4%              4%
   Novato                51,904      53,200       54,700     56,700         3%                    3%              4%
   Ross                  2,415       2,500        2,600      2,700          4%                    4%              4%
   San Anselmo           12,336      12,600       13,000     13,400         2%                    3%              3%
   San Rafael            57,713      60,800       64,400     68,700         5%                    6%              7%
   Tiburon               8,962       9,200        9,500      9,900          3%                    3%              4%
   Unincorporated        67,427      69,600       72,700     76,600         3%                    5%              5%
   Countywide            252,409     261,100      272,100    285,400        3%                    4%              5%
Source: ABAG 2013 Projections
The 2010 Census documented that Sausalito’s age distribution was heavily skewed towards
those 25 years or older. Figure A.1 below provides a population breakdown by age range from
2010 Census data.
Figure A.1: Age Breakdown of Sausalito Residents (2010)
            900                                                                 807
                                                                          695
            750                                                   648 680             653
                                                        603 614
            600
                                                  482
            450                                                                             359
                  303
Number of
                                            263
            300                                                                                   222
                        144 109                                                                         147
                                   94 124
People
            150                                                                                               70 37
                                                                                                                       7    0
              0
                                                          Age Range
Source: US Census 2010
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                                            Page A - 3
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

Sausalito’s percentage of persons under 18 (9%) is 13 points lower than the Marin County figure,
while the percentage for people between 18 and 65 (70%) is 9 points higher than the County.
The percentage of people over 65 (21%) is also higher than the County by 4% (see Figure A.2).
Figure A.2: Age of Sausalito Residents Compared to Marin County (2010)
             80%
                                             70%
             70%
                                       61%
             60%
Percent of
             50%
             40%
Population   30%     22%                                        21%
             20%                                          17%
                           9%
             10%
             0%
                    19 and below      Age 20 to 64      65 and above
                                       Age Range                 Marin County   Sausalito
Source: US Census 2010
The greatest increases in population age groups over the next 10 years are expected to be the
elderly and young adult households, which tend to have the lowest income levels. According to
the Marin Commission on Aging (MCA) 1, the greatest increases in population age groups in
Marin County from 2000 to 2020 are expected to be persons 60 years or older. The 2010 Census
shows that one quarter of Marin residents are 60 years or older, and about two-thirds of those
aged 85 years of age and older are women.
b. Employment Trends
Data from ABAG documents an estimated 4,581 employed residents in Sausalito in 2013. More
than one-fourth were employed in the professional, scientific, management, administrative, and
waste management services industry. See Table A.4 for a complete distribution of employed
Sausalito residents by industry.
1
    Marin Commission on Aging, Marin County Area Plan for Aging 2009-2012
    Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page A - 4
    Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

Table A.4: Occupation by Industry in Sausalito
                                                        Number of Employed
 Industry                                                                           Percentage
                                                         Sausalito Residents
 Professional, Scientific, Management, Administrative           1,179                   26%
 Educational, Health, and Social Services                        772                    17%
 Finance, Insurance, Real Estate and Rental Leasing              693                    15%
 Manufacturing                                                   370                     8%
 Retail Trade                                                    265                     6%
 Wholesale Trade                                                 275                     6%
 Other Services                                                  282                     6%
 Information                                                     249                     5%
 Arts, Entertainment, Recreation, Accommodation and
                                                                 161                     4%
 Food Services
 Transportation on Warehousing and Utilities                     108                     2%
 Construction                                                    148                     3%
 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting, and Mining           32                     1%
 Public Administration                                            47                     1%
 Total Employed Civilian Population 16 years and over           4,581                   100%
Source: ABAG 2013
An overwhelming major of those in the workforce in Sausalito are employed by for-profit
organizations or self-employed. Government workers at all levels account for only 7% of all
workers (see Figure A.3).
Figure A.3: Employment by Type in Sausalito
                       Self-Employed,
                       unincorporated
                      business worker
                            23.1%
     Local, State, or
         Federal
       Government
         Worker
           5.8%                                                             For profit private
                                                                            company worker
                                                                                 53.8%
       Non-Profit
         Worker
          6.2%
              Self-Employed, incorporated
                     business worker
                           11.1%
Source: 2010 Census, ACS 2008-2012
The California Office of Employment Statistics has compiled wages for select occupations,
organized by income limit category. Typical Bay Area wages are listed below in Table A.5 below.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page A - 5
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

Table A.5: Bay Area Wages for Select Occupations
                                                                                          Max. Monthly
 Very Low Income
                                                    Hourly Wage        Annual Income        Affordable
 (< $45,250 - 2 person household)
                                                                                           Housing Cost
 Waiters/Waitresses                                     $12.02             $25,009             $625
 Home Health Aides                                      $12.39             $25,774             $644
 Retail Salespersons                                    $13.67             $28,427             $711
 Security Guards                                        $15.56             $32,354             $809
 Preschool Teachers                                     $18.18             $37,829             $946
 Nursing Assistants                                     $19.09             $39,713             $993
                                                                                          Max. Monthly
 Low Income
                                                    Hourly Wage        Annual Income        Affordable
 ($45,250 -$72,400 - 2 person household)
                                                                                           Housing Cost
 Dental Assistants                                      $23.00             $47,851            $1,196
 Tax Preparers                                          $31.52             $65,555            $1,639
 Computer Support Specialists                           $31.67             $65,872            $1,647
 Elementary School Teachers                               n/a              $66,590            $1,665
 Real Estate Agents                                     $32.16             $66,895            $1,672
 Paralegals and Legal Assistants                        $33.50             $69,684            $1,742
                                                                                          Max. Monthly
 Moderate Income
                                                    Hourly Wage        Annual Income        Affordable
 ($72,400 - $98,900 - 2 person household)
                                                                                           Housing Cost
 Graphic Designers                                      $34.92             $72,624            $1,816
 Social Service and Community Service Managers          $36.41             $75,735            $1,893
 Librarians                                             $36.97             $76,884            $1,922
 Accountants and Auditors                               $41.65             $86,642            $2,166
 Physical Therapists                                    $44.11             $91,765            $2,294
 Firefighters                                           $44.21             $91,953            $2,299
Source: 2013 California Occupational Employment Statistics – San Francisco – San Mateo – Redwood City
According to ABAG projections, the decline in the rate of job growth seen in Sausalito in the past
decade will continue to 2030, falling from an average of 66 new jobs per year from 2010 to 2020
to only 32 per year for the next 10 years. See Figure A.4 for Sausalito’s projected job growth
through 2040.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                    Page A - 6
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

Figure A.4: Sausalito’s Projected Job Growth, 2010-2040
         9,000
         8,000                                                              7,640
                                      6,880              7,200
         7,000             6,220
  NUMBER OF JOBS
         6,000
         5,000
         4,000
         3,000
         2,000
         1,000
                       0
                           2010       2020               2030               2040
                                                YEAR
 Source: ABAG 2013
In general, jobs/housing balance is an in indicator of how many vehicle miles workers must
commute to their jobs. A highly skewed ratio often means workers must commute far from
where they live. The ratio of jobs per households is expected to increase in Sausalito from 1:1.51
in 2010 to 1:1.63 in 2020 and 1:1.66 in 2030 (see Figure A.5). Generally, it is desirable to have a
balance of jobs and workers in order to reduce commute times. However, a 1:1 ratio between
jobs and employed residents does not guarantee a reduction in commute trips. Although
Sausalito is expanding its job base, many residents still commute elsewhere to work, while many
of the people who work in Sausalito are living in other communities due to high housing costs (in
comparison to level of pay), limited housing availability, or personal lifestyle choices. A
simplified ratio measurement does not take these factors into account. Therefore, one focus of
the Housing Element is to address the issue of matching housing costs and types to the needs
and incomes of the community’s employed residents.
Figure A.5: Sausalito’s Projected Jobs/Housing Balance, 2010-2040
         1.75                                                                1.71
         1.70
  JOBS/HOUSING RATIO
                                                          1.66
         1.65                            1.63
         1.60
         1.55              1.51
         1.50
         1.45
         1.40
                           2010       2020                2030               2040
                                                YEAR
Source: ABAG 2013
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page A - 7
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

2. Housing Condition
a. Housing Types and Production
The 2010 Census documented a total of 4,536 housing units within Sausalito. This represents a
4% increase from the 1990 Census’ report, a very slight increase when compared to other Marin
County jurisdictions. Table A.6 summarizes the regional housing growth trends between 1990
and 2010 and illustrates Sausalito’s relatively slow housing growth over this period.
Table A.6: Regional Housing Growth Trends (1990-2010)
 20%
 15%
 10%
   5%
   0%
      Jurisdiction         1990            2000          2010     % Change 1990-2010
   Belvedere               1,037           1,059         1,045         Less than 1%
   Corte Madera            3,717           3,850         4,026               8%
   Fairfax                 3,225           3,418         3,585              11%
   Larkspur                5,966           6,413         6,376               7%
   Mill Valley             6,139           6,286         6,534               6%
   Novato                 18,782          18,994        21,158              13%
   Ross                     768             805           884               15%
   San Anselmo             5,330           5,408         5,538               4%
   San Rafael             21,139          22,948        24,011              14%
   Sausalito               4,378           4,511         4,536               4%
   Tiburon                 3,433           3,893         4,025              17%
   Marin County           99,757         104,990       111,214              12%
Source: US Census 1990, 2000, 2010
Table A.7 below shows the details and summarizes the change in housing types in Sausalito from
2000 to 2010.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page A - 8
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

Table A.7: Change in Housing Types in Sausalito, 2000-2010
                                         2000                     2010*              2000-2010 Change
             Unit Type          Number        Percent     Number       Number      Number        Percent
   Single-Family
   Detached                       1,706          38%        1,789         39%        83            5%
   Attached                        423            9%         824          18%        401           95%
   Subtotal Single-Family         2,129          47%        2,613         57%        484           23%
   Multi-Family
   2-4 units                      1,353          30%         900          20%       -453          -34%
   5+ Units                        805           18%         938          21%        133           17%
   Mobile Home and Other           224            5%          85           2%       -139          -62%
   Subtotal Multi-Family          2,382          53%        1,923         43%       -459          -19%
   Totals                         4,511         100%        4,536        100%         25           1%
Source: Department of Finance E-5
*Major decline of “2-4 units” in multi-family housing type and increase of “Attached” in single-family
housing type between 2000 and 2010 due to recategorization by the Department of Finance.
b. Age and Condition of the Housing Stock
Sausalito’s housing stock is old. Approximately 83% of the 4,376 housing units surveyed in
Sausalito were built before 1980, more than 50% were built before 1960, and about 25% are
pre-1940’s structures (see Table A.8). 135 units were added to the stock between 2000 and
2009, which is not enough to make a significant change in the percentage of units in the various
age categories.
Table A.8: Age of Units Built in Sausalito and Marin County
                                          Sausalito                           Marin County
           Year Built          Number           Percentage            Number             Percentage
         2000 to 2009            135                 3%                 5,568                 5%
         1990 to 1999            311                 7%                 6,780                 6%
         1980 to 1989            302                 7%                12,193                11%
         1970 to 1979            956                22%                22,619                20%
         1960 to 1969            718                16%                25,117                23%
         1950 to 1959            483                11%                19,946                18%
         1940 to 1949            180                 4%                 6,163                 6%
        1939 or earlier         1,291               30%                12,505                11%
              Total             4,376              100.0%             111,083              100.0%
Source: US Census 2010
Despite the advanced age of the housing stock in Sausalito, the general condition of the units is
very good due to ongoing repairs, maintenance, rehabilitation, and reconstruction. Land values
in Sausalito are very high so the cost of even extensive renovations is often minor in comparison
to the cost of the property. As a result, properties tend to be well maintained and frequently
updated. The City’s Building Official has reported that there are a very low percentage of
dwellings in Sausalito that are in need of repair and not currently under permit.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                        Page A - 9
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                      Adopted January 13, 2015

c. Construction prices and trends
From 2000 to 2012, 2,413 homes were sold in Sausalito (see Figure A.6). As demonstrated in the
following graph, home sales were impacted between 2008 and 2010 due to the economic
recession. Although the number of homes sold varied per year, the figure followed the
countywide trend.
Figure A.6: Homes Sold in Sausalito, 1998-2012
      300      282
                     230                            240
      250                               220   215          214
                           199
  Homes Sold
      200                        150                             139   136                             148
      150                                                                                        124
      100                                                                                 69
       50                                                                      24   23
        0
               1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
                                                          Year
Source: DataQuick, Zillow.com for 2008-2010 sales
From 2000 to 2008, the median sale price of a home (single family and multifamily) in Sausalito
increased by over 20%, from about $490,000 to about $740,000 (see Table A.9). Compared to
the county as a whole, median sales prices in Sausalito rose by a higher percentage than all
other jurisdictions besides Ross within the 2000-2008 period. 2013 saw an additional increase in
the median sales price of homes in Sausalito as the figure rose to $895,000, representing a 12%
increase.
Table A.9: Regional Median Sale Price 2000-2013
                                 2000               2004                2008               2013*
  Sausalito                  $494,238          $779,144           $742,628                $895,000
  Belvedere/Tiburon         $1,123,268        $1,630,150         $1,531,457              $1,800,000
  Corte Madera               $657,320          $800,324           $885,678                $872,000
  Fairfax                    $499,230          $605,160           $684,450                $645,000
  Larkspur                   $873,300         $1,018,130         $1,230,000              $1,255,000
  Mill Valley                $748,845         $1,005,322          $999,297               $1,050,000
  Novato                     $457,628          $603,647           $636,539                $580,900
  Ross                      $1,476,889        $2,239,092         $2,661,826              $2,220,000
  San Anselmo                $626,534          $801,837           $855,563                $869,500
  San Rafael                 $557,474          $724,679           $757,002                $677,500
Source: DataQuick, *Dataquick Annual Sales Price Charts by Zip Code, 2013
From 1999 through 2013 the number of building permits issued for housing units in Sausalito
fluctuated. On average over the last fifteen years, about 2 building permits for single family units
and about 2.2 building permits for multifamily units were issued per year (see Figure A.7).
Rotary Village, a 22-unit multi-family senior housing project, contributed to the sharp spike in
building permits issued in 2003.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                          Page A - 10
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                         Adopted January 13, 2015

Figure A.7: Building Permits Issued for Sausalito Housing Units, 1999-2013
  20
  15
  10
   5
   0
       1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                           Single-Family     Multi-Family
Note: This chart includes building permits for replaced existing units.
Source: Sausalito Community Development Department, April 2014.
3. Household Characteristics
a. Household Type and Tenure
The US Census defines a household as all of the people who occupy a housing unit as their usual
place of residence and a housing unit as “a house, an apartment, a mobile home or trailer, a
group of rooms, or a single room occupied as a separate living quarters, or if vacant, intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters. Persons living in licensed facilities or dormitories are
not considered households. In 2010 there were 4,112 households in Sausalito. Almost half of
those households (47%) consisted of people living alone, compared to just 31 percent single-
person households in Marin County. In contrast, families comprised 40 percent of households in
Sausalito, compared to 61 percent families in the County. See Figure A.8 for a comparison of
households by type in Sausalito and Marin County in 2010.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                  Page A - 11
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

Figure A.8: Households by Type, 2010
                70%        61%                                                         Total Households
                60%
                                                          47%                              103,210 (100%)
                50%
  Percent of Total
                                  40%                                                       4,112 (100%)
                40%                              31%
  Households    30%
                                                                                              Marin County
                20%                                                           13%
                                                                       8%
                10%
                                                                                              Sausalito
                 0%
                             Family             Single Person          Non-Family
                                                                       Multiperson
                       62,653 (61%)            31,746 (31%)             8,811 (8%)
                       1,653 (40%)             1,927 (47%)              532 (13%)
Source: US Census 2010
b. Housing Tenure
Tenure refers to whether a housing unit is rented or owned. Sausalito’s housing units are almost
equally divided between owners and renters, in marked contrast to the county, where the
percentage of home ownership is considerably higher. See Figure A.9 for a comparison of owner
and renter occupied households in Sausalito and Marin County between 2000 and 2010.
Figure A.9: Households by Tenure
                100%
                90%
                80%                           36%                                    37%
                            51%                                  49%
                70%
   Percentage
                60%
                50%
                40%
                30%                           64%                                    63%
                            49%                                  51%
                20%
                10%
                 0%
                          Sausalito        Marin County       Sausalito        Marin County
                                      2000                            2010
                                       Owner-Occupied       Renter-Occupied
Source: US Census, 2000 and 2010
c. Average Household Size
The average household size in Marin County in 2000 was 2.3 persons and the average household
size in Sausalito was 1.7 (US Census 2000). By 2010 the average household size in Marin County
had increased slightly to 2.4 while Sausalito’s average household size remained the same (US
Census 2010). See Figure A.10 for a comparison of Sausalito’s average household size in 2000
and 2010 compared to Marin County.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                           Page A - 12
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

Figure A.10: Sausalito Average Household Size Compared to Marin County
                          3
Average Household Size
                                                                   2.3     2.4
                         2.5
                          2       1.7      1.7
                         1.5
                          1
                         0.5
                          0
                                 City of Sausalito                 Marin County
                                                  2000    2010
Source: US Census, 2000 and 2010
d. Vacancy Rate Trends
As housing prices have risen, rental unit vacancy rates have fallen (RealFacts). From 2006 to
2008 vacancy rates in rental units have slightly risen from 3.2% to 3.7% in Marin County. In
Sausalito rental vacancy rates fluctuated from 2006 to 2008, with the vacancy rate just under 3%
in 2008, a decrease from 5.2% in 2007. The 2010 Census provides a more comprehensive
depiction of vacancy rates among all rental units in the community (vacancy data from Real
Facts is limited to projects with 100+ units). According to the census, Sausalito had a rental
vacancy rate of 5.8%. In comparison, the 2010 Census documented rental vacancies Countywide
slightly below Sausalito at 5.2% (see Figure A.11). The 2010 Census documents a homeowner
vacancy rate of 2.1% in Sausalito, representing the percentage of vacant homes “for sale”.
Figure A.11: Sausalito Vacancy Rates in Rental Units, 2006-2010
                         7.00%
                                                                                  5.8%
                         6.00%                     5.2%                                   5.2%
   Rental Vacancy Rate
                         5.00%   4.50%                                                             Sausalito
                         4.00%                                            3.7%
                                         3.2%               3.1%      3.0%                         Marin County
                         3.00%
                         2.00%
                         1.00%
                         0.00%
                                   2006              2007                2008      2010
Source: RealFacts, US Census 2010
Housing experts consider a five percent rental vacancy rate as necessary to permit ordinary
rental mobility. In a housing market with a lower vacancy rate, tenants will have difficulty
locating appropriate units and strong market pressure will inflate rents. In situations where the
housing market is extremely tight, there can be a greater tendency among landlords to
discriminate against renters. Fair Housing of Marin is a civil rights agency that investigates
housing discrimination, including discrimination based on race, origin, disability, gender and
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                            Page A - 13
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                           Adopted January 13, 2015

children. Their caseload consists almost entirely of renters. The organization receives
approximately 1,200 inquires a year county-wide, of which about 250 are discrimination
complaints that are fully investigated. Fair Housing of Marin also educates landowners on fair
housing laws, provides seminars in English, Spanish and Vietnamese on how to prepare for a
housing search and recognize discrimination, and education programs on the importance of
community diversity in schools, which includes an annual “Fair Housing” poster contest.
4. Housing Costs, Household Income and Ability to Pay for Housing
a. Household Income
Income is defined as wages, salaries, pensions, social security benefits, and other forms of cash
received by a household. Non-cash items, such as Medicare and other medical insurance
benefits, are not included as income. It is generally expected that people can afford to pay about
30% of their gross income on housing. Housing costs include rent or principal, interest, property
taxes and insurance, but not utilities, food, etc. It is therefore critical to understand the
relationship between household income and housing costs to determine how affordable—or
unaffordable—housing really is.
Information on household income by household size is maintained by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for each county and is updated annually. Income
categories are defined as a percentage of the countywide median household income for four
person households: (1) Extremely Low Income -- below 30% of median income; (2) Very-Low
Income -- 30- 50% of median income; (3) Low Income -- 50-80% of Marin County median
income; (4) Moderate Income––80-120% of Marin County median income; and (5) Above-
Moderate Income––120% and above. Income limits for all income categories are adjusted for
household size so that larger households have higher income limits than smaller households. For
all income categories, the income limits for household sizes other than four persons are
calculated using the four-person income limit as the base. Data from the 2014 State Income
Limits states the median income for Marin County is $103,000. The maximum income for each
income category based on this median income is as follows:
Table A.10: Income Categories in Marin County 2014
   Extremely Low Income             (<30% of area median income, or AMI)               0-$33,950
   Very Low-Income                              (30-50% of AMI)                     $33,951-$56,550
   Low-Income                                   (51-80% of AMI)                     $56,551-$90,500
   Moderate-Income                             (81-120% of AMI)                    $90,501-$123,600
   Above Moderate-Income                         (>120% of AMI)                      over $123,601
Source: HCD 2014
In 2011 approximately 434 Sausalito households (11%) earned less than $25,000 per year, 502
households (13%) earned between $25,000 and $49,999 per year, 388 households (10%) earned
between $50,000 and $74,999 per year, 488 households (12%) earned between $75,000 to
$99,999 per year, and 2,833 households (66%) earn over $75,000 per year. Although recent data
is not available for the proportion of owner or renter households within each of the income
categories, Table A.11 shows a breakdown of the year 2000 households in Sausalito by tenure
and income category (using four-person household income data). In 2008 the median county
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                   Page A - 14
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

income was $96,800. Thus, at the time, 35% of median was $33,880, 50% of median was
$48,400, 80% of median was $77,440 and 120% of median was $116,160.
Table A.11: Household Tenure by Income in Sausalito, 2010
                                                     Renters                   Owners
               Income Category               Number        Percent    Number         Percent
   Very Low-Income (≤50% of AMI)                380          17%        335            16%
   Low-Income (51%-80% of AMI)                  325          15%        230            11%
   Moderate-Income (81%-120% of AMI)            530          23%        210            10%
   Above Moderate Income (>121% of AMI)        1,010         45%       1,300           63%
   Total Occupied                              2,245       100.0%      2,075         100.0%
Source: ABAG 2013
b. Extremely Low Income Housing Needs (<30% of county median income)
In virtually all cases the only housing choice for extremely low income households is rental
housing. For individuals, single-room occupancy units are also an affordable solution. Deed
restricted rentals that target these income categories, often with supportive services, can be the
best housing solution for extremely low income families or individuals.
c. Sales Prices, Rents and Ability to Pay for Housing
i. Homeownership Market
There is a gap between affordable housing costs and actual housing costs for all lower income
groups in Marin County. Households on an extremely low income budget can afford less than 10
percent of the median sales price of a single family home and just less than half the rent of a
two bedroom apartment. In addition, the median sale price for a single family home in Sausalito
is affordable only to households earning considerably more than a moderate income in the
County.
Table A.12 compares median home sales prices during calendar year 2013 in Sausalito and other
Marin communities by zip code, and contrasts this with sales prices during the prior year.
Within Sausalito zip code 94965, a total of 162 single-family homes and condominiums were
sold in 2013 for an overall median sales price of $895,000, reflecting a significant 35% price
increase from the prior year. At $707, the price per square foot of homes sold in Sausalito is
among the highest in the County, surpassed only by the communities of Belvedere/Tiburon and
Ross.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page A - 15
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

Table A.12: Regional Single-Family Homes and Condominium Sales Jan-Dec 2013
                                        # Homes/                             % Change
                                                      % Change     Median                 Price/
        Community         Zip code       Condos                                from
                                                      from 2012  Sales Price              Sq. Ft.
                                           Sold                                2012
  Sausalito                 94965          162           8.7%     $895,000    34.9%        $707
  Belvedere/Tiburon         94920          223           -6.7%   $1,800,000   21.8%        $769
  Corte Madera              94925          158           11.3%    $872,000     3.8%        $592
  Fairfax                   94930          118           20.4%    $645,000    15.2%        $432
  Greenbrae                 94904          197            8.2%   $1,255,000   20.1%        $627
  Inverness                 94937           25           -7.4%    $920,000    89.7%        $522
  Larkspur                  94939           92          -29.8%   $1,255,000   19.5%        $638
  Mill Valley               94941          489            6.1%   $1,050,000   16.7%        $616
  Novato                    94945          229           -9.5%    $615,000    21.8%        $315
  Novato                    94947          351          -10.0%    $488,250    16.5%        $343
  Novato                    94949          250          -12.0%    $639,500     9.3%        $328
  Ross                      94957           35           16.7%   $2,220,000    3.3%        $869
  San Anselmo               94960          285           11.8%    $869,500    11.0%        $535
  San Rafael                94901          459          -15.3%    $745,000    29.6%        $437
  San Rafael                94903          441           -4.3%    $610,000    16.8%        $413
  Stinson Beach             94970           35           -7.9%   $1,550,000   29.4%        $931
  Source: Dataquick Annual Sales Price Charts by Zip Code, 2013.
For purposes of evaluating home purchase affordability, Table A.13 presents the maximum
affordable purchase price for moderate income households (120% AMI), and compares this with
the 2013 median sales price in Sausalito of $895,000 to demonstrate an affordability gap. As
illustrated below in Table A.13, the maximum affordable purchase price ranges from $451,000
for a two-person household up to $627,000 for a household with five persons rendering median
housing prices in Sausalito well beyond the reach of moderate income households.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                              Page A - 16
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

Table A.13: 2013 Marin County Maximum Affordable Housing Cost (Moderate Income)
  $1,000,000
    $900,000
    $800,000
                                                                          $329,000                $268,000
    $700,000            $444,000                  $385,000
    $600,000
    $500,000
    $400,000
    $300,000                                                              $566,000                $627,000
                        $451,000                  $510,000
    $200,000
    $100,000
           $0
                       1 Bedroom                 2 Bedroom               3 Bedroom               4 Bedroom
          Max Affordable Purchase Price        Gap Between Affordable Purchase Price and Median Housing Price
  Moderate Income                                   1 Bedroom        2 Bedroom         3 Bedroom        4 Bedroom
  Affordable Housing Cost                           (2 persons)      (3 persons)       (4 persons)      (5 persons)
  Household Income @ 120% Median                      $98,900         $111,250          $123,600         $133,500
  Income Towards Housing @ 35% Income                 $34,615          $38,937           $43,260          $46,725
  Maximum Monthly Housing Cost                        $2,885           $3,245            $3,605           $3,995
  Less Ongoing Monthly Expenses:
                                       Utilities       -$150            -$170             -$210            -$250
              Taxes (1.1% affordable hsg price)        -$413            -$468             -$518            -$574
                                     Insurance          -$85            -$100             -$115            -$130
                             HOA Fees & Other          -$180            -$180             -$180            -$180
       Monthly Income Available for Mortgage          $2,057           $2,327            $2,582           $2,861
       Supportable 30-yr Mrtg @ 4.5% interest        $406,000         $459,000          $510,000         $565,000
             Homebuyer Downpayment (10%)              $45,000          $51,000           $56,000          $62,000
          Maximum Affordable Purchase Price          $451,000         $510,000          $566,000         $627,000
  Sausalito Median Housing Price                                              $895,000
Source: Karen Warner Associates
Utility costs based on 2013 Housing utility allowance schedule for attached units (gas appliances).
ii. Rental Housing Market
A rent survey was conducted in March 2014 to evaluate the cost of rental housing within
Sausalito. Rental data was collected based on asking rents for units advertised on several rental
websites, including Craigslist, Trulia, and Bay4Rent. A total of 33 apartments were identified for
rent, with median rents of $1,850 for a studio, $2,400 for a one-bedroom, and $3,075 for a two-
bedroom units. Just one three-bedroom unit was advertised, with an asking rent of $3,075 for a
two-bedroom units. Just one three-bedroom unit was advertised, with an asking rent of $5,700.
Nine single-family homes were also advertised for rent in Sausalito, with median rents of $4,500
for a two bedroom home, and $6,350 for homes with three to four bedrooms. In addition,
several liveaboard boats were listed for rent.
Table A.15 presents the maximum affordable rents for very low, low and moderate-income
households by household size, and compares with median apartment rents in Sausalito (as
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                            Page A - 17
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

documented in Table A.14). As the table below indicated, Citywide median rents are above the
level of affordability for all very low and low income households, with an affordability gap
ranging from $367 to $1,174 per month for low income households depending on household
size. Unlike most other Marin jurisdictions, even households earning moderate incomes are
priced out of the rental market in Sausalito, with the exception of studio units which are
extremely limited in supply (Table A.15).
Table A.14: Survey of Vacant Rental Units in Sausalito March 2013
                                                # Units
 Unit Type and Bedrooms                                                  Rental Range               Median Rent
                                             Advertised
Apartments/Condominiums
               Studios                              2                     $1,750-$1,950                 $1,850
                    1                              14                     $1,875-$3,100                 $2,400
                    2                              16                     $2,285-$4,500                 $3,075
                    3                               1                         $5,700                    $5,700
Single-Family homes
                    2                               3                    $3,200-$10,000                 $4,500
                  3-4                               6                    $4,500-$20,000                 $6,350
Source: www.craigslist.org, Trulia.com, Bay4Rent.com
Table A.15: 2013 Maximum Affordable Rents in Marin County
                                               Maximum Affordable Rent After Utilities Allowance2
 Income Level     1
                                          Studio               1 Bedroom           2 Bedroom            3 Bedroom
                                        (1 person)              (2 person)         (3 person)           (4 person)
 Very Low Income                           $890                   $1,016             $1,138               $1,239
 Low Income                               $1,483                  $1,695             $1,901               $2,087
 Moderate Income                          $2,062                  $2,357             $2,646               $2,915
 Sausalito Median
                                          $1,850                  $2,400             $3,075                 $23
 Apartment Rent
 Source: Karen Warner Associates
 1 Income levels based on State HCD published Income Limits for 2013.
 2 Utility costs based on Marin Housing multi-family utility allowance schedule (gas heating, cooking and water
 heating; assumes monthly refuse service included in rent): $100 for studios, $115 for 1 bedrooms, $135 for 2
 bedrooms, and $175 for 3 bedrooms.
Programs like Section 8 or units built with affordability controls can help meet the needs of
lower income households. To meet this need it may be important to provide deeper levels of
subsidy or housing with supportive services.
d. Overpayment
The 2000 Census indicates that overpayment remains a critical problem for lower and
moderate-income households, who are disproportionately affected by this burden compared to
other households. Affordability problems occur when housing costs become so high in relation
to income that households have to pay an excessive proportion of their income for housing, or
are unable to afford any housing and are homeless. Housing overpayment refers to spending
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                                Page A - 18
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

more than 30 percent of income on housing; severe overpayment is spending greater than 50
percent.
Three quarters of lower income families in Sausalito, those with incomes under 80% of the
county median, are overpaying for housing, meaning that more than 30% of their income goes
to housing. For families lower down on the income scale the housing burden is worse. Three out
of four extremely low income households devote more than half of their income to housing.
The percentage of Sausalito’s lower income population with high housing cost burdens is shown
in Table A.16 below.
Table A.16: Housing Cost Burden by Tenure in Sausalito
                                                                             Above
                                   Very Low-      Low-       Moderate
                                                                           Moderate              % of Total
                      Occupant    Income (less  Income        Income
                                                                            Income      Total    Occupied
                        Type      than 30-50%  (50%-80%     (80%-120%
                                                                         (Above 120%                Units
                                      AMI)        AMI)          AMI)
                                                                              AMI)
 Overpayment (30%-     Renters         55          90           280            15        440        10%
 50% of income for
 housing)              Owners          15          15            45           220        295         7%
                      Subtotal         70          105          325           235        735        17%
 Severe
                       Renters        310          100           15             0        425        10%
 Overpayment (50%
 or more of income
                       Owners         195          135           75            90        495        11%
 for housing)
                      Subtotal        505          235           90            90        920        21%
        Total                         575          340          415           325       1655        38%
Source: ABAG 2013
e. Overcrowding
The State defines an overcrowded unit as one occupied by more than 1.01 people per room
excluding bathrooms and kitchens. A unit with more than 1.5 people per room is severely
overcrowded. The incidence of overcrowded housing is a general measure of whether there is
an available supply of adequately sized housing units. In Sausalito in 2013, only 15 households
were considered overcrowded. All 15 of these households were owner occupied and classified
as “severely overcrowded”, meaning that there were more than 1.5 people per room with these
households. See Table A.17 for the number of households in Sausalito living in overcrowded
units.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page A - 19
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

Table A.17: Number of Households in Sausalito Living in Overcrowded Units
  16
  14
  12
  10
   8
   6
   4
   2
   0
        Overcrowded (1.01-          Severely       Overcrowded (1.01-        Severely
       1.5 people per room) Overcrowded (over 1.5 people per room) Overcrowded (over
                             1.5 people per room)                      1.5 people per room)
                      Owner Occupied                           Renter Occupied
         Tenure                                Condition                         # of Units
                                             Overcrowded
                                                                                      0
                                      (1.01-1.5 people per room)
    Owner Occupied
                                        Severely Overcrowded
                                                                                     15
                                      (over 1.5 people per room)
                                             Overcrowded
                                                                                      0
                                      (1.01-1.5 people per room)
    Renter Occupied
                                        Severely Overcrowded
                                                                                      0
                                      (over 1.5 people per room)
Source: ABAG 2013
*Based off ACS 2008-2012 which utilizes a sample in its survey. Given Sausalito’s relatively small size,
there is likely a limited amount of renter overcrowding that was not captured in this survey.
f. Foreclosure
Compared to other areas in the State and Country, Marin fared relatively well during the
foreclosure crisis in 2008. Though the Marin Independent Journal reported that the foreclosure
rate in Marin had tripled in 2008, the foreclosure rate was nearly three times smaller than that
of the State’s. On January 17, 2014, the Journal reported that the foreclosure rate has declined
each year since 2010 with a 60% drop in foreclosures experienced in 2013.
g. Assisted Developments at Risk of Conversion
California housing element law requires all jurisdictions to include a study of all lower income
housing units which may at some future time be lost to the affordable inventory by the
expiration of some type of affordability restrictions.
Sausalito has a total of 38 affordable rental housing units, none of which is at risk of conversion
to market rate within the next ten years. Bee Street Housing, Inc., owns a six-unit senior housing
property at 408 Bee Street which is managed by EAH Housing. The maximum income for a one
person household at the Bee Street Housing property is $39,600 annually and for a two person
household is $45,250 annually. The units were built on a 20-year HUD 202 contract which was
renewed by HUD until 2025.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page A - 20
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                     Adopted January 13, 2015

The Sausalito Rotary (a 501.c.3 non-profit) owns and manages the remaining 32 affordable units
in Sausalito. Rotary Place is a 10 unit senior housing property on Bee Street and Rotary Village is
a 22 unit senior housing development on Olima Street. The Rotary Housing projects were built
without restrictive loans and are maintained as affordable projects as part of the organization’s
community service. Rents are maintained at very low income levels, and both projects accept
tenants with Section 8 vouchers.
5. Special Needs Housing
In addition to overall housing needs, every jurisdiction must make a special effort to facilitate
the development of housing for special need groups. To meet the community’s special housing
needs (including the needs of seniors, people living with physical and mental disabilities, single
parent and female-headed households, large families, farmworkers, and individuals and families
who are homeless), Sausalito must be creative and look to new ways of increasing the supply,
diversity and affordability of this specialized housing stock. Table A.18 provides the number of
households and people in Sausalito within the various special needs groups.
Table A.18: Estimate of Special Needs Households in Sausalito, 2000 and 2010
 Special Needs Households/Persons                                               Total in      Total in
                                                                                 2000          2010
 Persons with disabilities:                                                      1,166          n/a
     16-64 years                                                                    (866)       n/a
     65+ years                                                                   (300)          n/a
 Elderly Households (65+)                                                        1,111         1,083
 Large Family Households                                                           28            41
 Single-Female Headed Households                                                  148           146
 Farm/fishery workers                                                              10           n/a
Source: Census 2000 and 2010
*2000 Census provides most recent data for persons with disabilities and farm/fishery workers.
Special needs housing includes a variety of housing types and living arrangements, from
independent living (owning or renting), to assisted living (licensed facilities), to supportive
housing, transitional housing, and emergency shelter. Further, the vast majority of special needs
housing is service enriched. In other words, services are offered to residents to help them
maintain independent living as long as possible.
a. Persons with Disabilities
According to 2000 Census and 2013 ABAG data, there are a total of 1,166 persons in Sausalito
with disabilities (e.g., sensory, physical, mental and self-care disabilities), representing 16
percent of the population. Among the city’s senior citizens (age 65 and over), 300 people, or
one third, have disabilities, (see Table A.19). People living with disabilities represent a wide
range of different housing needs, depending on the type and severity of their disability as well
as personal preference and lifestyle. The design of housing, accessibility modifications, proximity
to services and transit, and group living opportunities represent some of the types of
considerations and accommodations that are important in serving this need group.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page A - 21
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

Incorporating barrier-free design in all new multifamily housing is especially important to
provide the widest range of choice, and is required by the State of California and Federal Fair
Housing laws.
Special consideration should also be given to the issue of income and affordability, as many
people with disabilities may be in fixed income situations. Marin Center for Independent Living,
for example, indicates that most of their clients live below the level of poverty. As the
population ages, the need for housing for people with disabilities will increase. Consideration
can be given to dwelling conversion (or adaptability) and appropriate site design.
Developmental Disabilities: Due to the dramatic rise in autism spectrum disorders (ASD), in
2010 the California legislature passed SB 812 which requires the housing element to specifically
analyze the housing needs of persons with developmental disabilities, and to identify resources
available to serve this population. The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS)
currently provides community-based services to 6,000 adults diagnosed with ASD; over 4,000
California teenagers diagnosed with ASD will reach adulthood over the next five years, many of
whom will want to live independently and need appropriate housing.
The Golden Gate Regional Center (GGRC), which serves the counties of Marin, San Francisco and
San Mateo, is among 21 regional centers operated by the State DDS to serve the
developmentally disabled population. The goal of these centers is to: 1) prevent/minimize
institutionalization of developmentally disabled persons and their dislocation from family and
community; and 2) enable this population to lead more independent and productive lives. The
living arrangements for persons served by the Golden Gate Regional Center in 2010 were as
follows:
     •   69% Parent’s Home
     •   13% Community Care Facility
     •   6% Own Home Independent Living
     •   4% Own Home Supported Living
     •   4% Intermediate Care/Skilled Nursing Facility
     •   2% Developmental Center
     •   1% Family Home Agency/Foster Care
     •   1% Other
The GGRC provides services to approximately 1,200 individuals with developmental disabilities
in Marin, San Francisco and San Mateo counties, and estimates that 380 of these individuals are
in need of housing assistance. Within zip code 94965, which encompasses Sausalito and extends
north to Marin City and west to Muir Beach, the Regional Center currently provides services to
eight residents with developmental disabilities, generating an estimated need for three housing
units:
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page A - 22
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

Table A.19: Estimate of Developmentally Disabled Residents Served by GGRC within Sausalito
Zip Code
               0-14         15-22        23-54        55-65       65+          Total       Est.Housing
  Zip Code Years            Years        Years        Years       Years                    Need*
  94965        7            1 person 0                0           0            8           3 units
               persons                                                         persons
  Source: Golden Gate Regional Center (GGRC), 2012.
  * GGRC utilizes the following need factors to estimate housing need by age group: age 0-14 25% need
  housing; age 15-22 50% need housing; age 23-54 35% need housing; age 55-65 25% need housing; age
  65+ 20% need housing.
Golden Gate has identified a number of community-based housing types appropriate for
persons living with a developmental disability: licensed community care facilities and group
homes; supervised apartment settings with support services; SB 962 homes (for persons with
special health care and intensive support needs); and for persons able to live more
independently, rent subsidized homes; inclusionary housing, and Section 8 rental vouchers.
Founded in 1919, the non-profit Cedars of Marin is one of California’s original programs for
persons with developmental disabilities. Cedars provides housing for 48 disabled adults on its
main campus in Ross, and in addition provides ten community-based group homes (for 6 or
fewer residents) in Novato and San Rafael.
Sausalito’s Housing Element sets forth several programs which seek to encourage and facilitate
housing for persons with disabilities, enable group homes and ensure reasonable
accommodation.
b. Seniors
Seniors are a significant special needs group in Sausalito, with 21 percent of the City’s
population age 65 and above in 2010, nearly double the 11 percent share of seniors statewide.
Over one-quarter of Sausalito’s households are headed by seniors, with homeowners comprising
three-quarters of the community’s 1,083 senior households and renters comprising the
remaining one-quarter. An estimated 335 seniors live alone (31% of senior households) and
approximately 40 percent are low income (<80% AMI).
With the overall aging of society, the senior population (persons over 65 years of age) will
increase in most communities, including Sausalito. Consequently, the need for affordable and
specialized housing for older residents will grow. The particular housing needs of this group
include the need for smaller and more efficient housing, for barrier-free and accessible housing,
and for a wide variety of housing with health care and/or personal services, including the
provision of a continuum of care as elderly households become less self-reliant. Typical forms of
housing to meet the needs of seniors include smaller attached or detached housing for
independent living (both market rate and below market rate); second units; shared housing;
age-restricted subsidized rental developments; congregate care facilities; licensed facilities; and
skilled nursing homes.
The Alzheimer’s Association estimated that in 2010, there were 480,000 Californians aged 65
and older living with Alzheimer’s. By 2025, there would be an estimated 660,000 Californians
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                    Page A - 23
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                   Adopted January 13, 2015

aged 65 and older living with Alzheimer’s, nearly a 38 percent increase over 15 years. The
Alzheimer’s Association also released a report in 2009 estimating that among California’s baby
boomers aged 55 and over, one in eight will develop Alzheimer’s disease, and one in six will
develop some form of dementia. Such trends point towards an increasing need for dementia
facilities, opportunities for seniors to remain with their family, such as in an accessory dwelling
unit (ADU, or “granny” or “in-law” second unit), and a need for housing where an “in-home”
care-giver can reside.
The increasing longevity of people and the increasing number of seniors will create additional
need for affordable housing and specialized housing for older residents. This has the following
implications:
     •    Given the limited supply of vacant residential land, senior projects will compete
          with non-age-restricted housing for development sites, potentially conflicting with
          housing efforts aimed at meeting other important housing needs.
     •    Senior households on fixed incomes have limited resources for home
          improvements to maintain or rehabilitate older housing. The need for rehabilitation
          assistance programs may increase.
     •    Many seniors can become “trapped” in large houses due to upkeep expenditures
          and house payment increases that would result from moving into a smaller housing
          unit. This creates new information and assistance needs for local housing programs
          (Strategic Plan Data Focus Report 2004-2014, Division of Aging, Marin Health and
          Human Services).
Low- and very low-income seniors often cannot afford the cost of licensed facilities in Marin.
According to the Marin County Division of Aging, the average basic rent is currently between
$3,500 to $4,000 per month for a single bed (room, bathroom, and three meals a day). Personal
care is an additional cost above the basic housing charge.
As discussed in Paragraph 4g (Assisted Developments at Risk of Conversion) above,
Sausalito has three facilities for very-low income seniors, one owned by the non-profit housing
corporation and managed by the Ecumenical Association for Housing (EAH) and the other two
owned by the Rotary Housing Corporation. The three facilities provide 38 affordable rental
housing units for very-low income seniors.
c. Large Households
Large households, defined as households with five or more persons, typically consist of families
with children. The 2010 Census identifies 41 large households in Sausalito - 22 homeowners and
19 renters – representing just one percent of all households. The limited number of large
households is not surprising as families with children comprise only ten percent of Sausalito’s
households. While large households are not a significant special needs group, the City is
interested in providing a greater range of housing options to allow families to reside in the
community.
d. Single Parent and Female-Headed Households
Single parent and female-headed households may have difficulty finding appropriately sized
housing and need affordable housing with day care and recreation programs on-site or nearby,
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                 Page A - 24
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

in proximity to schools and with access to services. Also, despite fair housing laws,
discrimination against children may make it more difficult for this group to find adequate
housing. Women in the housing market, especially the elderly, lower and moderate income
individuals, and single-parents, face significant difficulties finding housing, and both ownership
and rental units are extremely expensive relative to the incomes of many people in this
population category. In 2010 there were 146 female headed householders in family households
with no husband present, which amounted to 3.6 percent of the total number of households in
Sausalito. Nearly half of these female-headed families (62 households) included children under
the age of 18.
e. Farmworkers (or Fishery Workers)
State law requires that jurisdictions evaluate the need for farmworker housing in the housing
element. According to the US Census, the “farmworker” occupational category includes those
working in the farming, fishing and forestry industries. In Sausalito, farmworkers are reflective of
persons working in the fishing industry, and overlaps with the community’s marine industry.
There are no agricultural uses in Sausalito and, because lots tend to be small, the demand for
landscape maintenance workers is small. The 2000 Census identified ten persons employed in
agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, which were likely those working within the fishing
industry. Sausalito has a diversity of housing types, including houseboats and liveaboards that
could serve the needs of this special needs group.
f. Marine Workers
Marine workers are an integral part of the community’s history and the working waterfront.
Marine-related occupations in Sausalito include: boat building, repair and restoration,
sailmaking, canvas works, marine survey, marine mechanics, chandlery, rigging, custom boat
lettering, dive service, towing, haul out service, brightwork and boat cleaning, dock
maintenance, boat delivery, pump-out service, fueling station, captain, crew, ship’s engineer,
ship’s chef, yacht sales, dock repair, and harbor master. Among the marine-related businesses in
Sausalito also include a sailing school, kayak school, school for wooden boat building, bait shop,
maritime science nonprofit, and travel agency for worldwide sailing experiences. Many of
Sausalito’s marine workers reside on liveaboards, and the majority is lower income. The Galilee
Harbor co-op was specifically established to provide an affordable liveaboard community for
Sausalito’s artists and maritime workers, and since 2003 has provided 38 rent- and income-
restricted berths. Support of similar and other affordable housing options would help workers to
live near work opportunities, and showcase the skills of local marine workers.
g. Individuals and Families who are Homeless
In order to comply with Senate Bill 2 (SB 2), the City must analyze the housing needs of its
homeless population, including the need for emergency shelter, transitional and supportive
housing. According to the State Department of Housing and Community Development,
emergency shelter is defined as housing that offers minimal supportive services, limits
occupancy to six months or less, and is provided at no cost to the family or individual.
Homeless individuals and families have perhaps the most immediate housing need of any group.
They also have one of the most difficult sets of housing needs to meet, due to both the diversity
and complexity of the factors that lead to homelessness, and to community concern regarding
the siting of housing that serves homeless clients. Statistics regarding homelessness reflect
everyone who does not have a permanent home of their own including people who are staying
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                 Page A - 25
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

with friends or family, living in their cars, staying in shelters as well as those who are on the
street.
        i. Number of Homeless People
       The best source of data for estimating the daily average number of homeless people is the
       2013 Marin Homeless Point in Time Count, which was conducted by the Marin Health and
       Human Services on January 24, 2013. The data was gathered from 50 organizations
       serving homeless people and included a count of both unsheltered homeless people
       (those living on the streets) and those who were sheltered (living in emergency shelters
       and transitional housing) on the night before the count. The count reports numbers of
       sheltered and unsheltered homeless people to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
       Development (HUD), according to HUD’s definition of homelessness.
       The count found a total of 933 homeless persons (unsheltered, sheltered, and other
       homeless populations), representing a 24% decline from the last Countywide assessment
       in 2011. The unsheltered homeless count documented 368 persons and is broken down
       by jurisdiction in Table A.20.
       Table A.20: Marin County Unsheltered Homeless, 2013
          City / Location on the day of the count:     Unsheltered         Percentage of
          “What city/area did you stay last night?”    Homeless Count      Unsheltered
                                                                           Homeless Count
          Sausalito                                    23                  6%
          Bolinas                                      27                  7%
          Belvedere                                    2                   1%
          Corte Madera                                 4                   1%
          Fairfax                                      3                   1%
          Forest Knolls                                2                   1%
          Greenbrae                                    0                   0%
          Inverness                                    2                   1%
          Kentfield                                    0                   0%
          Lagunitas                                    0                   0%
          Larkspur                                     0                   0%
          Marin City                                   1                   0%
          Mill Valley                                  3                   1%
          Novato                                       32                  9%
          Olema                                        1                   0%
          Out of area                                  7                   2%
          Pt. Reyes                                    9                   2%
          Ross                                         2                   1%
          San Anselmo                                  3                   1%
          San Geronimo                                 1                   1%
          San Rafael                                   175                 48%
          Stinson                                      0                   0%
          West Marin                                   0                   0%
          Woodacre                                     0                   0%
          Not stated                                   71                  19%
          Total                                        368                 100%
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                    Page A - 26
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                   Adopted January 13, 2015

            Source: County of Marin Homeless Point in Time Count 2013
       As shown above, the count found 23 unsheltered homeless individuals in Sausalito that
       met the Marin County Health and Human Services definition of “unsheltered” homeless. 2
       Data is not available on the breakdown of the sheltered homeless population by
       jurisdiction, and since the vast majority of Marin’s emergency shelters and transitional
       housing are located in either San Rafael or Novato, it is likely that most of the sheltered
       homeless people were residing in one of those two jurisdictions on the night of the count.
       In addition to the homeless count, there were 4,388 persons who were precariously
       housed on the same day. A person is considered precariously housed and at risk of
       homelessness if they are about to lose housing and have no other place to live, or are
       housed but living temporarily with friends or family because they lack the resources or
       support networks to retain or obtain permanent housing and/or are housed but have
       moved frequently due to economic reasons and/or are living in severely overcrowded
       housing.
       ii. Homeless Subpopulations and Service Needs
       In addition to estimating the daily average number of homeless people, SB2 requires that
       jurisdictions include in their Housing Elements a description of the percentage of
       subpopulations of homeless people in the community, including data that identifies
       specific service needs (e.g. mental illness, substance use, developmental disability,
       emancipated foster youth). The best source for estimating homeless subpopulations and
       service needs is the 2013 Marin Homeless Point in Time Count. As part of the 2013 count,
       data was gathered on how many homeless people had particular disabilities or other
       special needs. See Table A.21 below for a county-wide summary of these needs.
       Table A.21: Health Issues of the Homeless Community in Marin County, 2013
                “Do you have any of the following                 Number             Percentage
                health issues?”
                Alcohol Use                                       233                32%
                Physical Disability                               175                24%
                Mental Illness                                    177                24%
                Multiple Conditions                               122                17%
                Drug Use                                          51                 7%
                Chronic Health Condition                          50                 7%
                Developmental                                     36                 5%
                HIV/AIDS                                          19                 3%
       Source: County of Marin Homeless Point in Time Count 2013
       This data demonstrates that homeless people in Marin County are likely to have at least
       one disability. 52% of adults counted reported having at least one type of disabling
       condition such as a physical or developmental disability, chronic illness or substance
2
  The County defines unsheltered as any person that resides in a place not meant for human habitation,
such as a car, park, sidewalk, open space or on the street.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                   Page A - 27
  Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

     abuse problem. 17% suffered from two or more illnesses or conditions. The survey found
     or 43%, were chronically homeless, meaning they had a disability and had been homeless
     continuously for 12 months or had experienced four episodes of homelessness over a
     three year period. This data is consistent with national studies that have found high levels
     of disability among homeless people and suggests that both health and behavioral health
     services are needed to assist this population. Consistent with what has been found
     nationally, 26% of adults counted reported experiencing domestic violence, and veterans
     comprised 9% of the adults counted.
     iii. Inventory of Resources Available
     SB 2 also requires that the Housing Element include an inventory of the homeless housing
     resources available within the community, including emergency shelters, transitional
     housing and supportive housing. Currently Sausalito does not have a dedicated
     emergency shelter, transitional housing or supportive housing within its jurisdictional
     boundary. The nearest emergency shelters to Sausalito are located in Novato and San
     Rafael. The Fireside Apartments, located less than a mile away in Mill Valley, offers ten of
     its fifty units as permanent supportive housing for homeless families.
     Table A.22: 2013 Homeless Housing Inventory
                                                                      Permanent
                                Emergency         Transitional                         Total # of
                                                                      Supportive
                                   Shelter          Housing                               Beds
                                                                        Housing
              Family Beds             49              252                 185             486
            Individual Beds          216               90                 316             622
                 Totals              265              342                 501            1,108
           Chronic Homeless
                                    varies           varies               209             209
                  Beds
             Veteran Beds              1               16                  35              52
             Seasonal Beds            66                --                 --              66
           Domestic Violence
                                      20               84                  --             104
                  Beds
     Source: Marin County Continuum of Care: 10 Year Plan to Prevent & End Homelessness 2013-2023
     iv. Unmet Need for Emergency Shelter, Transitional and Supportive Housing
     There is no data presently available documenting the increased level of demand for
     shelter in Marin County during particular times of the year. Due to the relatively mild
     climate, the only time of year when increased demand appears to be a factor is during the
     winter months (December to February). The biannual homeless count always takes place
     in the last week of January, which is a period when demand for shelter typically is at its
     highest. Since the year-round need described above is based on that biannual count, the
     seasonal need for emergency shelter is no likely greater than the year-round need.
     In Sausalito, the estimated 23 unsheltered homeless individuals determined by the 2013
     Marin Homeless Point in Time Count creates an unmet need of 23 emergency shelter
     beds.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page A - 28
Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                               Adopted January 13, 2015

Sources:
DataQuick Information Systems. Bay Area Home Sale Activity for year 2013. Accessed March
2014
DataQuick Information Systems. Custom Report, Marin, 1998-2008. Received May 28, 2008.
Internet rental listing from Craigslist, Trulia, and Bay4Rent. Accessed March 10, 2014.
RealFacts Online Database. Market Overview. Downloaded July 15, 2008.
Construction Industry Research Board (CIRB). Annual construction data custom report. Received
June 10, 2008.
RealtyTrac.com, accessed March 2014.
State of the Cities Data Systems: Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) Data,
Housing Problems and Affordability Mismatch Reports. Downloaded from
http://socds.huduser.org/scripts/odbic.exe/CHAS/statetable.htm on July 17, 2008. Note: CHAS
data is originally from the 2000 US Census.
California Department of Finance. E-5 City / County Population and Housing Estimates, 2013.
Downloaded from http://www.dof.ca.gov/research/demographic/reports/estimates/e-5_10/ in
January 2014.
California Department of Finance. Historical Census Populations of Places, Towns, and Cities in
California, 1850-2000. Downloaded from
http://www.dof.ca.gov/research/demographic/reports/census-surveys/historical_1850-2000 in
April 2010.
U. S. Census Bureau. (2010). SF 1, Downloaded from http://factfinder2.census.gov/ January
2014.
U. S. Census Bureau. (2000). SF 1 and SF 3, Downloaded from http://factfinder.census.gov/ June
2006.
U. S. Census Bureau. (1990). SF 1 and SF 3, Downloaded from http://factfinder.census.gov/ June
2006.
Association of Bay Area Governments Projections 2013. Release December 2013.
Marin Health and Human Services. County of Marin 2013 Point in Time Comprehensive Report
Findings. June 2013.
Marin Independent Journal. Marin foreclosures plummet in 2013. Published January 2014.
Marin Commission on Aging, Marin County Area Plan for Aging 2009-2012
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                               Page A - 29
 Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

APPENDIX B – HOUSING CONSTRAINTS
A. Constraints and Opportunities
Section 65583(a) of the Government Code requires a discussion of constraints to the
development of housing. Such constraints include both governmental and non-governmental
constraints. Governmental constraints include potential and actual constraints upon the
maintenance, improvement or development of housing for all income levels, and for persons
with disabilities as a result of land use controls, codes and their enforcement, site
improvements, fees and other exactions, and local processing and permit procedures. Non-
governmental constraints include potential and actual constraints upon the maintenance,
improvement or development of housing for all incomes such as availability of financing, the
price of land, and the cost of construction. State housing law requires the identification of these
constraints so that where possible, such constraints may be addressed and removed. An
inventory of land suitable for residential development is also required, including vacant sites and
sites having the potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and
public facilities and services to these sites. In addition, the analysis must include the
identification of a zoning district or districts where emergency shelters are allowed as a
permitted use without a conditional use or other discretionary permit.
B. Governmental Constraints
Like all local jurisdictions, the City of Sausalito has a number of procedures and regulations it
requires any developer to follow, and fees to pay. There are many locally imposed land use and
building requirements that can affect the type, appearance, and cost of housing built in
Sausalito. These local requirements include zoning standards, permitting fees, parking
requirements, subdivision design standards, and design review. Other building and design
requirements enforced by Sausalito follow state laws, such as the California Building Code,
Subdivision Map Act, and energy conservation requirements.
1. Endangered and Threatened Species
The City of Sausalito is 2.2 square miles total, of which 1.9 square miles is land, and the
remaining 0.3 is water (Source: Census Bureau). Sausalito’s 1.9 square miles of land is bound by
sensitive eco-habitat for endangered and threatened species. The city’s small size and proximity
to endangered and threatened species habitat is a constraint when considering construction;
birds, plants, and insects do not distinguish property lines.
The city’s geographical constraints include: (1) Richardson’s Bay (water) running the length of
the city’s base, and (2) Sausalito’s Marin Headlands’ Golden Gate National Recreation Area
(GGNRA) running the length of the city’s upper most ridge. The GGNRA also serves as the city’s
southern border.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                       Page B - 1
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

Sausalito’s Marin Headlands (GGNRA) is:
     •    Located at the center of the California Floristic Province, one of only five regions in the
          world with a Mediterranean climate. This climate promotes high floral diversity and
          unique assemblages rivaled only by the equatorial rainforests.
     •    Provides habitat for the endangered mission blue butterfly, one of the first species ever
          listed on the endangered species list, as well as the California red-legged frog, and
          migratory insects such as the monarch butterfly.
     •    Home to thirty-eight rare or special status plant species, of which 9 are Federally
          Endangered, 1 is Federally Threatened, 13 are Federal Species of Concerns, and the
          remaining 15 species are included or proposed for inclusion by the California Native
          Plant Society.”
     •    Lies in the middle of the Pacific Flyway. Every year, hundreds of migratory bird species
          use the area as a rest and refueling space (National Parks Service).
Sausalito’s waterfront provides a habitat for “zostera marina”, or eelgrass. According to a recent
Sausalito study of the Marinship area and Sausalito waterfront (5/18/2010), “Eelgrass provides
foods, shelter, and spawning grounds for many bay fish and invertebrates.” Richardson’s Bay,
the major body of water forming Sausalito’s northern waterfront, is a major subtidal spawning
area for Pacific herring. The report also notes that “Eelgrass is also vital to bird species that
forage on the fauna associated with eelgrass, such as the California least tern. Further
degradation of eelgrass bed health will have a negative impact on bay fish, invertebrates, and
some bird species as well as potential financial impacts on fisherman.” The Sausalito General
Plan notes that Richardson’s Bay is especially susceptible to water pollution due to its enclosed
shape, shallowness, and minimal tidal flushing action.
According to the California Department of Fish and Game’s Natural Diversity Data Base (NDDB),
two threatened or endangered plant species and four animal species are located within the
Sausalito planning area. Plant species include the Point Reyes Bird’s Beak and the white-rayed
Pentachaeta. Animal species include the California Clapper Rail, California Black rail, the Salt
Marsh Harvest Mouse, and the Mission Blue Butterfly.
2. Sausalito’s Sewer System
Many cities in California have sewer infrastructure challenges, but Sausalito’s situation is unique
and especially urgent. The City of Sausalito has over 27 miles of sewer pipe, some over 60 years
old. Many of these aging pipes are cracked, broken, or literally crumbling; some are made of
clay. In recent years, Sausalito’s antiquated pipes have caused several sewage spills releasing
millions of gallons of raw sewage into Richardson’s Bay.
One of the hardest hit areas for environmental contamination is Sausalito’s Marinship area,
located to the north and built from landfill and bayfill during World War II. The sewer system
and storm drains, constructed hastily during wartime, are old and substandard. According to a
 Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                          Page B - 2
 Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

recent Sausalito task force study of the Marinship area and Sausalito waterfront (May 18, 2010),
the Marinship endures environmental contamination from seawater intrusion and storm water
run-off year-round. In the Marinship, since the end of World War II, there has been no
coordinated effort to maintain or upgrade various portions of the public infrastructure system.
The City has not assumed the overall responsibility of the infrastructure and has not uniformly
required development projects to provide off-site general improvements. Except where recent
development has occurred, most of the utility systems are approaching obsolescence. Sewer
pipe joints have been disconnected in multiple areas because of uneven settling of the ground.
Sewer lines are prone to both leaking sewage out and leaking groundwater and seawater in.
Raw sewage also leaks into broken storm drains and straight into the bay. The storm sewer
systems cannot handle the storm volumes and back-up during high tides.
Sausalito’s current sewer system is so inadequate that in April 2008 the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) issued an Administrative Order mandating that the city of Sausalito
assess, repair, or replace its aging sewer pipes within a specific timeframe. The EPA called for
aggressive action and long-range plans to stop chronic sewage spills into Richardson’s Bay.
In addition to the EPA mandate, the city of Sausalito was sued by Northern California River
Watch for violations under the Clean Water Act. In November 2008 Sausalito reached a
settlement with River Watch. Sausalito is now creating and implementing plans to address its
antiquated sewer system, complying with terms laid out by EPA and River Watch.
To fund the estimated $7.6 million required to meet the EPA mandates, in 2009 Sausalito
residents accepted a large sewer fee increase, with some property owners receiving up to a 67%
rate fee hike.
In addition to improving the city’s sewer lines, Sausalito must also explore strategies to hasten
the repair of private lateral sewer pipes on private property. Every home in Sausalito has a
private lateral sewer line connecting to a city sewer line. Unfortunately, many of these private
laterals are also in need of repair, and add stress to the current system.
The City has put various programs in place, such as point-of-sale assessment and mandated
repair of private lateral lines when a property is sold. Still, by some estimates this strategy alone
would take 60 years or more to adequately address the private lateral sewer line problem. As a
result, the city continues to explore additional programs and options for private lateral sewer
pipe repair.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                         Page B - 3
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

3. Density
Sausalito’s density per square mile ranks 6th among Marin County’s 14 cities (see Table B.1).
Table B.1: Marin County Jurisdiction Densities Ranked High to Low
   Marin County Jurisdiction                  Density per Square Mile
   San Anselmo                                4,584.4/sq mi
   Belvedere                                  3,935.2/sq mi
   Larkspur                                   3,833.7/sq mi
   Fairfax                                    3,485.2/sq mi
   San Rafael                                 3,352.3/sq mi
   SAUSALITO                                  3,331.8/sq mi
   Corte Madera                               2,870.7/sq mi
   Mill Valley                                2,833.3/sq mi
   Kentfield/Green Brea                       2,117/sq mi
   Novato                                     1,683/sq mi
   Ross                                       1,461.5/sq mi
   Stinson Beach                              683/sq mi
   Tiburon                                    656.5/sq mi
   Muir Beach                                 590/sq mi
Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sausalito,California
Note: Another source, realestate.yahoo.com, raised Sausalito’s density to 3,813.
http://realestate.yahoo.com/California/Sausalito/neighborhoods
Sausalito’s current high density is above average for Marin County and would pose a constraint
under the best circumstances. However, factoring in the current state of Sausalito’s situation,
with miles of crumbling sewers, narrow, winding roads, and the city’s close proximity to
sensitive ecosystems, the prospect of increasing density becomes especially challenging.
4. Federal and State Regulations regarding Hazardous / Toxic Waste
Housing located near toxic and hazardous waste dumps or collection and processing services,
and housing located on landfill/bayfill could struggle to receive mortgage financing per new
federal regulations. On June 12th, 2009 the FHA announced a new approval process to insure
mortgages on individual units in condominium projects under Section 203(b) of the National
Housing Act in accordance with the passage of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act (HERA)
of 2008. The FHA states, in Item IV. General Requirements, D. Environmental Review
Requirements, that
          “…the lender must avoid or mitigate the following conditions before completing its
         review process....The property is located within 3000 feet of a dump or landfill, or of a
         site on an EPA Superfund (NPL) list or equivalent state list, or a Phase I Environmental
         Site Assessment indicates the presence of a Recognized Environmental Condition or
         recommends further (Phase II) assessment for the presence of contaminants that could
         affect the site....”
 Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                        Page B - 4
 Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                           Adopted January 13, 2015

Large flat land sections within as well as outside and adjacent to the Marinship were used as
dumping sites for toxic and hazardous waste (lead, paint, oil, etc.). Since this dumping occurred
during wartime and under a state of emergency, toxic and hazardous waste was not subject to
monitoring or environmental review.
Today, the Marinship area of Sausalito is home to federal and state agencies that conduct
dredging, toxic waste, and hazardous waste collection and processing for the bay area.
As such, the Marinship area is subject to a complex overlay of federal, state, and local land use
and water use regulations. Federal and State Health and Safety Codes also apply.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has a Base Yard facility in Sausalito’s Marinship area and
operates hazard collection boats that patrol for debris and toxic hazards throughout the bay,
removing approximately 90 tons a month 1.
The Dredged Material Management Office (DMMO) dredges Sausalito’s “Raccoon Straights”, the
body of water running the length of the Marinship waterfront. DMMO consists of
representatives from the San Francisco District US Army Corps of engineers (COE), the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development
Commission (BCDC), the San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB), and
the state Lands Commission (SLC). In addition to these agencies, wildlife agencies lend advise
and expertise to the DMMO process. These wildlife agencies include the National Marine
Fisheries Service, the US Fish and Wildlife Service, and the California Department of Fish and
Game; the agencies offer advice and expertise to the DMMO process.
In addition to historic and modern-day activities involving toxic and hazardous waste in northern
Sausalito and, specifically, the Marinship area, flooding caused by landfill/bayfill subsidence,
antiquated sewer systems, sea level rise, and cyclical tidal actions pollute sidewalks, streets, and
structures with environmental contaminants such as nitrogen, herbicides, insecticides, oil,
grease, toxic chemicals from urban runoff including the nearby 101 freeway, and sediment from
improperly managed construction sites and erosion.
5. Land Use Controls
The 1995 “Land Use and Growth Management Element” in Sausalito’s General Plan includes
density standards ranging from up to 2.2 dwelling units per acre to 29 dwelling units per acre,
with an average density of about 13 dwelling units per acre (see Table B.2). One third is
designated for ‘medium-low’ development at 7.3 dwelling units per acre while another third is
designated for ‘medium-high’ at 17.4 dwelling units per acre.
1
  http://www.spn.usace.army.mil/hazard_removal/index.html
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                       Page B - 5
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

Table B.2: Sausalito’s Residential Density Standards
    Land Use        General Plan Designation                            Maximum Allowed Density
                                                                        (dwelling units per acre)
    Single          Very Low Residential (R-1-20)                       2.2
    Family          Low Density Residential (R-1-8)                     5.4
                    Medium Low Density Residential (R-1-6)              7.3
                    Arks (A)                                            0.35
                    Houseboats (H)                                      4.35
    Two Family      Medium Density Residential (R 2-5)                  8.7
                    Medium High Density Residential (R-2-2.5)           17.4
    Multifamily     Planned Development High Density Residential        22.3
                    (P-R)
                    High Density Residential (R-3)                      29.0
Source: Sausalito Zoning Ordinance
As an older city, there are numerous lots in Sausalito that were created prior to the current
standards and are less than 5,000 square feet in area. In the R-2-2.5 (Two-Family) Zoning District
Sausalito’s Zoning Ordinance allows lots that were subdivided prior to 1963 (the majority of
existing lots) with an area of 3,000 square feet to have two units. These are fairly high densities
for land with topography as steep as what is prevalent in Sausalito.
Table B.3 lists the basic development standards for all of Sausalito’s residential districts. The
development standards regulating bulk and mass (floor area ratio and lot coverage) increase for
the two-family and multi-family districts to allow for more units and greater design flexibility. In
addition, the City of Sausalito does not have a required setback from the front property line,
which gives owners greater flexibility in developing their properties.
Table B.3: Residential Development Standards
Development                    R-1                  R-2
                                                                    P-R        R-3        H         A
Requirement      R-1-6      R-1-8   R-1-20   R-2-2.5 R-2-5
Min. parcel      6,000              20,000              10,000                        10,000
                          8,000 sf           5,000 sf           20,000 sf   5,000 sf           1,500 sf
size                sf                  sf                  sf                            sf
Min. lot width     50’        50’      50’      50’        50’     50’          50’      50’       30’
Max. Density     1du/                         1 du/      1 du/                1 du/     1du/     1 du/
                             1du/     1du/                        1 du/
(du/parcel)      parce                         2,500     5,000                 1,500  10,000      1,500
                            parcel  parcel                       1,980 sf
                     l                           sf         sf                   sf       sf        sf
Max. Floor
Area Ratio        0.45       0.40     0.35     0.65      0.40     0.65          0.8     0.25      0.30
Max. Building
                  35%        30%      30%      50%       35%       50%         50%      25%       30%
Coverage
Minimum Setbacks
   Front        0’        0’       0’       0’          0’     0’           0’       0’        0’
   Side         5’        5’       10’      5’          5’     5’           5’       varies    0’
   Rear         15’       15’      20’      15’         15’    15’          15’      15’       0’
Max. Height     32’       32’      32’      32’         32’    32’          32’      25’       12’
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                         Page B - 6
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

Source: Sausalito Zoning Ordinance
The Zoning Ordinance restricts building heights to 32 feet in all residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-3)
and commercial districts that allow residential uses (CN-1, CR, CC). Chapter 10.40.060 of the
Zoning Ordinance measures building height as the vertical distance from the average level of the
natural ground surface under the building to the highest point of the building or structure. The
maximum building height would therefore depend on where the highest and lowest points of
contact of the building are with the natural grade. Also, building height is computed individually
for each detached structure. This method of measurement presents design flexibility for many
residential parcels as a large proportion of them are on hillsides. Within the commercial districts
which are on relatively flat land, Sausalito has several examples of three story residential and
commercial developments built within the 32 foot height limit.
Currently, commercial zoning districts (CN-1, CR, CC) allow housing by right only on upper
stories. The Zoning Ordinance encourages the integration of residential uses with commercial
uses to a certain extent by prohibiting the conversion of existing residential uses to commercial
uses (except in the CC District where residential conversion is permitted with a Minor Use
Permit (MUP). Allowances are also made for tandem parking, and the sharing of parking
between commercial and residential uses, through MUPs.
To better facilitate the provision of upper-story residential use above ground floor commercial,
and encourage the integration of affordable units within market-rate projects, Sausalito's 2009-
2014 Housing Element established new Vertical Mixed Use (VMU) requirements to be applied
throughout the CN-1, CR and CC zoning districts. In July 2014, City Council adopted the following
provisions within its Zoning Code to implement the VMU program:
    • New construction of 2nd and 3rd stories is limited to residential use.
    • A minimum of one unit must be affordable. Projects with 6 or more units must provide
         20% affordable units.
    • For rental units, the affordability is targeted at low income (up to 80% county median
         income) households.
    • For ownership units, affordability targeted to moderate income (up to 120% county
         median incomes) households.
    • Affordable units must have a minimum of two bedrooms to accommodate families.
    • The affordable units must be deed-restricted for a period of not less than forty years, to
         ensure long-term affordability.
    • The conversion of existing upper story residential uses to commercial uses is prohibited.
    • The following exceptions to the VMU requirements may be considered by the Planning
         Commission:
          a. To allow the expansion of an existing business;
          b. To provide for commercial uses of less than 1,000 square feet; and
          c. If the property owner can demonstrate a financial hardship.
Incentives to foster the creation of upper story residential VMU units include:
    • Raising the current Conditional Use Permit requirement for 4 or more residential units
         to 7 or more residential units.
    • Allowance for commercial and residential users to share parking, and for tandem and
 Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                          Page B - 7
 Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

         off-site parking leases with a Minor Use Permit.
    •   Allowance for affordable units to vary in square footage, design and interior amenity
         within reason from non-affordable units.
    •   Reduction or waiver of certain application and development review fees for the
         affordable units.
The City has also increased efforts to encourage the provision of housing at or near the
prescribed maximum density levels in respective zoning districts. As a means of encouraging
multi-family development on parcels zoned for multi-family use, between January 2011 - May
2013, a Planning Commission subcommittee conducted extensive public outreach to evaluate
and recommend amendments to development standards within the Multi-Family (R-2-2.5 and R-
3) Zoning Districts. Following additional public input, in March 2014, the City Council adopted
an Ordinance adding Municipal Code Section 10.44.330 (Development Standards for Dwelling
Units in Two-Family and Multi-family Residential Zoning Districts), and modifying other Code
sections to discourage the development of large single-family residences in multi-family zones
which eliminate development potential for future units. Housing Element Implementation
Program 20, Multi-family Development in Multi-family Districts, reflects the newly adopted
Ordinance, which establishes the following provisions within the R-2-2.5 and R-3 zone districts:
    •    Decreased allowable floor area, building coverage and impervious surfaces for any single
         dwelling unit. The total maximum allowable amount of floor area, building coverage and
         impervious surface is not reduced, but required to be distributed among multiple units
         on the parcel;
    •    Parking reductions for small units, including one space per unit under 700 square feet,
         and allowances for off-site parking with a CUP;
    •    Tandem parking as a permitted use (without a CUP) for projects which propose the
         maximum number of units allowed; and
    •    Requirement for conceptual site design to demonstrate the feasibility of achieving the
         maximum units under zoning in the future, or the ability to build ADUs on the site.
Affordable Housing Density Bonus: On July 22, 2014, the Sausalito City Council adopted a new
density bonus ordinance (Zoning Code Section 10.44.130) to conform with the new
requirements of Government Code Section 65915. In summary, applicants of residential
projects of five or more units may apply for a density bonus and additional incentive(s) if the
project provides for construction of one of the following:
         a. Ten percent (10%) of the total units of a housing development for lower income
         households; or
         b. Five percent (5%) of the total units of a housing development for very low income
         households; or
         c. A senior citizen housing development or mobilehome park that limits residency based
         on age requirements for housing for older persons; or
 Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                       Page B - 8
 Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

         d. Ten percent (10%) of the total dwelling units in a common interest development
         (condominium) for persons and families of moderate income.
The amount of density bonus to which the applicant is entitled varies according to the amount
by which the percentage of affordable housing units exceeds the minimum percentage
established in this section, but generally ranges from 20-35% above the specified General Plan
density. In addition to the density bonus, eligible projects may receive 1-3 additional
development incentives (or concessions), depending on the proportion of affordable units and
level of income targeting. The incentives are offered:
         a. A reduction in site development standards (e.g., setback and square footage
         requirements, and/or parking requirements) or architectural design requirements.
         b. Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if
         nonresidential land uses reduce individual unit costs, and the nonresidential land uses
         are compatible with the housing project and adjoining development.
         c. Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the permit applicant or the
         City that would result in identifiable cost reductions.
Sausalito's local ordinance breaks down required incentives (or concessions) into two tiers, with
applicants encouraged to select incentives identified in Tier 1 before selecting concessions in
Tier 2. Incentives with an anticipated greater level of impact are identified as Tier 2 and are less
preferred, and thus require a higher level of review and approval by the City. The overall goal
of this hierarchy is choose concessions that reduce neighborhood impacts, further the project's
consistency with the General Plan, and promote affordability.
In addition to these incentives, at the request of the developer, the City will permit a parking
ratio (inclusive of handicapped and guest parking) of 1 space for 0-1 bedroom units, 2 spaces for
2-3 bedroom units, and 2½ spaces for four or more bedrooms.
6. Provisions for a Variety of Housing Types
Housing element law specifies that jurisdictions must identify adequate sites to be made
available through appropriate zoning and development standards to encourage the
development of various types of housing for all economic segments of the population. This
includes single-family homes, multi-family housing, mobile homes, emergency shelters and
transitional housing, among others. Table B.4 below summarizes housing types permitted within
residential, commercial, and public zoning districts.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                       Page B - 9
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

    Table B.4: Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District
Housing Types Permitted               R-1    R-2    R-3    PR     CC     CR      CN-11    CW     W      H    R-A    ES-
                                                                                                                    Overlay
Residential Uses
Single family dwellings               P      P      P      P                                          P      P
Two-family (duplex) dwelling                 P      P      P
Multiple family dwellings                           P      P
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)2      P      P      P
Residential Accessory uses            P      P      P      P      P      P       P                    P
Ground floor residential                                          C      C       C
Upper floor residential                                           P      P or    P
(1-6 units)                                                              C
Upper floor residential                                           C      C       C
(7 or more units)
Mobile Homes                          M      M      M      M
Liveaboards                                                                               C      C
Single family ark dwelling                                                                                   P
Single family ark dwelling group                                                                             P
Houseboat                                                                                             P
Multiple Unit Houseboat                                                                               C
Special Needs Housing
Residential care homes, 6 or fewer    P      P      P      P
clients
Residential care homes, 7 or more                   C
clients
Senior housing projects                             C             C      C       C
Supportive Housing3                   P      P      P      P      P or   P or    P or C
                                                                  C      C
Transitional Housing3                 P      P      P      P      P or   P or    P or C
                                                                  C      C
Emergency Shelter                                                                                                   P
Single Room Occupancy Housing                                     C      C       C
    P = Permitted, C = Conditionally Permitted, M = Requires a Minor Use Permit
    Legend: R-1: Single Family, R-2: Two Family, R-3: Multiple Family, PR, CR: Commercial Residential, CC:
    Central Commercial, CN-1: Neighborhood Commercial, H: Houseboats, R-A: Arks, ES-Overlay: Emergency
    Shelter Overlay Zone.
    1
     No residential uses are allowed in CN-2, Neighborhood Commercial.
    2
      An application for an ADU which does not meet the ministerial requirements set forth in the Code may
    be considered through a CUP process if the ADU meets certain specified criteria.
    3
     Supportive and transitional housing are subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential
    dwellings of the same type in the same zone, and are limited to levels above the ground floor in
    commercial districts..
    Source: Sausalito Zoning Ordinance.
    a. Condominiums
    Condominiums in Sausalito include “community apartments” (developments where an undivided
    interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located
    thereon) and “stock cooperative”. Condominiums also include an estate in real property consisting
    of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property developed for marina
    or yacht harbor purposes, together with a separate interest in a berthing space in such marina or
      Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                               Page B - 10
      Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

yacht harbor. In Sausalito, condominiums are common in the two-family and multi-family zoning
districts.
In order to preserve the supply of rental units and the affordable housing rental stock, Sausalito’s
Zoning Ordinance includes regulations that protect tenants and prevent the conversion of low and
moderate income rentals. The Housing Element includes a program to assure that the
requirements of the Condominium Conversion regulations are met, and to evaluate strengthening
the regulations by extending inclusionary requirements to projects with three or four units and
prohibiting conversions during periods of low rental vacancy rates. The program also includes the
examination of options for providing relief for condominium conversion projects with three or four
units which are primarily occupied by long-term homeowners.
b. Accessory Dwelling Units
An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) or a second permanent dwelling (aka, secondary dwelling unit) is
a dwelling accessory to a primary dwelling on a site. An ADU may be either a detached or attached
dwelling unit that provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, and
includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same
parcel or parcels as the primary dwelling.
While the City adopted a zoning regulation in 1984 prohibiting the development of ADUs in all
residential zoning districts, the City recognizes the existence of hundreds of ADUs in the
community illegally built without permits. Based on a City-wide survey conducted in 2010 and
analysis of the survey results, the community has come to recognize ADUs as a low impact
approach to addressing a portion of the community’s lower income housing needs, and in
November 2012, the Sausalito City Council adopted Accessory Dwelling Unit Regulations (Zoning
Code Section 10.44.080) to encourage the provision of new ADUs through a ministerial approval
process, and to enable the legalization of existing ADUs through an amnesty program.
The Code now provides for interior conversions, attached and detached accessory dwelling units
by right within the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zone districts. ADUs which do not meet the ministerial
requirements set forth in the Code may be considered through a CUP process if the ADU meets
certain specified criteria. During the first 18 months of Sausalito's ADU ordinance, six new ADUs
received planning approvals, indicating the City's standards are, in fact, supporting the creation
of ADUs. Similarly, the City's ADU amnesty program (in effect from January 2013-March 2014),
was highly successful, with 14 previously illegal units issued permits, and an additional 44 units
going through the staff review and permitting process at the close of the amnesty period.
c. Multi-Family Dwelling Units
The Multiple Family Residential (R-3) Zoning District provides areas for residential
neighborhoods of single-family dwellings, two family dwellings, duplexes, apartments, and other
multiple family attached dwelling units, such as condominiums. The multiple family district
provides for innovative site planning, while providing on-site recreational amenities and location
near community facilities, businesses and/or major streets. Sausalito has 590 individual parcels
in the R-3 Zoning District, encompassing a total of nearly 50 acres of land.
d. Residential in Commercial Districts
Sausalito’s existing zoning regulations allow for residential uses on upper floors of commercially-
zoned properties, and as described earlier in this section, the City has adopted new Vertical
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                      Page B - 11
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

Mixed Use requirements to further facilitate such development. This form of mixed-use infill
development has contributed to residential uses in commercial districts, served by transit.
Residences over ground floor commercial provide passive security for the area, provide a built-in
customer base for commercial and retail uses, and create increased activity and vitality within
commercial areas. This form of traditional mixed-use enhances the historic development pattern
found in the commercial areas of the City where a number of apartments and flats exist above
street level retail spaces.
e. Liveaboards, Houseboats and Ark Dwellings
Sausalito has a long-standing tradition as a working waterfront with a vibrant marine culture
that has defined the community for over 100 years. There are eight marinas in the City with over
1,500 vessels where several hundred boat owners reside on their boats as permanent
“liveaboard” housing. In recognition of the important role liveaboards play in providing
affordable housing for the community’s marine workers and other modest income residents, the
San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC) and Sausalito Zoning
Ordinance both allow for up to 10% of marina berths to be used as permanent liveaboard
housing.
The City conducted an anonymous survey in 2009 of liveaboard tenants in Sausalito, in order to
document the nature and affordability of liveaboards in Sausalito. A detailed discussion can be
found in Chapter IV – Housing Resources.
f. Manufactured Housing/Mobile Homes
Section 65852.3 of the California Government Code requires jurisdictions to administratively
allow manufactured homes on lots zoned for single-family dwellings if they meet certain
standards. More specifically, the Government Code requires the following:
         “Except with respect to architectural requirements, jurisdictions can only subject the
         manufactured home and the lot on which it is placed to the same development
         standards to which a conventional single-family residential dwelling on the same lot
         would be subject, including, but not limited to, building setback standards, side and rear
         yard requirements, standards for enclosures, access, and vehicle parking, aesthetic
         requirements, and minimum square footage requirements. Any architectural
         requirements imposed on the manufactured home structure itself shall be limited to its
         roof overhang, roofing material, and siding material. These architectural requirements
         may be imposed on manufactured homes even if similar requirements are not imposed
         on conventional single-family residential dwellings, but requirements may not exceed
         those which would be required of conventional single-family dwellings constructed on
         the same lot. In no case may a jurisdiction apply any development standards that will
         have the effect of precluding manufactured homes from being installed as permanent
         residences.”
Sausalito allows mobile homes as a land use under the definition of “Single-family dwellings” as
a form of affordable housing. Mobile homes are subject to design review and installation
standards pursuant to State codes.
g. Residential Care Homes
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                      Page B - 12
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

The Zoning Ordinance defines residential care homes as facilities that provide residential social
and personal care for children, elderly, people with limited self-care abilities, but where medical
care is not a major element. Residential care homes include children’s homes, halfway houses,
orphanages, rehabilitation centers, and self-help group homes. The Zoning Ordinance
distinguishes between smaller (six or fewer clients) and larger (seven or more clients) residential
care homes.
Section 1566.3 of the California Health and Safety Code requires residential facilities serving six
or fewer persons to be considered a residential use of property for purposes of local zoning
ordinances. No local agency can impose stricter zoning or building and safety standards on these
residential facilities – such as a conditional use permit, variance or other zoning clearance - than
is required of a family dwelling of the same type in the same district. The Zoning Ordinance
permits residential care homes serving six or fewer persons by right in all residential zoning
districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, and PR), and does not subject such facilities to a use permit, building
standard, or regulation not otherwise required of single-family homes in the same district.
Within the R-3 (Multi-Family Residential) district, residential care homes with seven or more
clients can be allowed through a Conditional Use Permit granted by the Planning Commission
through a public hearing process.
h. Senior Housing Projects
Approximately 21 percent of Sausalito’s population is made up of seniors (age 65 and over). A
few senior housing projects have been built in Sausalito, accounting for a total of 38 units. These
projects include Rotary Village (22 units, 2004), Rotary Place (10 units, 1992), and Bee Street
Housing (6 units, 1985).
Sausalito Village is a non-profit membership organization in Sausalito dedicated to providing
resources and assistance to enable seniors to remain in their own homes as they age. Sausalito
Village has a team of volunteers to help members, and hosts programs, events and classes for
seniors. The Housing Element includes a Program to support the efforts of Sausalito Village to
allow seniors to age in place, and promote available housing assistance programs for seniors.
A more detailed discussion on the needs of the senior population can be found in Section 5b of
Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment.
i. Transitional and Supportive Housing and Emergency Shelters
In 2007, the State enacted legislation commonly referred to as Senate Bill 2 (SB 2). This
legislation requires local agencies to address housing needs for homeless populations in their
communities. Generally, SB 2 specifies that at least one zone in a city or county be identified
where "emergency shelters" are a permitted use without a conditional use or other
discretionary permit, subject to development and management standards permitted under
Government Code Sections 65582, 65583 and 65589.5. Additionally, the jurisdiction must
demonstrate that there is sufficient capacity within the designated zone to accommodate the
current need for emergency shelters as identified in the Housing Element.
SB 2 further requires that a jurisdiction's Zoning Ordinance specify that "supportive housing"
and "transitional housing" be considered a residential use of property, subject to the same
standards as other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                        Page B - 13
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

Sausalito's adopted 2009-2014 Housing Element sets forth Program #21 "Zoning Text
Amendments for Special Needs Housing" to bring the City into compliance with State statutes by
making various Zoning Ordinance provisions for special needs housing. On July 22, 2014, the
Sausalito City Council adopted various Zoning Code provisions for special needs housing,
including the following definitions and zoning regulations for transitional and supportive
housing, and for emergency shelters:
         Supportive housing. Permanent affordable housing with no limit on length of stay that is
         occupied by the target population as defined in the Health & Safety Code Section
         53260(d), and that is linked to on or off-site services that assist the supportive housing
         resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his
         or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. (Health and Safety Code
         Section 50675.14(b))
         Transitional housing and transitional housing development. Buildings configured as
         rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the
         termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible
         program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less
         than six months. (Health and Safety Code Section 50675.2(h)). The housing may take
         several forms such as group housing and multi-family units and may include supportive
         services to allow individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of independent living.
         Emergency shelter. Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that
         is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or
         household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. (Health and
         Safety Code Section 50801(e))
The Sausalito Municipal Code has been amended to allow transitional and supportive housing
where residential uses are allowed, and are thus a permitted use in the R-1, R-2, PR and R-3 Zoning
Districts, and a permitted use (6 or fewer units) or conditionally permitted use (7 or more units)
in the CC, CR and CN-1 Zoning Districts. The Code specifies that supportive and transitional
housing are subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type
in the same zoning district. For example, transitional and supportive housing structured as single-
family would be permitted (either principally or conditionally) in the R-1, R-2, PR, R-3, CC, CR and
CN-1 residential zoning districts, whereas transitional and supportive housing structured as two
family would be limited to R-2, PR, R-3, CC, CR and CN-1 zoning districts and transitional and
supportive housing structured as multi-family would be limited to the PR, R-3, CC, CR and CN-1
residential zoning districts.
The Municipal Code has also been amended to identify emergency shelters as a permitted use
on City and Sausalito School District owned sites within the Public Institutional (PI) Zoning
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                        Page B - 14
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

District 2. The Zoning Map has been amended to establish an Emergency Shelter Overlay zone,
and identifies applicable PI sites with the -Es Designator.
The designated sites within the Es-Overlay District cover about 40.3 acres and encompass 19
parcels with an average lot size of approximately 2.13 acres. Development standards in the PI
zoning district, which is the base zoning district for the Es-Overlay District, include side setbacks
of 10 feet and rear setbacks of 20 feet only if abutting a residential district, and a maximum
building height of 32 feet. There is no minimum parcel size, and no maximum Floor Area Ratio or
Building Coverage limits in the PI Zoning District.
The 19 parcels may be grouped into the major sites listed below:
     •    Fire and police stations on Johnson Street,
     •    Large parcel utilized by Bayside Elementary school and Willow Creek Academy School,
     •    Parking lots and land near the downtown and ferry terminal,
     •    City Hall and Robin Sweeny Park,
     •    Public Works Department corporation yard at the corner of Tomales Street and Nevada
          Street, and
     •    Martin Luther King Jr. Park.
Based on the 2013 estimate of Sausalito’s homeless population of 23 persons, , the Es-Overlay
District needs to provide adequate sites to accommodate a minimum 23 bed emergency
shelter. Utilizing the State Building Code occupancy standard of a minimum of 100 square feet
(10 foot x 10 foot area) per person, a 2,500 square foot shelter could accommodate 23
individuals, plus two staff members. Review of parcels within the Es-Overlay District reveals
several sites that can reasonably accommodate a 2,500 square foot shelter, both through new
construction and reuse of existing buildings.
In addition to the application of development standards in the PI District, pursuant to SB 2, the
City has adopted the following objective standards to regulate emergency shelters:
A. Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply to emergency
     shelters:
          1. Property Development Standards. The shelter shall conform to all property
              development standards of the zoning district in which it is located except as
              modified by these performance standards.
          2. Shelter Capacity. An emergency shelter for homeless persons shall contain no more
              than twenty (20) beds and shall serve no more than twenty (20) persons nightly. The
              physical size of the shelter shall not be larger than necessary for the number of
              persons the shelter serves.
          3. Parking. On-site parking for residents shall be based on one space for every four
              beds, and staff parking shall be based on one space for each employee on the
              maximum staffed shift.
          4. Lighting. Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security purposes. The
              lighting shall be stationary and designed, arranged and installed so as to confine
2 The Spencer Fire Station site is not included within the Emergency Shelter Overlay due to its remote location,
and lack of proximity to supportive services in the neighborhood and limited transportation services to
supportive services elsewhere.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                                Page B - 15
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

             direct rays onto the premises and to direct light away from adjacent structures and
             public rights-of-way. External lighting shall be of an intensity compatible with the
             neighborhood.
        5. On-site Waiting and Intake Areas. An interior waiting and intake area shall be
             provided which contains a minimum of 200 square feet. Waiting and intake areas
             may be used for other purposes (excluding sleeping) as needed during operations of
             the shelter.
B. Common Facilities. The development may provide one or more of the following specific
   common facilities for exclusive use of the residents and staff, provided that such facilities do
   not substantially increase the overall size of the shelter facility:
        1. Central cooking and dining room.
        2. Recreation room.
        3. Laundry facilities to serve the number of occupants at the shelter.
        4. Other uses that are considered ancillary to the primary use such as office and
             storage, not to exceed 10% of the total floor area of the shelter facility, exclusive of
             items 1, 2, and 3 above.
C. On-site Staff. At least one manager shall be on-site during all hours of operation of the
   facility. Such manager must be an individual who does not utilize the shelter's beds or other
   services and who resides off-site. The manager must be accompanied by one supporting
   staff member for every fifteen (15) beds occupied in the facility.
D. Security. Security personnel shall be provided during operational hours whenever clients
   are on the site. A security plan shall be submitted to the City prior to issuance of a
   certificate of occupancy.
E. Concentration of Uses. No more than one emergency shelter shall be permitted within a
   radius of 300 feet of another emergency shelter.
F. Emergency Shelter Operations. The agency or organization operating the emergency shelter
   shall comply with the following requirements:
       1. Hours of Operation. Clients shall only be on site and admitted to the facility
             between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
       2. Length of stay. Each emergency shelter resident shall stay for no more than 90 days
             (cumulative, not consecutive) in a 365 day period. Extensions up to a total stay of
             180 days in a 365-day period may be granted by the shelter provider if no
             alternative housing is available.
       3. Management Plan. Prior to commencing operation, the shelter operator shall
             provide a written management plan to the Director for approval. The management
             plan shall address: hours of operation, admission hours and process, staff training,
             neighborhood outreach and privacy, security, resident counseling and treatment,
             maintenance plans, residency and guest rules and procedures, and staffing needs.
       4. Annual report. The provider shall provide an annual report of the use of the facility
             and determination of compliance with the City's development standards for the use.
 Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                         Page B - 16
 Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

During the State HCDs review of Sausalito's draft 2015-2023 Housing Element, the State HCD
requested specific changes to the City's Emergency Shelter Ordinance that was adopted in July 2014.
To address this issue, the City will amend Section 10.28.080 of the Municipal Code as follows: a)
amend Sausalito Municipal Code Section 10.28.080.I.3 (Management Plan) to remove the words "for
approval" in the sentence "Prior to commencing operation, the shelter operator shall provide a
written management plan to the Director for approval" and add the words "(to the extent such
services are required)" after the phrase "The management plan shall address"; and b) eliminate
Sausalito Municipal Code Section 10.28.080.I.4 (Annual Report).
Sausalito also has local churches located in different residential zoning districts that are
providing services to the needy in Sausalito. These churches include the St. Mary Star of the Sea,
Sausalito Presbyterian Church, Sausalito Christian Fellowship, and the Christ Episcopal Church of
Sausalito. According to community members and church staff, none of the four churches
currently provide emergency shelter services to homeless persons, however, the Presbyterian,
Episcopal and St. Mary Star of the Sea rotate monthly to provide weekly hot lunches, and the
Presbyterian church provides a hot dinner on Fridays. St. Mary Star of the Sea also provides free
bags of groceries every Monday. With these precedent activities, the City recognizes that these
churches have established themselves as go-to locations in the community for those in need,
and may choose to offer shelter services to homeless persons in the future.
j. Single Room Occupancy
Single room occupancy (SRO) residences are small, one room units (generally 100-250 sq. ft.)
occupied by a single individual, and may either have shared or private kitchen and bathroom
facilities. SROs are rented on a weekly to monthly basis typically without rental deposit, and can
provide an entry point into the housing market for extremely low income individuals, formerly
homeless and disabled persons. Until recently, Sausalito's Zoning Ordinance did not explicitly
address Single Room Occupancy uses. Commercial districts are the most conducive to provision
of SROs, either through new development or reuse of an existing building. Program 21 in the
City's 2009-2014 Housing Element called for the City to amend the Zoning Ordinance to explicitly
specify SROs as a conditionally permitted use within this zoning district. On July 22, 2014, the
Sausalito City Council adopted various Zoning Code provisions for special needs housing,
including the following definition of Single Room Occupancy Housing:
          Single Room Occupancy Housing (SRO). Refers to a residential facility where individual secure
          rooms are rented to a one or two person household. Rooms are generally 150 to 375 square
          feet in size and include a sink, closet and toilet, with shower and kitchen facilities typically
          shared. SRO units are rented to tenants on a weekly or monthly basis.
The Zoning Code has been amended to conditionally allow SROs in the CC, CR and CN-1
commercial zoning districts. These districts allow development up to 27 dwelling units per gross
acre. These zoning districts are distributed in areas throughout Sausalito, with a large area
concentrated along Bridgeway near the waterfront, starting from Napa Street, along Bridgeway
past the ferry terminal, and terminating about 1,000 feet north of Tiffany Park.
There are 137 parcels in the three commercial zoning districts combined, with an average lot
size of 5,000 sq. ft. Sites may possibly be combined to create an SRO, and development
standards allow buildings up to a maximum height of 32 feet, providing sufficient sites for SRO
use.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                            Page B - 17
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

7. Building Codes and Enforcement
The City is built on a tree-covered 980 foot slope with an average grade of 22 percent. Sausalito
is bound by Richardson’s Bay (water) at its base, Highway 101 to the north, and the Golden Gate
National Recreation Area (GGNRA) at the south and along its ridgeline. The national recreation
area includes highly combustible grass, brush and trees. Strong gale-force winds blow over the
City from the Golden Gate National Recreation Area throughout the year. This fire danger is
exacerbated by the fact that most of the city consists of frame structures, many over 100 years
old, which are built on small lots with little or no side yard setbacks. In addition, the streets are
narrow, steep and winding making access for firefighting difficult.
In response to these challenges, the City requires Class A roofing on all new buildings and on all
re-roofs where more than 50 percent of the roofing material is replaced and fire sprinklers are
required for all new construction and major remodels. Additional erosion control and
encroachment permit requirements have also been added in response to the slope and right-of-
way requirements.
The Building Inspector is responsible for enforcement of a substandard housing ordinance which
is aimed at ensuring that housing in the city is safe and sanitary. The standard used is that
provided by the State Health and Safety Code and is not a constraint to the development of
affordable housing. Typically, enforcement is triggered either on a complaint basis or from in-
field citations by the Building Inspector.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                        Page B - 18
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

8. Parking
Sausalito is a community with narrow, winding roads and steep terrain. Many houses were built
before private ownership of cars was common and on lots where it is difficult to provide on-site
parking. As a result parking throughout the city is at a premium and it is necessary that on-site
parking be provided for new development wherever possible. The Zoning Ordinance requires
two on-site parking spaces be provided per dwelling unit for new single-family dwellings, two-
family dwellings and two or more bedroom multi-family units. A half-space reduction is provided
for new multi-family studios or one-bedroom units. Tandem parking for two-family and multi-
family uses is allowed through the Conditional Use Permit process.
Table B.5 and Table B.6 below compare the parking requirements for jurisdictions within Marin
County. In addition to having lower requirements in the amount of parking spaces required,
Sausalito provides greater flexibility in that parking spaces are not required to be covered.
Table B.5: Parking Requirements for Single Family Dwellings
                                     Least               Most
                                     Restrictive         Restrictive                     Common
                                                                          Most
   Sausalito’s Requirement           Requirement         Requirement                     Additional
                                                                          Common
                                     (other Marin        (other Marin                    Requirements
                                     jurisdictions)      jurisdictions)
   2 spaces/dwelling- none are           2 spaces/          4 spaces/       2 spaces/     1 or all spaces
   required to be covered                 dwelling           dwelling       dwelling         covered
Source: Marin Workbook, 2009
Table B.6: Parking Requirements for Multi-Family Dwellings
   Unit Type        Sausalito’s       Least             Most             Most          Common
                    Requirement* Restrictive            Restrictive      Common        Additional
                                      Requirement Requirement                          Requirements
                                      (other Marin      (other Marin
                                      jurisdictions)    jurisdictions)
   Studio                  1.5                0                3               1
   1 bedroom               1.5                1                3              1.5
   2 bedrooms               2               1.25               3               2
   3 bedrooms+              2                 2                3               2        1 covered space
   *No requirement to provide covered parking
Source: Marin Workbook, 2009
9. Roads and Related Constraints
Sausalito’s streets are narrow, in fact much narrower than the public right-of-way. The steep
hilly, winding terrain generally makes widening impractical. Access by emergency vehicles,
including fire trucks, is constrained along many streets.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                        Page B - 19
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                           Adopted January 13, 2015

The concrete streets in the southern portion of the community are estimated to be over 80
years old, as are the streets in the downtown and Caledonia Street commercial-residential
district. Many hillside streets in the central and southern neighborhoods are 15-20 years old,
and many of the Hillside streets in the northern neighborhoods are over 20 years old.
While past city efforts have focused on pavement maintenance, the City is implementing a
comprehensive street rehabilitation strategy, given the state of roads and the extent of needed
repairs. City staff has determined that street facilities are “generally past their service life”.
In addition to the aging streets, the condition of the storm drain network is largely unknown.
Numerous storm drain segments around the City are known to be in a failed state of condition
and do not contain flows inside the sewer pipe.
In the Marinship, the public streets include approximately the northern 200 feet of Marinship
Way, all but the eastern end of Harbor Drive, Gate 5 Road, Coloma Street and one block of
Heath Way. All other roadways are privately owned. There are a series of access easements
granted to downstream property owners and, in some cases, the public. No methods of
maintenance have been established for these private roads and traffic laws are not routinely
enforced, which could lead to increasing personal injury and property damage. Many of these
roadways are ill defined. Amenities such as sidewalks, street lights, street trees and street
furniture are generally lacking on both the private and public streets in the Marinship. Many do
not meet minimum city street standards.
10. Historic Preservation
Incorporated in 1893, Sausalito is an older California city. Several mechanisms are in place to
preserve and maintain the older structures in the City. First, any exterior modification to any
structure proposed in the City’s Downtown Historic Overlay District or on the local register must
undergo Design Review at a joint meeting with the Historic Landmarks Board and Planning
Commission. Next, any structure older than fifty years in age subject to discretionary permitting
must be evaluated by the Historic Landmarks Board to determine its historical significance. The
Historic Landmarks Board uses several criteria in evaluating the historic nature of a property,
including events that may have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of the
history or cultural heritage of the City, state, or nation, association with the life or lives of one or
more important people, embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region,
or method of construction, or representative of the work of an important creative individual. In
2011 the City adopted Historic Design Guidelines to assist with the review of applications to
modify historic structures and ensure that they are compatible with the existing historic fabric of
the City. A Neighborhood Historic Context Statement was started in early 2013 with the
objective of further identifying areas of historical significance. This document is currently an
administrative draft and does not have a set completion date. When finished, it will provide a
foundation for identifying future historic districts and will be used by decision-makers and staff
to administer protection and management policies.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                          Page B - 20
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                              Adopted January 13, 2015

11. Permit Processing
The City strives to process permits as quickly as possible while providing the opportunity for
appropriate public input. However, the development review process for discretionary permits
required by the Zoning Ordinance can act as a constraint to the production of affordable
housing. A description and analysis of the current residential development review process in the
City is provided below. The analysis addresses properties that allow housing development, both
in residential districts and in commercial districts.
In all of the City’s zoning districts, a discretionary Design Review Permit is required to construct
single family and/or multi-family housing. The purpose of Design Review is to address issues
such as the provision of adequate light and air to surrounding residences, architectural
compatibility within the neighborhood, protection of public and private views, and minimization
of site degradation. Table B.7 lists the City’s required findings for approval of a Design Review
Permit. The purview of Design Review does not extend to the project’s overall merits or the
residential use itself.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                       Page B - 21
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                           Adopted January 13, 2015

Table B.7: Required Findings for Approval of a Design Review Permit
 1 The proposed project is consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plans
      and this chapter.
 2    The proposed architecture and site design complements the surrounding neighborhood
      and/or district by either:
           a. Maintaining the prevailing design character of the neighborhood and/or district;
               or
           b. Introducing a distinctive and creative solution which takes advantage of the
               unique characteristics of the site and contributes to the design diversity of
               Sausalito.
 3    The proposed project is consistent with the general scale of structures and buildings in
      the surrounding neighborhood and/or district.
 4    The proposed project has been located and designed to minimize obstruction of public
      views and primary views from private property.
 5    The proposed project will not result in a prominent building profile (silhouette) above a
      ridgeline.
 6    The proposed landscaping provides appropriate visual relief, complements the buildings
      and structures on the site, and provides and attractive environment for the enjoyment of
      the public.
 7    The design and location of buildings provide adequate light and air for the project site,
      adjacent properties, and the general public.
 8    Exterior lighting, mechanical equipment, and chimneys are appropriately designed and
      located to minimize visual, noise, and air quality impacts to adjacent properties and the
      general public.
 9    The project provides a reasonable level of privacy to the site and adjacent properties,
      taking into consideration the density of the neighborhood, by appropriate landscaping,
      fencing, and window, deck and patio configurations.
 10 Proposed entrances, exits, internal circulation, and parking spaces are configured to
      provide an appropriate level of traffic safety and ease of movement.
 11 The proposed design preserves protected trees and significant natural features on the
      site to a reasonable extent and minimizes site degradation from construction activities
      and other potential impacts.
 12 The project site is consistent with the guidelines for heightened review for projects
      which exceed 80% of the maximum allowed Floor Area Ratio and/or site coverage, as
      specified in Chapter 10.54.050 E and F (Heightened Review Findings).
 Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                       Page B - 22
 Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                           Adopted January 13, 2015

The Planning Commission acts on Design Review Permit applications following a public hearing
and simultaneously reviews any other discretionary applications associated with the project.
While the discretionary Design Review Permit triggers environmental review, the vast majority of
projects in Sausalito are determined to be exempt from CEQA under the urban infill exemption
(CEQA Guidelines Section 15332). If the decision of the Planning Commission is appealed to the
City Council, the Council will hold an appeal hearing and make the final decision on the application.
Table B.8 presents the specific steps and typical timeline for a Design Review Permit. Past
approved residential infill projects that met City standards received Planning Commission
approval in approximately 2-3 meetings. In summary, Sausalito’s design review process is
comparable to other Marin County communities, and does not serve as a constraint to
development.
Table B.8: Typical Design Review Permit Timeline
 Task                                                                    Range            Typical
 Application filed                                                                        --
      Project sponsor submits completed application forms,
      drawings, supporting documents and fees
 Completeness review                                                     15-30 days       20 days
      The application is routed to applicable local, regional, state
      and federal agencies and departments to determine whether
      additional information is required to process the application,
      and for recommended conditions of approval
 Incomplete Notification                                                 Varies           20 days
      If the application is incomplete, the applicant will be required
      to submit follow-up information as requested. The time to
      complete this task is determined by the project sponsor. If the
      application was initially found to be complete, this step is
      skipped
 Environmental Review                                                    1 day -          1 day
      The application is reviewed to determine whether the project       6 months
      is exempt from the requirements of the California
      Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or if an Initial
      Environmental Study is required. The vast majority of projects
      in Sausalito are found to be exempt from CEQA under the
      urban infill exemption. If a Negative Declaration is prepared,
      environmental review may take the full 6 months allowed by
      law
 Staff Report                                                            10 days -        10 days
      A detailed evaluation of the application is conducted by staff     2 months
      and a written report is prepared for public review
 Public Hearing                                                          10 days          10 days
      A hearing notice is sent at least 10 days before the meeting to
      property owners and occupants within 300 feet of the
      property. The Planning Commission conducts a public
      meeting and takes action on the application
 Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                        Page B - 23
 Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

The City fosters creativity and innovation in project design and exerts minimal control over
project architecture, and hence has chosen not to adopt prescriptive design guidelines.
However, in conjunction with proposed development standards to encourage the development
of multi-family uses on multi-family zoned properties, the City is evaluating amendments to its
Design Review Procedures (Chapter 10.54 of the Zoning Code) to address the following:
     • Guidance on preferred unit sizes for various unit types;
     • Feasibility of constructing the maximum number of units permitted under zoning in the
         future by illustrating the potential location of future units and on-site parking and
         access; and
     • Requirement for projects to be designed to ensure on-site structures do not crowd or
         overwhelm neighboring properties or loom over the street.
12. Fees and Exactions
In terms of cost of development, fees can be a more significant factor than processing time.
Particularly since Proposition 13, cities are concerned with the need to recover processing costs.
Sausalito has a fixed fee system, which is based upon average costs of typical projects. Use of a
fixed fee approach may lead to disparity between controversial projects, which due to the
amount of community input, Planning Commission discussion, and staff time, may not pay their
full costs, while less controversial projects with features addressing community and
neighborhood concerns may pay more than their share.
With the exception of the Construction Traffic Road Fee the City has no development impact
fees, and in addition, does not collect impact fees for the local school district. The Construction
Traffic Road Fee, instituted in 2003 to recover costs from developers for accelerated wear and
tear to the City’s roads as a result of construction projects, is paid at the time of building permit
issuance. Building permit fees are determined by the valuation of the project (labor and
materials), which can vary dramatically in Sausalito based on the project location. In 2014 a
typical building permit and processing fee for a new single-family home was $11,000, and
$21,000 for a two-family home. Table B.9 below summarizes the planning and development fees
collected by the City.
These fees, some of which are substantial, could act as a constraint to the development of
affordable housing. The Municipal Code includes a provision that allows the City Council to
waive permitting fees for any non-profit organization, public body, district or agency of federal,
state, county or municipal government or under other circumstances that the City Council in its
discretion justifies such a waiver. In the early 2000s, the City waived over $5,000 in building
permit fees for the multi-family Rotary Housing Corporation project. The Rotary Housing was
also allowed to use the City’s bonding capabilities to secure a low loan rate.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                        Page B - 24
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                            Adopted January 13, 2015

Table B.9: City of Sausalito Planning and Building Fees
            Design Review ‐ Administrative                                                   $ 1,746
            Design Review ‐ Planning Commission (Addition- 500 square feet or less)          $ 2,478
            Design Review ‐ Planning Commission (addition- 500 square feet or more)          $ 3,656
            Design Review ‐ Planning Commission (addition- 500 square feet or more)          $ 5,297
            Variance – Administrative                                                        $ 1,746
            Variance - Planning Commission                                                   $ 2,991
            Minor Use Permit                                                                 $ 957
            Conditional Use Permit                                                           $ 2,405
            Condominium Conversion Permit (4 or less units)                                  $ 2,405
            Condominium Conversion Permit (5 or more units)                                  $ 4,810
            General Plan/Specific Plan Map or Text Amendment                                 $ 5,186
            Rezoning                                                                         $ 5,186
            Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment                                                  $ 5,186
 Planning
            Environmental Review - Categorical Exemption                                     $ 450
 Fees
            Negative Declaration - Staff Preparation                                         $ 2,597
            Mitigated Negative Declaration - Staff Preparation                               $ 4,332
                                                                                             20% of contract
            Mitigated Negative Declaration - Consultant Preparation                          amount
                                                                                             20% of contract
            Environmental Impact Report - Consultant Preparation                             amount
            Lot Line Adjustment                                                              $ 3,176
            Tentative Subdivision Map Application (5+ parcels)                               $ 6,551
            Parcel Map Application (4 or less parcels)                                       $ 4,787
            Appeal of Staff Action                                                           $ 861
            Appeal of Zoning Administrator Action                                            $ 1,105
            Appeal of Planning Commission Action - Appeal by Applicant                       $ 2,910
            Appeal of Planning Commission Action - Appeal by Non-Applicant                   $ 1,000
            Building Permit Fees (based upon valuation)*
              $1 to $2,000               $60
              $2,001 to $25,000          $76 for the first $2,000 + $10 for ea add'l $1,000 or fraction thereof
              $25,001 to $50,000         $306 for the first $25,000 + $8 for ea add'l $1,000 or fraction thereof
              $50,001 to $100,000        $506 for the first $50,000 + $5 for ea add'l $1,000 or fraction
                                         thereof.
              $100,001 to $500,000       $756 for the first $100,000 + $4 for ea add'l $1,000 or fraction
                                         thereof
 Building
              $500,001 to $1,000,000     $2,356 for the first $500,000 + $4 for ea add'l $1,000 or fraction
 Fees
                                         thereof
              $1,000,001 and up          $3,956 for the first $1,000,000 + $3 for ea add'l $1,000 or fraction
                                         thereof
            Electrical Permit Fees       see Building Permit fees
            Mechanical Permit Fees       see Building Permit fees
            Plumbing Permit Fees         see Building Permit fees
            Plan Check Fee (First        65% of Building Permit fee, plus 10% consultant administrative
            three checks)                surcharge for plans checked by City's consultant. Expedited plan
                                         check is available at applicant's option for additional consultant fee.
 Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                                Page B - 25
 Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                                   Adopted January 13, 2015

              State Building Standards
              Commission Surcharge
                 $1 to $25,000             $1
                 $25,001 to $50,000        $2
                 $50,001 to $75,000        $3
  Building       $75,001 to $100,000       $4
  Fees
                 Every $25,000 or          Add $1
  (cont’d)
                 fraction thereof
                 above $100,000
              Construction Tax (SMC        $300/dwelling
              Section 3.16.030)
                 Commercial Use            $0.20/sq.ft.
                 Industrial Use            $0.05/sq.ft.
              Seismic                      Per State fee schedule for Strong Motion Instrumentation Program
              Energy Code (Title 24)       20% of Building Permit fee
              Review
  Source: City of Sausalito Fee Schedule, accessed August 18, 2014.
As a means of assessing the cost that fees contribute to development in Sausalito, the City has
calculated the total planning, building, public works and non-city agency fees associated with
development of three different residential prototypes. The first prototype consists of a new
single-family residence on a vacant lot, the second prototype is a per-unit cost for a multi-family
development on a vacant R-2 or R-3 lot, and the third is a per-unit cost for residential units
above existing ground-floor commercial in commercial districts that allow residential uses. As
indicated in Table B.10, planning fees for the three prototypes are the same at $5,511, whereas
building fees (which are based on the valuation of the project) for the prototypical single-family
project are approximately $32,000, about four to five times higher than the per unit costs for
multi-family residential units and residential units over existing ground-floor commercial uses.
Table B.10: City and Non-City Fees for Single and Multi-Family Residences
                                                          Planning          Building Permit
                                                          Permit Fees       Fees*
  Single Family – with a valuation of $1.9 mil            $5,511            $31,904
  Duplex (per unit) – with a valuation of $1 mil          $5,511            $8,591 per unit
  New Residential over Existing Commercial                $5,511            $6,409 per unit
  (per unit)- with a valuation of $1.5 mil for 4                            (estimate)
  units
*Includes construction road impact fee
Source: City of Sausalito Community Development Department, August 20, 2014
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                            Page B - 26
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015

13. On- and Off-Site Improvements
Improvement requirements for development in Sausalito are very limited. As the City is
essentially fully subdivided, streets and utilities are in place. For new residential development
the City requires standard utility connections, for sewer, water and stormwater runoff. Since
most streets in Sausalito are narrow with inadequate room to add sidewalks these off-site
pedestrian improvements may not be required. The City requires the undergrounding of
overhead utilities. However, the City’s Undergrounding Committee has the authority to grant
waivers to this requirement for reasons of financial hardship.
14. Prehistoric Cultural Resources
In 1907 UC Berkeley researcher N.C. Nelson recorded four prehistoric site locations in Sausalito,
three of which fall within the City limits, though it is probable that more sites exist under landfill
and bay fill. For example, in 2009, Native American relics were uncovered during construction of
a restaurant on Bridgeway (“Likely American Indian Burial Site Stops Construction in Sausalito”
Marin IJ, 2/26/09).
Native American burial grounds are protected under the California environmental Quality Act,
and state-wide law protects these locations. According to the General Plan, three sensitivity
sites include:
Zone 1: The shoreline at El Portal Park extending to the south to South Street. Prehistoric sites
could be found extending from the shoreline itself up to and into the mouths of the drainages,
approximately at Third Street in this area.
Zone 2: Area from El Portal Park to the west, approximately ending at Napa Street. Archeological
site placement could again range from the old shoreline to the upper reaches of the drainages
running down from the south; Bonita Street, at least on its eastern end, probably marked the
line of extension. Further to the west the actual toe of the hills drops lower down to the vicinity
of Caledonia Street near Bee Street.
Zone 3: Area from the original shoreline between Dunphy Park and Martin Luther King School
The construction of the Marinship shipyard to build supply ships during World War II caused a
massive filling of the marshlands found on the bay side of Bridgeway in this area. Bridgeway,
which occupies high ground from its intersection with Napa Street to the west as far as
approximately the intersection of Bridgeway and Nevada Street probably marked the extension
of any aboriginal site placement. From Nevada Street to the Martin Luther King school site,
archeological site placement may have continued in as far as Tomales Street behind the former
distillery, now an area of housing (Willow and Cypress Lanes). The City dictates specific
requirements, such as subsurface archaeological testing, for any future development on
recorded archaeological sites identified by the Northwest Information Center. The California
Environmental Quality Act requires assessment of potential impact that development may have
on prehistoric archaeological resources, and requires environmental assessment of historical
archaeological resources.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                       Page B - 27
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                           Adopted January 13, 2015

15. Housing for Persons with Disabilities
Senate Bill 520 (SB 520), passed in 2002), requires housing elements to provide a needs analysis
for persons with disabilities, and analyze potential governmental constraints to the
development, improvement and maintenance of housing for persons with disabilities. The
Element must also include a program to remove constraints to, or provide reasonable
accommodations for housing designed for occupancy by, or with supportive services for persons
with disabilities.
As discussed in Appendix A – Housing Needs Assessment, Census data shows that 24% of
Sausalito’s population has a disability (i.e., sensory, physical, mental, and self-care disabilities).
Among the City’s senior citizens, 34% have disabilities. The analysis acknowledges the wide
range of housing needs due to the differing disabilities.
A goal of the Fair Housing Act is to ensure that a City’s development regulations and Zoning
Ordinance do not create barriers to housing for persons with disabilities. In Sausalito, where the
majority of residential properties are developed, this means allowing for building modifications
that will adapt a home to meet the special housing needs of persons with disabilities.
Given the steep topography of the community, access to homes can be difficult to those persons
with disabilities. To compound the issue, due to the steep terrain, it is often difficult for sites to
be developed with a single-level only residence. To address these potential constraints on
housing the Planning Commission has demonstrated a willingness to grant variances to setbacks
to accommodate for the construction of ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) compliant ramps
and “hillevators.” In addition, many new or substantially remodeled homes have been
constructed with elevators to provide access between floors. The City does not discourage the
construction of elevators; the area used for elevator shafts is not counted toward the allowable
floor area ratio (FAR).
As described in Section 6g above, residential care homes with six or fewer clients are permitted
by right within all residential zoning districts. Within the R-3 (Multi-Family Residential) District,
residential care homes with seven or more clients can be allowed through a Conditional Use
Permit granted by the Planning Commission through a public hearing process. The Zoning
Ordinance does not require special findings for approving a Conditional Use Permit for these
facilities and does not restrict their siting, such as requiring a certain distance between facilities.
The City’s residential parking standards apply to care home facilities and, as with all projects, a
parking reduction could be considered by the Planning Commission. However, historically, there
has been little or no demand for such housing in Sausalito.
In July 2014, the City Council adopted amendments to Title 12 (Health and Safety) of the
Municipal Code to specify procedures for an individual with a disability to request a reasonable
accommodation from zoning, permit processing and building regulations to provide that
individual with an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. A decision on whether to
grant a reasonable accommodation is made by the Community Development Director, or his/her
designee. If the request for an accommodation is related to another discretionary permit, then
the request is processed with the project as a whole. However, no special permit is required for
the granting of a reasonable accommodation.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                         Page B - 28
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

C. Non-Governmental Constraints
State law requires an analysis of potential and actual non-governmental constraints to the
maintenance, improvement, and development of housing for all income levels. The Housing
Element must identify these constraints and ways, if any, to reduce or overcome these
constraints in order to meet the City’s housing needs.
1. Flooding, Subsidence and Seismic Considerations
The Sausalito waterfront, particularly in the northern “light industrial” area known as the
Marinship, was created with landfill/bayfill and is subject to liquefaction. Liquefaction occurs
when water in ground soil – especially fill – is agitated during the shaking of an earthquake. This
water rises and literally makes the soil liquid. Buildings built on liquefaction can literally shake
apart because the soil cannot support their structure. According to research conducted since the
1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and other scientists predict a 62%
probability of at least one magnitude 6.7 or greater quake, capable of causing widespread
damage, striking the San Francisco Bay region before 2032. The San Andreas fault lies
approximately 6.5 miles southwest of Sausalito in the Pacific Ocean. Other faults near Sausalito
include the Hayward fault and Rodgers Creek fault 13 miles east and 22 miles northeast of
Sausalito.
The Marinship was created from landfill / bayfill during World War II and used for ship-building.
In just three months, 2,000 workers converted bay mud and marsh into a 210 acre shipyard. An
estimated 838,763 cubic yards of earth and rock, excavated from nearby areas, was spread over
the shoreline and tidal mudflats. 26,000 pilings were driven into bay mud to create the
shipways and support for the new warehouses and fabrication workshops. As a result of its
hasty construction during war time, today sections of the Marinship are sinking at a rate of
between ½ to ¾ inches per year.
Flooding is a concern in Sausalito, mostly for the low-lying areas east of Bridgeway. The
National Flood Insurance program indicates that the flooding risk is high in this area. In addition,
sea level rise, caused by melting land-based ice and the expansion of seawater by thermal
warming, is another constraint for Sausalito. The Bay Conservation and Development
Commission (BCDC) has determined that areas of Sausalito are expected to experience a 16 inch
rise in sea level by 2050 and a 55 inch rise by the end of the century.
2. Land Costs
Vacant land within the City is extremely limited and the City’s location, for many reasons
including the views and proximity to San Francisco, is very desirable. Additionally, development
costs in Sausalito are higher than in many other parts of the Bay Area because of steep slopes,
irregular topography, bay mud or slide-prone areas. The technical and engineering costs of
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                         Page B - 29
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

mitigating these factors are very high. Development costs vary both between and within
jurisdictions based on factors such as the desirability of the location and the permitted density.
Two other major factors contribute to high land costs: Marin County is considered a desirable
place to live and available land is in short supply. 3
In Sausalito, a 3,614 square foot vacant parcel with approved plans for a single family home was
sold for $508,980 in 2012. The major contributors to the cost of land are the amount of land
available, the density of residential use allowed, location, “buildability”, availability of
community services, and attractiveness of the neighborhood. The upward pressures on land
value are so strong that it more than off-sets the extra costs involved in building on Sausalito’s
steep terrain.
For Marin County, land costs average around 15-20 percent of construction costs for multifamily
developments. Even though land costs for single family homes vary widely throughout the
county, the costs (as a percentage) are significantly higher than for multifamily developments.
3. Geographical Constraints
Sausalito is a town of steep terrain, built on a 980 foot slope with an average grade of 22
percent. Slope stability is a recurrent problem, and can result where excavations (cut slopes)
are made into hillsides, triggering instability. Underground springs, seasonal and permanent
creeks and streams also exist in Sausalito, limiting the availability of developable land.
Richardson’s Bay, located on the east side of the City, also limits developable land.
4. Construction Costs
Multifamily Developments. Construction costs include both hard costs, such as labor and
materials, and soft costs, such as architectural and engineering services, development fees and
insurance. For multifamily homes in Marin County, hard costs account for 60-70 percent of the
building cost and soft costs average around 15-20 percent (the remaining 15-20 percent is land
costs). Based on recent multifamily developments in the County, hard costs are currently
between $250 and $400 per square foot for a multifamily unit (EAH).
With all construction costs and land costs are included, total multifamily unit development costs
rise to $300 to $500 per square foot, or between $400,000 and $500,000 per unit. These high
costs reflect the high cost of land and the expensive finishes which are typical in Marin County.
Single Family Homes. For single family homes, hard costs often are roughly 40 percent of the
total construction cost, soft costs are 20 percent and land is the remainder. In the region, single
family homes cost roughly $125 per square foot for a two story house and $160 for a three story
3
  According to the Marin Economic Commission’s Marin Profile 1999: A Survey of Economic, Social and
Environmental Indicators, 84 percent of land area in Marin is designated for agriculture, park lands and
open space and watershed. Of the remaining land, 11 percent is developed and five percent is listed as
potentially developable development.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                             Page B - 30
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

home. According to the Association of Bay Area Governments, wood frame construction at 20-
30 units per acre is generally the most cost efficient method of residential development.
However, local circumstances affecting land costs and market demand will impact the economic
feasibility of construction types.
One factor affecting costs is the use of prevailing wage labor. Construction costs for a typical
apartment complex in the region (45 units per acre, structured parking, 800 square units), are
around $200,000 a unit for prevailing wage labor and $175,000 a unit for non-prevailing wage
labor. Projects receiving public subsidies, such as affordable housing developments, often must
pay prevailing wages. Costs can change dramatically over time. From 2000-2007 construction
costs were rising faster than inflation. In late 2007 they leveled off and have since been declining
(EAH). In late 2008 and early 2009, construction costs dropped roughly ten percent.
5. Financing
Home Financing. Within the past decade, interest rates for home loans have reached high rates
of ten and even 12 percent. Starting in late 2008, it became harder to get a home purchase loan,
but the average interest rate dropped to around four percent in 2010. In particular, people with
short credit history, lower incomes or self-employment incomes, or those with other unusual
circumstances, have had trouble qualifying for a loan or were charged higher rates.
Currently, interest rates for a 30-year fixed rate loan are around 4.2 percent. This figure is up
from a 3.6 percent interest rate experienced in late 2012, viewed as one of the lowest rates in
recent memory. In comparison, rates between 2006 and 2008 fluctuated between 6.25 and
seven percent (HSH Financial Associates).
Small changes in the interest rate for home purchases dramatically affect affordability. A 30-year
home loan for $400,000 at four percent interest has monthly payments of roughly $1,910. A
similar home loan at seven percent interest has payments of roughly 20 percent more, or
$2,660.
Construction Financing. Construction loans for new housing are difficult to secure in the current
market. In past years, lenders would provide up to 80 percent of the cost of new construction
(loan to value ratio). In recent years, due to market conditions and government regulations,
banks require larger investments by the builder.
Many builders are finding it nearly impossible to get construction loans for residential property
at the current time. Complicated projects, like mixed use developments, are often the hardest to
finance. Non-profit developers may find it especially difficult to secure funding from the private
sector.
Affordable housing developments face additional constraints in financing. Though public funding
is available, it is allocated on a highly competitive basis and developments must meet multiple
qualifying criteria, often including the requirement to pay prevailing wages. Smaller
developments with higher per unit costs are among the hardest to make financially feasible. This
is because the higher costs result in a sale price that is above the affordability levels set for many
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                         Page B - 31
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                             Adopted January 13, 2015

programs. Additionally, smaller projects often require significant inputs of time by developers,
but because the overall budget is smaller and fees are based on a percentage of total costs, the
projects are often not feasible (Marin Environmental Housing Collaborative).
6. Community Resistance to New Housing
Another common constraint to housing production in Marin County is community resistance to
new developments. There are a number of concerns that are often expressed at meetings,
including: 1) new developments will cause increased traffic, 2) additional housing or density will
adversely affect the community character, 3) affordable housing will impact property values,
and 4) valuable open space will be lost.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                    Page B - 32
  Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                        Adopted January 13, 2015

Sources:
   •    Affordable Housing Finance Basics, Marin Environmental Housing Collaborative,
        November 2007.
   •    Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance In-lieu Fee Analysis, Submitted to Marin County, March
        2008. Prepared by Vernazza Wolfe Associates, Inc.
   •    Ecumenical Association for Housing (EAH)
   •    Development Advisory Services, Inc.
   •    North Bay Family Homes
   •    HSH Financial Associates, Financial Publishers
 Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                  Page B - 33
 Appendix B – Housing Constraints                                                      Adopted January 13, 2015

APPENDIX C: VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED SITES ANALYSIS
The housing element is required to identify specific sites or parcels that are available for
residential development in the planning period in a land inventory. The land inventory is
required to include an inventory and analysis of vacant parcels (i.e., those parcels which do not
contain residential units and could potentially accommodate units based on the current General
Plan and zoning regulations) and an inventory and analysis of underdeveloped parcels (i.e.,
those parcels which are not “built-out” and could potentially accommodate additional units
based on the current General Plan and zoning regulations).
A. Data Sources
Parcel data for the City of Sausalito was retrieved from Marin Map, the Geographic Information
System (GIS) for Marin County, California. The parcel dataset was published by the County of
Marin Community Development Agency beginning in 1994. Attribute data (such as owner’s
name, average slope, construction year for existing units, parcel size, etc.) is updated on a
weekly basis, and the geometry of parcels is updated on a monthly basis, with new available
data from the Marin County’s Assessor-Recorder’s office. The data used for its analysis was first
retrieved for a study on vacant and underutilized sites, initiated by the City in early 2011.
Subsequently, detailed supplementary data for each parcel was retrieved in October 2011.
B. Methodology and Considerations for Development Constraints
The methodology used to determine the realistic development capacity of each of the sites in
this analysis was a combination of factors specific to each site, including zoning designation and
accompanying developments standards, lot size, and other land constraints applicable to the
specific site.
City staff had completed a Vacant and Underdeveloped Land Technical Study for the Housing
Element update, identifying vacant and underutilized parcels from the Marin County Assessor’s
Office using attribute data. Additional parameters were applied to assess realistic potential
development, considering factors such as slope and parcel size. Site visits and aerial imagery
checks were made to assess site conditions and build-out.
Table C.1: Applied parameters to assess realistic development potential
Zoning District and Type          Applied parameters to assess realistic potential development
Vacant Single-Family                   - Using MarinMap data, vacant parcels were located. If there
Districts 1                               was a structure on the parcel, but the improvement value
(R-1-20, R-1-8, R-1-6)                    was less than $200,000 and was not being coded as having
                                          a living unit, the parcel was inventoried as being vacant.
                                       - Parcels of all slope degrees were included;
                                       - All landlocked parcels were removed;
                                       - All parcels less than 3,000 square feet (s.f.) in size were
1
  Single-Family parcels are not identified as only one unit is allowed on every lot. Regardless of the size of
the lot, a single unit on a lot would render it “built out”, and not vacant or underutilized.
Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                                 Page C - 1
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                                                        January 13, 2015

Zoning District and Type          Applied parameters to assess realistic potential development
                                            removed;
                                       - All parcels on the City’s List of Noteworthy Historic
                                            Structures were removed;
                                       - All parcels that were on the City’s list of Constructed and
                                            Approved projects were removed;
                                       - All parcels that had parking constraints preventing the
                                            addition of units were removed; and
                                       - Visual checks were made using Google Earth and Google
                                            Streetview, and site visits were made to all parcels listed, to
                                            ascertain the actual build out and visual conditions of
                                            buildings.
Vacant and Underutilized               -    Using MarinMap data, vacant parcels were located. If there
Two-Family and Multi-                       was a structure on the parcel, but the improvement value
Family Districts                            was less than $200,000 and was not being coded as having
(R-2-2.5, R-2-5, R-3)                       a living unit, the parcel was inventoried as being vacant.
                                       -    Using MarinMap data, the lot size, maximum density and
                                            number of existing units on each parcel were analyzed to
                                            determine underutilized parcels. See Table C.2 for
                                            maximum densities in different zoning districts.
                                       -    Parcels of 40% slope or more were excluded 2;
                                       -    All landlocked parcels were removed;
                                       -    Parcels with buildings built after 1980 were removed;
                                       -    All parcels less than 3,000 square feet (s.f.) in size were
                                            removed;
                                       -    All parcels on the City’s List of Noteworthy Historic
                                            Structures were removed;
                                       -    All parcels that were on the City’s list of Constructed and
                                            Approved projects were removed;
                                       -    All parcels that could take on an additional unit were
                                            included if the lot had an underutilized portion, or the
                                            existing building could add another floor without conflicting
                                            with development standards, or if the existing building was
                                            dilapidated and abandoned;
                                       -    All parcels that had obvious parking constraints preventing
                                            the addition of units were removed; and
                                       -    Visual checks were made using Google Earth and Google
                                            Streetview, and site visits were made to all parcels listed, to
                                            ascertain the actual build out and visual conditions of
                                            buildings.
Underutilized Commercial               -    The residential unit potential of commercial properties was
Districts                                   determined by taking the difference between the maximum
2 One parcel with an average slope just slightly above the 40% threshold (40.7%) has been included in the
sites inventory due to its larger size (.75 acres) and site access from two streets.
Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                             Page C - 2
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                                                    January 13, 2015

Zoning District and Type     Applied parameters to assess realistic potential development
(CR, CC, CN-1)                         number of units allowed on each lot by maximum density,
                                       and the number of existing units. See Table C.2 for
                                       maximum densities in different zoning districts.
                                   - For parcels in the CN-1 zone, the maximum number of
                                       potential units were calculated using the maximum Floor
                                       Area Ratio, as this was more restrictive than the maximum
                                       density. An average of 800 square feet was assumed for
                                       residential units.
                                   - Parcels of 40% slope or more were excluded;
                                   - All landlocked parcels were removed;
                                   - All parcels less than 3,000 square feet (s.f.) in size were
                                       removed;
                                   - All parcels on the City’s List of Noteworthy Historic
                                       Structures were removed;
                                   - All parcels that were on the City’s list of Constructed and
                                       Approved projects were removed;
                                   - All parcels that had obvious parking constraints preventing
                                       the addition of units were removed; and
                                   - Visual checks were made using Google Earth and Google
                                       Streetview, and site visits were made to all parcels listed, to
                                       ascertain the actual build out and visual conditions of
                                       buildings.
Other Zoning Districts       Other zoning districts such as Public Facilities, Open Space, and
                             Industrial were not considered for this analysis, as sites in those
                             districts would require rezoning.
The resulting density for each site was calculated by dividing the maximum possible number of
whole units by the parcel size in acres. The maximum number of units was derived from dividing
the parcel size by the maximum density allowed in that particular zoning district (see Table C.2
below for maximum densities allowed). Due to the rounding down of units to whole numbers,
the resulting density was generally lower than the maximum density permitted.
For sites in the CN-1 Zoning District, the maximum number of units was derived by the
maximum Floor Area Ratio allowed, as this was a more restrictive development standard
compared to the maximum density. A three-story building was assumed, as the maximum height
allowed in the Commercial Zoning Districts is 32 feet (as measured from average natural grade).
Assuming an equal distribution of floor area per level, the floor area of the ground level is
subtracted, and the remainder is divided by an assumed residential unit size of 800 square feet.
The number of units was rounded down to a whole number for the calculation of the resulting
density.
Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                       Page C - 3
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                                              January 13, 2015

                  Table C.2: Maximum Zoning Densities
                 Zoning District                                        Maximum
                                                                        Density*
                 R-3                                                    29 du/acre
                 R-2-2.5                                                17.4 du/acre
                 R-2-5                                                  8.7 du/acre
                 R-1-6                                                  7.3 du/acre
                 R-1-8                                                  5.4 du/acre
                 R-1-20                                                 2.2 du/acre
                 Commercial zones that allow residential                29 du/acre
                 (CC, CR, CN-1)
                Source: Sausalito Zoning Ordinance, 2014
                *Note: Higher densities can be achieved on existing substandard parcels.
                For example, lots in the R-2-2.5 zone subdivided prior to 1963 (the majority
                of existing lots) with a minimum area of 3,000 square feet are permitted to
                have 2 units, equating to 29 units/acre.
Table C.3 below shows examples of past higher density infill housing projects in Sausalito.
Factors such as substandard lot sizes and zoning incentives for affordable housing projects for
seniors have contributed to higher densities for certain projects.
Table C.3: Examples of Higher Density Infill Projects
Year    Project Name /     Zoning      Parcel Size Zoning       Housing      Built no.  Built   Status
Built   Address            District                Density      Type         of units   Density
                                                   allowed
1992    Rotary Place       R-3         5,953 sf    29 du/ac     Senior       10         73      Completed
        (412/414 Bee                                            Affordable              du/ac   and
        Street)                                                 Housing                         occupied
                                                                Project
1999    538 Easterby       R-2-2.5     3,000 sf    29 du/ac     New          2          29      Completed
        St                             (sub-       (due to      Duplex                  du/ac   and
                                       standard    substanda                                    occupied
                                       lot)        rd lot size)
2003    Rotary Village     R-3         24,000 sf   29 du/ac     Senior       22         40      Completed
        (501 Olima St)                                          Affordable              du/ac   and
                                                                Housing                         occupied
                                                                Project
2007    85 Crescent        R-2-2.5     2,210 sf    29 du/ac     New          2          19.7    Completed
        Ave                            (sub-       (due to      Duplex                  du/ac   and
                                       standard    substanda                                    occupied
                                       lot)        rd lot size)
2011    317 Johnson        CR          2,708       29 du/ac     Second       2          32      Built,
        St                             (sub-                    Residential  (1 unit    du/ac   currently
                                       standard                 Unit         existing)          for lease
                                       lot)
Source: Sausalito Community Development Department, January 2012
In order to demonstrate the viability of small scale infill of both rental and ownership units,
Table C.4 provides examples of small infill projects in Sausalito which add just one to two units.
Small infill projects in the City take several forms, and include: development on vacant land;
Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                            Page C - 4
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                                                   January 13, 2015

demolition of an existing unit and the replacement with one to two new units; adding new units
to the existing development; and splitting larger units into smaller units. Sausalito approved a
total of 28 residential development applications between 1999 and 2011, contributing to 52
approved or built units. Of the total 28 applications, 26 were for one, two and three unit
projects. The City approved a total of two units between 2012 and 2013, both of which were
single-family homes.
The development trends reflected in Tables C.3 and C.4 help to substantiate the feasibility of
development on small parcels in Sausalito, and the ability to achieve maximum densities under
zoning.
Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                     Page C - 5
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                                            January 13, 2015

  Table C.4: Examples of Small Infill Projects adding 1-2 units
Year    Project Name / Zoning   Parcel      Zoning       Housing Type       Prior Built Built   Project Status
Built   Address        District Size        Density                         no.   no.   Density
                                                                            of    of
                                                                            units units
2011    565            CR       2,500       29 du/ac     Live/work          0     1     34.8    Building
        Bridgeway               square                   (Conversion of                 du/ac   Permit issued
                                feet                     three-story office                     in 2011
                                                         building to Art
                                                         Gallery on first
                                                         level, rental unit
                                                         on upper levels).
2011    317 Johnson    CR       2,708       29 du/ac     New upper level    1     2     32      Built,
        St                      (sub-                    second residential             du/ac   currently for
                                standar                  unit above                             rent
                                d lot)                   existing
                                                         commercial space
                                                         created by
                                                         dividing an
                                                         existing
                                                         residential unit
                                                         into two rental
                                                         units.
2005    521-525        R-3      7,500       29 du/ac     One single family  1     3     17.4    Building
        Bridgeway               square                   home demolished                du/ac   Permit finaled
                                feet                     and replaced with                      in 2010
                                                         a new duplex and
                                                         new single family
                                                         home.
2010    147 Edwards    R 2-2.5  3,614       17.4         New single-family  0     1     12.1    Building
                                square      du/ac        home built on                  du/ac   Permit finaled
                                feet                     vacant lot.                            in 2012
2007    88/90          R-2-2.5  7,398       17.4         One cottage unit   1     2     11.8    Built in 2009
        Cazneau Ave             square      du/ac        demolished and                 du/ac
                                feet                     replaced by
                                                         duplex.
2007    85 Crescent    R-2-2.5  2,210 sf    29 du/ac     New duplex built   0     2     19.7    Completed
        Ave                     (sub-       (due to      on vacant lot.                 du/ac   and occupied
                                standar     substanda
                                d lot)      rd lot size)
1999    538 Easterby   R-2-2.5  3,000 sf    29 du/ac     New duplex built   0     2     29      Completed
        St                      (sub-       (due to      on vacant lot.                 du/ac   and occupied
                                standar     substanda
                                d lot)      rd lot size)
2009    58 Miller Ave  R-1-6    7,100       7.3 du/ac    New single-family  0     1     6.1     Under
                                square                   home built on                  du/ac   construction
                                feet                     vacant lot.
  Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                          Page C - 6
  Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                                               January 13, 2015

C. Inventory of Sites
The following list shows parcels in the City with the potential to support additional housing
units, and includes commercial and residential sites. This list demonstrates that the City has
capacity for housing units within its current zoning designations. This capacity is one of the
proposed strategies that work towards fulfilling planned housing for the 2015-2023
planning cycle.
This list is not intended to:
       •     Suggest or promote any sites for sale or lease;
       •     Suggest that any sites are pre-approved or “fast tracked” for development;
       •     Suggest or propose the rezoning of any sites within the City for the purposes of
             housing;
       •     Suggest the value of any property, or any changes in current property values;
       •     Indicate that any existing or future residential units are automatically designated
             at the income levels determined through default density. Actual rents and future
             development would be determined by individual property owners. The default
             density is a planning tool to ensure that the Housing Element plans for housing
             across various income levels, or;
       •     Highlight any non-conformity with the Zoning Ordinance or development
             standards.
Each parcel listed would be subject to the normal development review process by the City,
including environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act.
Table C.5: Inventory of Sites
            APN                Address (or approximate address for vacant sites)
       1    065-267-37         107 SECOND ST
       2    065-238-41         217 SECOND ST
       3    064-141-05         1901 BRIDGEWAY
       4    064-141-06         510 EASTERBY ST
       5    064-135-28         2015 BRIDGEWAY
       6    064-135-24         BRIDGEWAY AND OLIVE
       7    064-135-29         2007 BRIDGEWAY
       8    064-141-01         1919 BRIDGEWAY
       9    064-135-26         2005 BRIDGEWAY
     10     065-238-25         203 SECOND ST
     11     065-052-03         209 CALEDONIA ST
     12     065-053-05         326 PINE ST
     13     065-056-02         41 CALEDONIA ST
     14     065-055-06         42 CALEDONIA ST
     15     065-052-23         201 CALEDONIA ST
     16     064-166-04         302 CALEDONIA ST
     17     064-167-27         333 CALEDONIA ST
Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                      Page C - 7
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                                             January 13, 2015

         APN               Address (or approximate address for vacant sites)
    18   065-055-02        1103 BRIDGEWAY
    19   065-055-03        JOHNSON ST
    20   064-274-03        WOLFBACK RIDGE ROAD
    21   064-276-23        3 WOLFBACK RIDGE ROAD
    22   200-240-10        WOLFBACK TERRACE ROAD
    23   200-240-23        WOLFBACK TERRACE ROAD
    24   200-310-01        WOLFBACK RIDGE ROAD
    25   200-310-03        WOLFBACK RIDGE ROAD
    26   200-310-04        WOLFBACK RIDGE ROAD
    27   200-310-05        WOLFBACK RIDGE ROAD
    28   200-310-06        WOLFBACK RIDGE ROAD
    29   200-310-08        WOLFBACK RIDGE ROAD
    30   200-310-09        WOLFBACK RIDGE ROAD
    31   200-310-12        CLOUDVIEW TRAIL
    32   200-310-16        WOLFBACK RIDGE ROAD
    33   065-222-05        105 CRESCENT AVE
    34   064-204-03        PLATT AVE
    35   064-204-35        CAZNEAU AVE
    36   064-213-22        CAZNEAU AVE
    37   064-243-22        GEORGE LANE
    38   064-242-10        GEORGE LANE
    39   064-135-06        522 SPRING ST
    40   064-141-10        530 EASTERBY ST
    41   064-201-01        35 MARIE ST
    42   064-141-18        518 EASTERBY ST
    43   065-261-04        107 FOURTH ST
    44   064-137-03        107 PEARL ST
    45   064-142-30        515 EASTERBY ST
    46   065-264-12        110 FOURTH ST
    47   064-062-14        175 TOMALES ST
    48   064-062-15        163 TOMALES ST
    49   064-135-03        510 SPRING ST
    50   064-141-17        511 SPRING ST
    51   064-342-07        20 BUCHANAN DR
    52   064-342-11        11 TOMALES ST
    53   064-181-24        812 SPRING ST
    54   064-138-02        254 WOODWARD AVE
    55   065-231-17        211 WEST ST
    56   065-236-04        209 FOURTH ST
    57   064-192-02        141 WOODWARD AVE
    58   064-062-19        TOMALES STREET (See Note 1)
    59   064-181-01        21 GORDON ST
    60   064-182-06        38 GORDON ST
Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                  Page C - 8
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                         January 13, 2015

         APN               Address (or approximate address for vacant sites)
    61   064-136-03        155 WOODWARD AVE
    62   064-142-29        EASTERBY STREET
    63   064-131-07        OLIVE STREET
    64   064-135-23        511 OLIVE STREET
    65   065-252-64        37-39 CRESCENT AVE
    66   065-253-02        MAIN STREET THROUGH TO CRESCENT AVE (See Note 2)
    67   064-163-06        BONITA STREET (See Note 3)
    68   064-163-07        417 BONITA ST
    69   065-301-05        115 SOUTH STREET
    70   064-141-13        523 SPRING ST
    71   065-072-12        10 READE LN
    72   065-063-08        911 BRIDGEWAY
    73   064-151-06        1733 BRIDGEWAY
    74   065-071-22        30 EXCELSIOR LN
    75   065-063-07        925 BRIDGEWAY
    76   064-151-02        1757 BRIDGEWAY
    77   065-267-41        104 THIRD ST
    78   065-238-15        214 THIRD ST
    79   065-241-10        210 RICHARDSON ST
    80   065-056-07        416 JOHNSON ST
    81   064-167-21        411 LITHO ST
    82   065-235-46        303 SECOND ST
    83   065-241-12        214 RICHARDSON ST
    84   064-167-03        408 LOCUST ST
    85   065-052-26        419 LOCUST ST
    86   064-151-16        412 NAPA ST
    87   052-322-02        330 EBBTIDE AVENUE
Notes
1       Owned by the City of Sausalito
2       Owned by the Marin Municipal Water District
3       Unknown owner
Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                  Page C - 9
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                         January 13, 2015

C. Uncounted Liveaboards
Table C.6: Uncounted Liveaboards in 2000 Census and 2000 – 2010 Department of Finance
                                 Housing Units in the City of Sausalito
    YEAR           TOTAL                 SINGLE                      MULTIPLE         MOBILE HOMES
                               DETACHED        ATTACHED         2 TO 4      5 PLUS        /OTHER
    2000            4,511         1,706           423            1,353        805           224
    2001            4,518         1,713           423            1,353        805           224
    2002            4,522         1,717           423            1,353        805           224
    2003            4,527         1,722           423            1,353        805           224
    2004            4,529         1,724           423            1,353        805           224
    2005            4,549         1,725           423            1,350        827           224
    2006            4,551         1,728           423            1,349        827           224
    2007            4,560         1,737           423            1,349        827           224
    2008            4,567         1,743           427            1,346        827           224
    2009            4,570         1,746           427            1,346        827           224
    2010            4,573         1,751           427            1,344        827           224
Source: California Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates 2000-2010.
The California Department of Finance updates each year’s housing count by unit type adding
new construction and annexations, and subtracting demolitions and conversions from the 2000
census benchmark based on data provided by the local jurisdiction. Review of State Department
of Finance annual housing unit counts for the years 2000 to 2010 indicate no change in the
number of “mobile homes/other” units in Sausalito, the category that encompasses a variety of
miscellaneous housing types including boats. Thus, in the years since the 2000 Census, the 38
undercounted liveaboard berths have remained an uncounted segment of Sausalito’s housing
stock. (While 38 BCDC permitted liveaboards were undercounted in the 2000 Census, only the 6
uncounted liveaboards within the Waterfront Marinship Zone where liveaboards are a legal
non-conforming use will be credited towards the 2009-2014 RHNA) . Discussions with the State
Department of Finance (February 2014) regarding the appropriate reporting of undercounted
liveaboards indicate that from this point forward, the City will need to evaluate any undercount
in comparison with the housing unit counts from the 2010 Census. So while the 2009-2014
RHNA developed by ABAG is based on unit counts from the 2000 Census, the current unit counts
reported by the Department of Finance now utilize the 2010 Census as the baseline.
Review of the 2010 Census maps for Sausalito indicate both the block numbers and boundaries
have changed significantly from the 2000 Census, with census blocks now encompassing both
waterfront homes and marinas. As shown in Table C.7, the 2010 housing unit count by census
block now exceeds the number of BCDC permitted liveaboards.
Discussion of this issue with the State Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD) has confirmed the City's ability to utilize the 2000 Census as the basis for the liveaboard
undercount in the City's 2009-2014 Housing Element. Sausalito's Housing Element update for
Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                     Page C - 10
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                                             January 13, 2015

the 2015-2023 period does not, however, include a liveaboard undercount within the sites
inventory 3.
           Table C.7: Comparison of Existing Permitted Liveaboards and 2010 Census
              Census Block #           2010                                            Existing
              (Tract 1302.02         Census                                         Liveaboards
                                                           Marina
              Block Group 1)        Housing                                          with BCDC
                                   Unit Count                                          Permits
                                                 Clipper Yacht Harbor                     52
                    1023                75
                                                 Galilee Harbor                           38
                    1035                80
                                                 Schoonmaker Marina                       16
                    1038                27       Sausalito Marine Ways                    --
                    1039                62       Sausalito Yacht Harbor                   31
                                                 Pelican Harbor                           9
                   Totals           244 units                                            146
3 This refers only to the 2010 Census and does not limit the City's ability to analyze and utilize any future
discrepancies, commencing with the 2020 Census.
Housing Element Update 2015–2023                                                                                Page C - 11
Appendix C – Vacant and Underutilized Sites Analysis                                                        January 13, 2015

APPENDIX D - EVALUATION OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS UNDER EXISTING
HOUSING ELEMENT
Housing Element Law requires that a jurisdiction review its previously adopted Element
to determine what accomplishments occurred in the intervening years, and to consider
modifications that might be necessary in order to make the new Element more
effective. These results should be quantified where possible (e.g. the number of units
rehabilitated), but may be qualitative where necessary (e.g. mitigation of governmental
constraints). The results should then be compared with what was projected or planned
in the earlier element. Where significant shortfalls exist between what was planned and
what was achieved, the reasons for such differences must be discussed.
The City of Sausalito 2009-2014 Housing Element set forth a series of housing programs
to address the following issue areas:
       Programs to Preserve and Improve Existing Affordable Housing
       Programs to Assist in the Development of Affordable Housing
       Programs to Maintain or Achieve Compliance with Housing Regulations
This section reviews the City’s progress to date in implementing these housing programs
and their continued appropriateness for the updated Housing Element. Table D-1 that
follows summarizes the City’s housing program accomplishments, followed by a review
of its quantified objectives. The results of this analysis provide the basis for
development of the program strategy for Sausalito's 2015-2023 Housing Element.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                     Page D - 1
 Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                           Adopted January 13, 2015

 Table D.1: Review of Accomplishments under 2009-2014 Housing Element
Implementing Program                               Accomplishments
PRESERVING HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD ASSETS
1. Code Enforcement and Public Information         Progress: Staff prepared a brochure summarizing
2009-14 Objective:                                 rehabilitation and energy retrofit programs available through
Develop and distribute informational handouts on   Marin Housing and PG&E. The brochure is available at City
available rehabilitation and energy retrofit       Hall. Staff is making the brochure available on the City’s
assistance through Marin Housing and P&E.          website.
Provide information on volunteer service           Effectiveness: The program was effective in enhancing public
organizations on City website.                     awareness of available rehabilitation and energy retrofit
                                                   programs.
                                                   Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                   updated Housing Element.
2. Residential Rehabilitation Loan and Energy      Progress: Staff prepared a brochure which summarizes
Retrofit Programs                                  rehabilitation and energy retrofit programs available through
2009-14 Objective:                                 Marin Housing and PG&E. The brochure is available at City
Publicize the Marin Housing Rehab program and      Hall and available on the City’s website. According to County
PG&E energy retrofit programs on City website      staff, no rehabilitation loans were made to Sausalito residents
and through brochures at City Hall and other       during the planning period.
community locations. Seek to assist five very low  Effectiveness: While the City was effective in providing public
income households.                                 information on available rehabilitation assistance programs,
                                                   no Sausalito residents applied for assistance.
                                                   Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                   updated Housing Element.
3. Historic Design Guidelines and Preservation     Progress: The City conducted a public workshop for a City-
Incentives                                         wide Neighborhood Historical study in February 2013. Staff
2009-14 Objective:                                 prepared a brochure which identifies funding sources for
Provide a brochure on funding sources for historic historic preservation. The process to update the Historic
preservation. Update Historic Preservation         Preservation regulations contained within the Zoning
regulations in Municipal Code and Zoning           Ordinance is on track for adoption in 2015.
Ordinance.                                         Effectiveness: The program was effective in enhancing public
                                                   awareness of available funding for historic preservation.
                                                   Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                   updated Housing Element, including updating its Historic
                                                   Preservation regulations.
4. Residential Design Review                       Progress: The City continues to utilize design guidelines to
2009-14 Objective:                                 promote development that is compatible with its
Continue to provide design review to ensure that   surroundings and Sausalito's character. In 2014, the City
new projects and modifications of existing         adopted Municipal Code Section 10.44.330 (Development
buildings are consistent with the small-town       Standards for Dwelling Units in Two-Family and Multi-family
character of Sausalito. Evaluate revisions to      Residential Zoning Districts) that limits the size of single family
Design Review Procedures to encourage multi-       homes in multi-family districts and encourages multi-family
family use in multi-family districts.              use in multi-family districts.
                                                   Effectiveness: The program was effective in achieving its
                                                   objectives.
                                                   Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                   updated Housing Element.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                  Page D - 2
  Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

Implementing Program                                 Accomplishments
5. Condominium Conversion Regulations                Progress: The City did not implement this program during the
2009-14 Objective:                                   planning period.
Evaluate strengthening regulations to extend         Effectiveness: Between 2009-2013, three duplexes, totaling
inclusionary requirements to smaller projects and    six units, were converted to condominium ownership. While
prohibit conversions during periods of low rental    the City has not yet amended its condominium conversion
vacancy rates. Examine relief options for long-      regulations, none of these projects would have triggered the
term homeowners.                                     program's proposed application of inclusionary requirements
                                                     to projects of 3 or more units.
                                                     Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                     updated Housing Element.
6. Preservation of Existing Rental Housing           Progress: Affordability controls were maintained in Sausalito's
2009-14 Objective:                                   three income-restricted rental projects (Bee Street Housing,
Preserve 5 extremely low income, 45 very low         Rotary Place, Sausalito Rotary Senior Housing) and income-
income, 15 low income and 7 moderate income          restricted liveaboard marina (Galilee Harbor).
housing opportunities. Require long-term             Effectiveness: Long-term rent restrictions were effective in
affordability controls in future affordable housing  maintaining affordability in 38 very low income apartment
projects.                                            units, and 34 lower and moderate income liveaboard berths.
                                                     Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                     updated Housing Element.
ENCOURAGING DIVERSITY IN HOUSING
7. Residential and Mixed Use Site Inventory          Progress: The City maintains on the City website the inventory
2009-14 Objective:                                   of vacant and underutilized residential and commercial
Maintain site inventory. Provide inventory and       parcels conducted for the Housing Element on the City
development incentive information to developers.     website.
                                                     Effectiveness: The program was effective in providing readily
                                                     accessible information on residential development
                                                     opportunities in the City.
                                                     Appropriateness: The residential sites inventory will be
                                                     updated and refined as part of the 2015-2023 Housing
                                                     Element. A program to maintain public access to the
                                                     inventory remains appropriate to the Element.
8. Vertical Mixed Use Requirements in                Progress: In July 2014, City Council adopted an Ordinance to
Commercial Districts 1                               Encourage and Incentivize the Development of Residential
2009-14 Objective:                                   Uses above Commercial Uses within the CC, CR and CN-1
Establish VMU requirements and initiate related      Zoning Districts.
zoning text amendments.                              Effectiveness: As the Ordinance has just recently been
                                                     adopted, the City has not yet received any project applications
                                                     under the new Vertical Mixed Use regulations.
                                                     Appropriateness: Maintaining a program to facilitate mixed
                                                     income residential infill within designated commercial areas
                                                     remains appropriate to the updated Housing Element.
 1
   As part of the July 2014 amendment to Sausalito's 2009-2014 Housing Element, Program 8b - Horizontal
 Mixed Use Incentives in Neighborhood Commercial (CN-1) District, was removed from the Element, and a
 replacement R-3 site was added to the Housing Element sites inventory.
   Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page D - 3
   Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                     Adopted January 13, 2015

Implementing Program                              Accomplishments
9. Non-Traditional Housing Types                  Progress: Implementation of this program was not completed
2009-14 Objective:                                during the planning period.
Facilitate the development of alternative housing Effectiveness: While the City has not yet amended its zoning
models suited to the community's housing needs    code to specifically address this program, no requests for
by modifying zoning regulations to allow for such housing types which didn't fit within Sausalito's existing zoning
additional housing types.                         were received.
                                                  Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate to the
                                                  updated Element, and the City will consider expanding to
                                                  specifically explore and evaluate regulations to facilitate junior
                                                  second units.
10a. Accessory Dwelling Units – Adoption of       Progress: The City's ADU Working Group meet over several
Regulations to Encourage New ADUs                 months to develop draft ADU regulations, which underwent
2009-14 Objective:                                extensive public review and refinement. The City Council
Adopt regulations to facilitate new ADUs and      adopted the ADU Ordinance in November 2012. In the 18
conduct educational campaign to promote. Seek     months since the ADU ordinance has been in effect (Jan 2013 -
to achieve 12 new ADUs during the remaining       June 2014), the City has received 8 applications for new ADUs,
2012-2014 planning period.                        6 of which have been approved and 2 which are currently
                                                  under review.
                                                  Effectiveness: The City's ADU Ordinance and associated public
                                                  outreach has been effective in producing lower-cost housing
                                                  opportunities in Sausalito. If the level of ADU permit activity
                                                  continues through the end of 2014, the City will be close to its
                                                  goal for 12 new units.
                                                  Appropriateness: Continuation of this program into the
                                                  updated Element remains appropriate.
10b. Accessory Dwelling Units – Registration and  Progress: In conjunction with establishing the ordinance for
Amnesty of Existing ADUs                          new ADUs, the Working Group established the parameters for
2009-14 Objective:                                an amnesty program for existing ADUs, also adopted by City
Develop and initiate ADU registration and         Council in November 2012. During the 15 month ADU
amnesty program. Seek to legalize at least 12     amnesty period (Jan 1, 2013 - March 31, 2014), the City
units that weren't previously counted in the U.S. received a total of 64 applications. Through June 2014, a total
Census and bring them into the City's official    of 14 of these ADU amnesty units not previously counted in
housing stock. Monitor progress and report to     the census have been issued permits, with an additional 45
HCD. If shortfall, amend Housing Element to       under review, and 5 ADUs issued permits that had already
identify additional strategies.                   counted in the Census.
                                                  Effectiveness: The amnesty program has been highly effective
                                                  by bringing at least 14 units up to Code, exceeding the City's
                                                  goal to bring 12 previously undocumented ADUs up to Code,
                                                  issue permits, and bring into the City's "official" housing stock.
                                                  Appropriateness: The City recognizes that additional
                                                  unpermitted ADUs remain in the community. The City may
                                                  therefore initiate another amnesty program during the next 8
                                                  year Housing Element cycle.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page D - 4
  Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                   Adopted January 13, 2015

Implementing Program                                Accomplishments
11. Liveaboard Housing                              Progress: The City determined a CUP is required for
2009-14 Objective:                                  liveaboard use, with the exception of marinas in the Marinship
Contact marina operators and facilitate necessary   (where liveaboards that existed prior to the City's 2003 Zoning
local permitting. Coordinate with Sausalito Yacht   Ordinance are grandfathered in). The following liveaboards
in amendment of BCDC permit. Report permitted       located within the Marinship are credited towards the 2009-
liveaboards to Dept. of Finance. Establish          2014 RHNA: 6 liveaboards in Schoonmaker not counted in the
monitoring procedures for local low/mod income      2000 Census; additional liveaboard capacity of 20 units in
occupancy requirements. Pursue improved mail        Clipper Yacht and 4 units in Schoonmaker.
service and communication with liveaboard           Effectiveness: The City has been effective in bringing some
residents.                                          liveaboards into the official housing stock, and will continue to
                                                    work with other marinas on local permitting.
                                                    Appropriateness: Continuation of this program into the
                                                    updated Element remains appropriate.
ENHANCING HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
12. Affordable Housing Development Assistance       Progress: While the City has not had any requests for
2009-14 Objective:                                  affordable housing during the planning period, in June 2014,
Consider financial and regulatory incentives to     the City Council adopted a local density bonus ordinance that
private developers upon request, for the            sets forth regulatory incentives and concessions for affordable
development of high quality affordable housing      housing. Adoption of the Vertical Mixed Use Ordinance in July
for families and seniors.                           2014 provides an additional tool to encourage the integration
                                                    of affordable units within designated commercial districts.
                                                    Effectiveness: While Sausalito does not currently have
                                                    financial resources to support the development of affordable
                                                    housing, the City now has several regulatory mechanisms in
                                                    place to facilitate the provision of affordable units.
                                                    Appropriateness: Continuation of this program into the
                                                    updated Element remains appropriate.
13. Local Affordable Housing Fund                   Progress: The City has not yet adopted an Inclusionary
2009-14 Objective:                                  Housing or other program that generates in-lieu fees, and thus
Upon adoption of a program that generates in-       has not established a local affordable housing fund.
lieu housing fees, establish a dedicated Affordable Effectiveness: This program was not implemented and
Housing Fund. Consult with Marin County in          therefore effectiveness cannot be measured.
developing Regulations to govern Fund oversight     Appropriateness: As indicated under Program #17, conducting
and expenditures.                                   an Inclusionary Housing Nexus and In-Lieu Fee Study and
                                                    considering whether to adopt an Inclusionary Housing
                                                    Ordinance remains appropriate to the updated Housing
                                                    Element. A program to establish a local affordable housing
                                                    fund thus also remains appropriate.
   Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                 Page D - 5
   Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                     Adopted January 13, 2015

Implementing Program                                Accomplishments
14. Partnerships for Affordable Housing             Progress: In the less than two years since Sausalito adopted
2009-14 Objective:                                  its 2009-2014 Housing Element in October 2012, the City has
Explore partnerships with a variety of affordable   focused on the implementation of near term programs
housing providers, utilizing the Nonprofit Housing  necessary to provide adequate sites and zoning for a variety of
Association of Northern California as a resource to housing types for special needs populations. Exploring
identify nonprofits with experience in developing   affordable housing partnerships did not occur during this
small scale infill projects consistent with         short time frame.
Sausalito’s character.                              Effectiveness: This program has not yet been implemented
                                                    and therefore effectiveness cannot be measured.
                                                    Appropriateness: Partnerships with affordable housing
                                                    providers remains an appropriate program over the longer
                                                    term, 2015-2023 planning period.
15. Homebuyer Assistance                            Progress: City staff obtained brochures from Marin Housing
2009-14 Objective:                                  Regarding MCC and BMR programs. The brochure is available
Contact Marin Housing regarding participation in    at City Hall. Staff has made the brochure available on the
MCC and BMR programs. Publicize MCCs as they        City’s website.
become available.                                   Effectiveness: The City was effective in providing information
                                                    about available first-time homebuyer assistance.
                                                    Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                    updated Housing Element.
16. Section 8 Rental Assistance                     Progress: Staff prepared a brochure that summarizes Section
2009-14 Objective:                                  8 assistance through Marin Housing. The brochure is available
Provide information and refer tenants to Marin      at City Hall. Staff has made the brochure available on the
Housing for Section 8 assistance. Provide handout   City’s website.
for distribution to rental property owners to       Effectiveness: The City was effective in providing information
encourage them to register units with Marin         about rental assistance available through Marin Housing for
Housing.                                            very low income households.
                                                    Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                    updated Housing Element.
17. Inclusionary Housing Regulations                Progress: Implementation of this program was not completed
2009-14 Objective:                                  during the planning period.
Prepare an Inclusionary Housing Nexus and In-       Effectiveness: This program was not implemented and
Lieu Fee Study and develop and adopt incentive-     therefore effectiveness cannot be measured.
based inclusionary housing regulations.             Appropriateness: Conducting an Inclusionary Housing Nexus
                                                    and In-Lieu Fee Study and potential adoption of an
                                                    Inclusionary Housing Ordinance remains appropriate to the
                                                    updated Housing Element.
REDUCING GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
18. Fee Deferrals and/or Waivers for Affordable     Progress: Implementation of this program was not completed
Housing                                             during the planning period.
2009-14 Objective:                                  Effectiveness: This program was not implemented and
Adopt resolution to waive 100% application          therefore effectiveness cannot be measured
processing fees for projects with min. 5% ELI       Appropriateness: Adopting provisions to waive application
units. Provide information to affordable housing    fees for projects with extremely low income units remains
community regarding fee deferrals, reductions,      appropriate to the updated Housing Element. The City
and waivers.                                        incorporated a fee waiver provision into the VMU program
                                                    that may serve as a model in this effort.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page D - 6
  Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                     Adopted January 13, 2015

Implementing Program                             Accomplishments
19. Density Bonus and Other Incentives for       Progress: The updated Density Bonus Ordinance was
Affordable Housing                               introduced at a community meeting in March 2014. Planning
2009-14 Objective:                               Commission and City Council conducted several public
Amend Zoning Ordinance to comply with State      hearings on the draft Ordinance, the City refined the
Density Bonus law requirements.                  Ordinance based on public input and adopted it in June 2014.
                                                 Effectiveness: The City was effective in providing zoning
                                                 incentives for the provision of affordable housing.
                                                 Appropriateness: Providing information on regulatory
                                                 incentives and concessions to facilitate affordable housing
                                                 remains appropriate to the updated Housing Element.
20. Multi-Family Development in Multi-Family     Progress: From January 2011 to May 2013, a Planning
Zones                                            Commission subcommittee conducted extensive public
2009-14 Objective:                               outreach to evaluate and recommend amendments to
Develop standards in Zoning Ordinance to         development standards within the Multi-Family Zoning
promote two-family and multi-family              Districts. Following additional public input, in March 2014, the
developments in two-family and multi-family      City Council adopted an Ordinance adding Municipal Code
zoning districts, and discourage single-family   Section 10.44.330 (Development Standards for Dwelling Units
developments in these districts. Evaluate        in Two-Family and Multi-family Residential Zoning Districts),
alternatives.                                    and modifying other Code sections to discourage the
                                                 development of large single-family residences in multi-family
                                                 zones and encourage multi-family use on multi-family zoned
                                                 properties.
                                                 Effectiveness: The City was effective in establishing zoning
                                                 provisions to limit the size of single family homes in multi-
                                                 family districts and encourage multi-family use on multi-family
                                                 zoned properties.
                                                 Appropriateness: The City completed this program and it is no
                                                 longer necessary in the updated Housing Element.
21. Zoning Text Amendments for Special Needs     Progress: The City introduced the Zoning Text Amendments
Housing                                          for Special Needs Housing at a community meeting in March
2009-14 Objective:                               2014. Planning Commission and City Council conducted
Adopt Zoning Ordinance text amendments           several public hearings on the code amendments, refined
specifying provisions for emergency shelters,    them based on public input, and adopted them in July 2014.
transitional and supportive housing and Single-  Effectiveness: The City was effective in providing zoning
Room Occupancy buildings.                        appropriate to accommodate a variety of special needs
                                                 housing.
                                                 Appropriateness: The City implemented this program and it is
                                                 no longer necessary in the updated Housing Element.
PROMOTING EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
22. Fair Housing Program                         Progress: City staff obtained flyers from Fair Housing of Marin
2009-14 Objective:                               regarding fair housing. The City makes the flyers available at
Refer fair housing complaints to Fair Housing of City Hall. Staff has made the brochure available on the City’s
Marin. Publicize the fair housing program.       website.
                                                 Effectiveness: The City was effective in providing information
                                                 about fair housing.
                                                 Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                 updated Housing Element.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                               Page D - 7
  Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                   Adopted January 13, 2015

Implementing Program                              Accomplishments
23. Sausalito Village Senior Services             Progress: The City helps to promote the work of Sausalito
2009-14 Objective:                                Senior Services through publication of links to the
Support the efforts of Sausalito Village to allow organization's two electronic newsletters. In 2013, the City
seniors to age in place and promote housing       Council created the Age-Friendly Sausalito Task Force to
assistance for seniors.                           assess the current age-friendliness of the City and to develop
                                                  a strategic plan which will assist the City in future planning.
                                                  Effectiveness: The City has been effective both in promoting
                                                  available services to seniors, and in evaluating the future
                                                  needs of the senior community.
                                                  Appropriateness: Expanding the existing program to explore
                                                  options to develop a citywide Plan of Action for seniors is
                                                  appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
24. Home Sharing and Tenant Matching              Progress: City staff obtained flyers from Marin Housing to
Opportunities                                     promote the home sharing service and made available at City
2009-14 Objective:                                Hall and on the city's website. However, the program has
Collaborate with Marin Housing and Sausalito      since been discontinued due to lack of funding.
Village Senior Services to implement and actively Effectiveness: The City was effective in providing information
promote “Home Connection in Marin” within         about Home Connection when the program was in operation.
Sausalito.                                        The only home sharing program currently available in Marin is
                                                  through Episcopal Senior Communities (ESC) in San Rafael.
                                                  Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                  updated Housing Element. The Age Friendly Sausalito Task
                                                  Force is working with ESC to develop a satellite home sharing
                                                  program in Sausalito.
25. Reasonable Accommodation Procedures           Progress: In June 2014, City Council adopted an ordinance
2009-14 Objective:                                permitting the City to grant reasonable modifications to the
Amend Zoning Ordinance and develop procedures     requirements of the zoning code to ensure persons with
to allow reasonable accessibility                 disabilities have the same opportunity to enjoy the rights and
accommodations.                                   privileges available to residents or property owners in the
                                                  same zoning district.
                                                  Effectiveness: Although the City only recently adopted the
                                                  ordinance, the City expects it will be effective in establishing
                                                  the process for requesting and granting reasonable
                                                  modifications to zoning and development regulations, building
                                                  codes, and land use.
                                                  Appropriateness: Providing information on opportunities for
                                                  reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities
                                                  remains appropriate for the updated Housing Element.
26. Universal Design / Visitability               Progress: Staff prepared a Universal Design brochure. The
2009-14 Objective:                                brochure is available at City Hall. Staff has made the brochure
Develop Universal Design and Visitability         available on the City’s website.
Principals brochure, and provide to residential   Effectiveness: The City was effective in providing public
development applicants.                           information on universal design.
                                                  Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                  updated Housing Element.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                 Page D - 8
  Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                   Adopted January 13, 2015

Implementing Program                              Accomplishments
27. Housing for Marine Workers                    Progress: In conjunction with the Housing Element update
2009-14 Objective:                                process, the City conducted extensive research to document
Support liveaboard and other affordable housing   the number of liveaboards in each marina with BCDC permits.
options which address the housing needs of local  In addition, as described under Program 11, the City has
marine workers.                                   clarified the local permitting process for liveaboards, and
                                                  determined liveaboards located in marinas in the Marinship
                                                  Specific Plan area are a legal non-conforming uses.
                                                  Effectiveness: The City has been effective in bringing some
                                                  liveaboards into the official housing stock, and will continue to
                                                  work with other marinas on local permitting.
                                                  Appropriateness: A program to address the housing needs of
                                                  marine workers remains appropriate to the updated Housing
                                                  Element, including working with marina operators to establish
                                                  procedures for implementation of low and moderate income
                                                  occupancy requirements.
28. Homeless Continuum of Care                    Progress: The City has provided information on its website
2009-14 Objective:                                about the emergency 211 toll-free call system for information
Support implementation of the Homeless            and referral. In July 2014, City Council adopted zoning
Countywide Continuum of Care and publicize the    provisions to: 1) establish an Emergency Shelter Overlay Zone
emergency 211 call system.                        on designated PI zoned sites; 2) specify that transitional and
                                                  supportive housing are to be considered a residential use of
                                                  property; and 3) provide for SROs as a conditional use within
                                                  the CC, CR and CN zones.
                                                  Effectiveness: The City has been effective in publicizing the
                                                  availability of emergency services and adopting zoning to
                                                  accommodate a continuum of care of persons and families
                                                  experiencing homelessness.
                                                  Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                  updated Housing Element.
IMPLEMENTING ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
29. Local Green Building Regulations              Progress: The City will incorporate the California Green
2009-14 Objective:                                Building Code into the local adoption of the 2013 Uniform
Adopt local Green Building regulations, including Construction Code in 2015.
appropriate policies and programs.                Effectiveness: This program has not yet been implemented.
                                                  Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                  updated Housing Element.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page D - 9
  Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                   Adopted January 13, 2015

Implementing Program                           Accomplishments
30. Climate Action Plan                        Progress: Sausalito has completed a baseline Community-
2009-14 Objective:                             wide Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions Inventory, and has
Complete the Community-wide Greenhouse Gas     undertaken numerous actions aimed at reducing GHG
Emissions Inventory, and adopt and implement   emissions. The mission of the Sustainability Commission is to
the Climate Action Plan.                       support the City in its goal to improve the environment, and
                                               to minimize the community's ecological footprint. The
                                               Commission accomplishes its mission through education and
                                               outreach to the citizens of Sausalito, and by formulating plans
                                               and policies for consideration by the City Council. Topic areas
                                               addressed by the Sustainability Commission include: 1) Waste
                                               reduction, collection, and disposal; 2) Recycling and reuse; 3)
                                               Alternative energy sources and energy efficiency; 4) Pollution
                                               and hazardous waste; 5) Ways to minimize environmental
                                               degradation.
                                               Effectiveness: The City has been effective in its actions to
                                               reduce waste and become a more sustainable community.
                                               Appropriateness: An overall program for sustainability is
                                               appropriate for the updated Element, of which the Climate
                                               Action Plan will be a component.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                          Page D - 10
  Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                Adopted January 13, 2015

Implementing Program                               Accomplishments
PROMOTING COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
31. Ongoing Community Education and Outreach       Progress: As part of the 2009-2014 Housing Element update,
2009-14 Objective:                                 the City developed an extensive e-mail list of community
Continue to include residents and community        stakeholders and interested parties and it will use this list for
organizations in the implementation of this        ongoing notification of opportunities for public input into the
Housing Element and the development of the         Housing Element update. In March 2014 the City sent a
next Housing Element through multiple means.       postcard to all residents and property owners in Sausalito
                                                   regarding the Housing Element Update, providing contact
                                                   information, upcoming workshop/meeting dates and an
                                                   invitation to join the email notification list for weekly/monthly
                                                   updates.
                                                   Effectiveness: The City has been very effective in keeping the
                                                   citizenry informed about the Housing Element update and
                                                   associated zoning implementation, and has continued to
                                                   receive a high level of community involvement in the process.
                                                   Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                   updated Housing Element.
32. Housing Element Monitoring/                    Progress: The City has been monitoring its progress in
Annual Report                                      implementing the Housing Element, and submitted Annual
2009-14 Objective:                                 Progress Reports to State HCD for calendar years 2012 and
The Community Development Department will          2013.
review the Housing Element annually, provide       Effectiveness: The City has been effective in monitoring
opportunities for public participation, and submit implementation of the Housing Element, and providing
an annual report to the State.                     opportunities for public review of its progress.
                                                   Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                   updated Housing Element.
33. Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG)     Progress: The City participated in the ABAG RHNA planning
Housing Needs Process                              meetings for the 2015-2023 housing planning cycle, and
2009-14 Objective:                                 provided reports to Council.
The City Council’s Sausalito ABAG delegate will    Effectiveness: The City's participation in the ABAG RHNA
continue to monitor and provide reports to the     process was effective, and contributed to a more realistic
City Council on the preparation and confirmation   RHNA of 79 units for the 2014-2022 RHNA period, reflecting a
of the RHNA for the next Housing Element cycle.    50% reduction from Sausalito's prior 2007-2014 RHNA.
                                                   Appropriateness: Continued involvement in the ABAG
                                                   housing needs process remains appropriate for the Housing
                                                   Element update.
34. Staff Affordable Housing Training and          Progress: Staff has attended a housing training sponsored by
Education                                          the State Department of Housing and Community
2009-14 Objective:                                 Development (HCD), and consults with HCD as necessary to
Designated City staff members shall begin training become more informed on Housing Element requirements.. In
sessions and provide on-going assistance to        addition, staff routinely refers the public to Marin Housing
homeowners, renters, and developers.               and Fair Housing of Marin as a means of providing information
                                                   on available assistance.
                                                   Effectiveness: Staff has been effective in keeping well
                                                   informed of housing laws and informing the public
                                                   accordingly.
                                                   Appropriateness: This program remains appropriate for the
                                                   updated Housing Element.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                 Page D - 11
  Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

Summary of Quantified Objectives: 2009-2014
The following table summarizes the quantified objectives contained in Sausalito's 2009-2014
Housing Element, and compares the City’s progress in fulfilling these objectives.
  Table D.2: Quantified Objectives for Sausalito’s 2009-2014 Housing Element planning period
                                      RHNA                 Rehabilitation               Conservation
Income Level                       Objectives                 Objectives                 Objectives
                             Objective    Progress     Objective     Progress     Objective      Progress
Extremely Low*
                                 23                        --                         5              5
(0-30% AMI)
Very Low
                                 22           6             5                        45             45
(31-50% AMI)
Low
                                 30          17            --                        15             15
(51-80% AMI)
Moderate
                                 34           4            --                         7              7
(81-120% AMI)
Above Moderate
                                 56          23            --                         --             --
(>120% AMI)
Totals                           165         50             5            0           72             72
     New Construction: Objective reflects 2007-2014 RHNA. Progress reflects: 1) residential building
     permits issued between 1/2007-12/2013: 23 single-family (above moderate income) and 1 unit above
     commercial (moderate income); 2) accessory dwelling units 2 (ADUs) issued permits between 1/2013-
     6/2014: 6 new ADUs and 14 amnesty ADUs not previously counted in the census; and 3) 6 existing
     liveaboards 3 with BCDC and City permits not counted in 2000 Census.
     Rehabilitation: Objective and progress reflects Marin Housing’s Rehabilitation Loan Program.
     Conservation: Objective and progress reflects conserving affordable units within Sausalito's three
     affordable rental projects and conserving the 34 rent and income-restricted berths in Galilee Harbor.
2
  Income distribution of ADUs based on Sausalito ADU survey: 25% very low income, 58% low income, 17%
moderate income (City of Sausalito ADU Single-Family Technical Report and ADU Multi-family Technical
Report, March 28, 2011).
.
3
  Liveaboard affordability based on compiled data on monthly berth rents (City of Sausalito Liveaboard
Technical Report, May 25, 2011).
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                Page D - 12
  Appendix D – Housing Element Accomplishments                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

APPENDIX E – COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
In late 2009, the City Council appointed the Housing Element Committee, comprised of City
Council, Planning Commission representatives, and City residents. In March 2011, the City
Council re-titled the advisory body as the Housing Element Task Force. The Housing Element
Committee/Task Force held over 45 public meetings during the 2009-2014 Housing Element
Update, including three publicly noticed Community Workshops, to engage Sausalito residents
and property owners in the discussion of topics related to the Housing Element Update.
In addition to the City’s direct efforts, residents also formed grassroots organizations to forward
their concerns with regards to the potential impacts of specific strategies proposed in the draft
Housing Element.
City staff and consultants have also received correspondence from the community through
email throughout the update process, and responded to questions. These emails were
forwarded to the Task Force for their information.
The 2015-2023 Housing Element also included a major Community Participation component.
The Housing Element Subcommittee continued its role in serving as a citizen-led advisory board,
working with consultants and City staff in refining ordinances and policies to align with the
community’s interests. Over 20 public meetings were held, including two community workshops
to present the zoning ordinance amendments and the updated Housing Element.
Summaries of questions, comments and concerns raised by the community at the two
Community Workshops are included in this Appendix.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                           Page E - 1
 Appendix E – Community Participation                                         Adopted January 13, 2015

A. First Community Workshop, March 15, 2014, Introduction to Housing
Element
1. Summary of Presentation by Staff and Consultants
    •    Background of the Housing Element Update process and purpose
    •    Components of a Housing Element
    •    Regional Housing Needs Allocation
    •    Consequences of Non-Compliance
    •    Project Overview: Zoning Ordinance Amendments and 2015-2023 Housing Element
         Update
    •    Zoning Ordinance Amendments:
         o Implementation of 2009-2014 Housing Element Programs
         o Vertical and Horizontal Mixed Use Ordinance (Program 8)
         o Density Bonus Ordinance
         o Multi-Family Standards
         o Special Needs: Emergency Shelters, Transitional/Supportive Services (SB 2) and
             Single Room Occupancy Units
         o Liveaboards Update: Existing and Future Liveaboards
         o Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU) Update
    •    2015-2023 Housing Element Update:
         o Sausalito’s Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) and Income Limits
         o Demographic Trends
         o Special Needs Households: Seniors, Persons with Disabilities, and Marine Workers
         o Housing Costs and Affordability
         o Income Characteristics
         o Homeownership and Rental Affordability Gap
2. General Public Comments and Questions
Workshop attendees asked general questions regarding the housing element update, the RHNA,
and the ordinances being implemented from the 2009-2014 Housing Element. There were many
concerns voiced over the Density Bonus and Vertical Mixed Use and Horizontal Mixed Use
ordinances, specifically regarding potential visual impacts on surrounding residences.
Additionally, specific questions included: consequences of non-compliance; how the City could
maximize local control and minimize impacts on the community; how State and ABAG
requirements differed; if rent control would be put in place; if shared housing units could be
considered a strategy; if Sausalito could consider the Marin City area as a part of the update and
if Marin City could absorb Sausalito’s housing needs; the applicable area affected by the Housing
Element and other planning purposes.
A comment was provided that called for attention to ensure that local teachers and other
members of the workforce had affordable housing options in Sausalito.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                        Page E - 2
  Appendix E – Community Participation                                      Adopted January 13, 2015

B. Second Community Workshop, September 20, 2014, Review of Housing
Element Goals, Policies, and Programs
1. Summary of Presentation by Staff and Consultants
    •   Overview of Housing Element Context
            o Purpose
            o Required chapters and components
            o RHNA and “Fair Share”
            o State requirements
            o Risks of non-compliance
    •   Recap of 2009-2014 Housing Element
            o Extensive community engagement
            o Low-impact strategies (liveaboards, ADUs, and Infill)
            o Implemented programs
            o Recap of July 2014 amendment
    •   Overview of 2015-2023 Housing Element Update
            o Streamlined update
            o Targeted update of 2009-2014 Housing Element
            o Re-assessment of programs from 2009-2014 Housing Element
            o Data updated to reflect demographic trends and new RHNA
            o Exploration of Junior ADU program
            o Survey of Housing Strategy
            o Removal of Butte Street site (16 units) from Site Inventory
2. General Public Comments and Questions
Workshop attendees provided various questions and comments both during and after the
presentation. Questions and comments were addressed by City staff, the consultants, and
Subcommittee members. The following lists questions and comments raised during the
workshop:
    •   Who would monitor the affordability of rental ADUs?
    •   Who are the members of the Sausalito Housing Element Subcommittee?
    •   How many people are currently living on liveaboards?
    •   Why is the proposed Valhalla development subject to lesser density standards?
    •   Why is the VMU necessary, given that the Housing Element generates a sufficient buffer
        through its site inventory?
    • Why are liveaboards not counted as family units?
    • Why is the [2015-2023] Housing Element update being rushed? Are we able to slow
        down and utilize the 120-day grace period after January 31, 2015?
    • Why are other marinas not required to obtain BCDC permits? Which ones do not have
        permits?
    • Do we possess the ability to formulate Affordable Housing Overlay Zones (AHOZ)?
    Comments
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                      Page E - 3
 Appendix E – Community Participation                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

  •    The Junior ADU program seems like a good option for exploring alternatives in providing
       additional affordable housing.
  •    The need for more cottage-style housing in Sausalito.
                        Housing Element workshop #2 notification flyer
                        distributed to residents by the City of Sausalito.
                           Photos from Housing Element Workshop #2
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                         Page E - 4
Appendix E – Community Participation                                       Adopted January 13, 2015

C. List of Meeting Dates for the 2015-2023 Housing Element Update
Process
2014
September 22 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
September 20 – Community Workshop #2
September 11 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
July 7 – Planning Commission Hearing
June 24 – City Council Hearing
June 13 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
May 21 – Planning Commission Hearing
May 20 – City Council Hearing
May 13 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
May 5 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
April 22 – City Council Hearing
April 9 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
April 7 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
April 2 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
March 31 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
March 19 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
March 15 – Community Meeting #1
February 25 – City Council Hearing
February 7 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
January 30 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
2013
December 16 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
November 21 – Housing Element Subcommittee Meeting
D. General Comments and Corresponding Policies/Programs
Table D-1: Comments Received During Community Outreach
 General Comment                                             Where Addressed
 Housing Affordable to Local Workforce:                      Program 8: VMU
 A comment was provided signaling the lack of affordable
 housing options for members of the local workforce. This
 concern stated that even teachers were priced out of
 Sausalito and that affordable housing options were needed
 to retain public servants in the community.
 Liveaboard Housing:                                         Program 12: Liveaboards and
 Comments and questions were raised regarding the            Houseboats
 liveaboard count and whether units in all eight marinas
 would eventually end up being counted in the City’s housing
 stock.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                  Page E - 5
 Appendix E – Community Participation                                Adopted January 13, 2015

ADU and/or Cottage-Style Housing:                             Program 10: Accessory
Several comments were provided that emphasized the            Dwelling Units
importance of accessory dwelling units in Sausalito. This     Program 11: Junior Accessory
discussion cited concerns regarding the availability and      Dwelling Units
affordability of this housing type to low and very-low income
segments of the population.
Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                    Page E - 6
Appendix E – Community Participation                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

APPENDIX F – HOUSING ELEMENT GLOSSARY
Excerpted from the Sausalito’s Zoning Ordinance, and A Citizen’s Guide to Planning, A Glossary
of Planning Terms, http://ceres.ca.gov/.)
This glossary is for ease of use of the Housing Element Document only; for full definitions
describing uses and regulations related to land use entitlements please see the Zoning
Ordinance, Section 10.88.
A. Abbreviations
ABAG:     Association of Bay Area Governments
AMI:      Area Median (Household) Income
APN:      Assessors Parcel Number
BMR:      Below-market-rate dwelling unit
CASA:     Community Assisted Shared Appreciation second mortgage loan
CDBG:     Community Development Block Grant
CEQA:     California Environmental Quality Act
CHFA:     California Housing Finance Agency
EIR:      Environmental Impact Report
FAR:      Floor Area Ratio
GMI:      Gross Monthly Income
HCD:      Housing and Community Development Department of the State of California
HUD:      U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development
MCC:      Mortgage Credit Certificate
PUD:      Planned Unit Development
SRO:      Single Room Occupancy
B. Definitions
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A second permanent dwelling that is accessory to a primary dwelling on
a site. A secondary dwelling may be either a detached or attached dwelling unit that provides a
complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel or parcels as the
primary dwelling. Also see “Granny Unit”.
Accessory Structure or Building: A detached building or structure which is subordinate to,
substantially smaller than, and the use of which is customarily incidental to, that of the main
building, structure, or use on the same lot.
Acres: Gross acreage refers to the entire acreage of a site. Most communities calculate gross
acreage to the centerline of proposed bounding streets and to the edge of the right-of-way of
existing or dedicated streets. Net acreage refers to the portion of a site that can actually be built
upon. Public or private road right-of-way, public open space, and flood ways are not included in
the net acreage of a site.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                          Page F - 1
 Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                       Adopted January 13, 2015

Affordability Requirements: Provisions established by a public agency to require that a specific
percentage of housing units in a project or development remain affordable to very low- and low-
income households for a specified period.
Affordable Housing: Housing capable of being purchased or rented by a household with very low,
low, or moderate income, based on a household’s ability to make monthly payments necessary to
obtain housing. Housing is considered affordable when a household pays less than 30 percent of
its gross monthly income (GMI) for housing including utilities.
Agency: The governmental entity, department, office, or administrative unit responsible for
carrying out regulations.
Apartment: (1) One or more rooms of a building used as a place to live, in a building containing at
least one other unit used for the same purpose. (2) A separate suite, not owner occupied, which
includes kitchen facilities and is designed for and rented as the home, residence, or sleeping place
of one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit.
Area; Area Median Income: As used in State of California housing law with respect to income
eligibility limits established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD),
“Area” means metropolitan area or non-metropolitan county. In non-metropolitan areas, the
“Area Median Income” is the higher of the county median family income or the statewide
non-metropolitan median family income. The Area Median Income referred to in this Housing
Element is that of Marin County.
Ark: The Residential-Ark District in Sausalito promotes and encourages traditional, pre-1963 single-
family arks. The district encourages arks’ maintenance, restoration and preservation in a manner
compatible with surrounding marine and commercial uses. Residential arks have a residential
density of one unit per 1,500 square feet. This district encompasses a very small group of ark
buildings at the junction of Humboldt Avenue and Johnson Street, which are built on the water.
Article 34 Referendum: Article 34 of the Constitution of the State of California requires passage of
a referendum within a city or county for approval of the development or acquisition of a publicly
financed housing project where more than 49 percent of the units are set aside for low-income
households.
Assisted Housing: Generally multifamily rental housing, but sometimes single-family ownership
units, whose construction, financing, sales prices, or rents have been subsidized by federal, state,
or local housing programs including, but not limited to Federal Section 8 (new construction,
substantial rehabilitation, and loan management set-asides), Federal Sections 213, 236, and 202,
Federal Section 221(d)(3) (below-market interest rate program), Federal Section 101 (rent
supplement assistance), CDBG, FmHA Section 515, multifamily mortgage revenue bond programs,
local redevelopment and in lieu fee programs, and units developed pursuant to local inclusionary
housing and density bonus programs. All California Housing elements are required to address the
preservation or replacement of assisted housing that is eligible to change to market rate housing
within 10 years.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page F - 2
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

Attached: Buildings and structures in Sausalito are considered attached if they share a common
roof system and/or building walls.
San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC): is a California State
commission dedicated to the protection, enhancement and responsible use of the San Francisco
Bay. The Planning Unit is responsible for conducting major planning studies, specialized research
and policy development, and developing amendments to the San Francisco Bay Plan. Similar to
the Sausalito Zoning Ordinance, BCDC allows for up to 10% of marina berths in Sausalito to be
used as permanent liveaboard housing.
Below-market-rate (BMR) Housing Unit: (1) Any housing unit specifically priced to be sold or
rented to low- or moderate-income households for an amount less than the fair-market value of
the unit. Both the State of California and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
set standards for determining which households qualify as “low income” or “moderate income.”
(2) The financing of housing at less than prevailing interest rates.
Building: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building Code: The national, standard building code that sets forth minimum standards for
construction is known as the Uniform Building Code (UBC). State housing regulations governing
the condition of habitable structures with regard to health and safety standards, and which
provide for the conservation and rehabilitation of housing in accordance with the UBC, are known
as the Uniform Housing Code (UHC).
Building Footprint: The outline of a building at all of those points where it meets the ground.
Building Height: The vertical distance from the average contact ground level of a building to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. The exact definition varies
by community. For example, in some communities building height is measured to the highest
point of the roof, not including elevator and cooling towers.
Buildout or Build-out: Development of land to its full potential or theoretical capacity as
permitted under current or proposed planning or zoning designations.
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA): A State law requiring State and local agencies to
regulate activities with consideration for environmental protection. If a proposed activity has the
potential for a significant adverse environmental impact, an Environmental Impact Report (EIR)
must be prepared and certified as to its adequacy before taking action on the proposed project.
An Environmental Assessment may be prepared for housing elements, leading to a Declaration of
No Environmental Impact, Negative Declaration, or Mitigated Negative Declaration. When a
project is not exempt from CEQA and will not have a significant adverse effect upon the
environment a negative declaration is prepared, describing the reasons why the project will not
have a significant effect and proposes measures to completely mitigate or avoid any possible
effects. (Significant Effects refer to a beneficial or detrimental impact on the environment. May
include, but is not limited to, significant changes in an area’s air, water, and land resources.)
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                         Page F - 3
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                      Adopted January 13, 2015

Census: The official decennial enumeration of the population conducted by the federal
government.
Character: Special physical characteristics of a structure or area that set it apart from its
surroundings and contribute to its individuality.
City: City with a capital “C” generally refers to the government or administration of a city. City with
a lower case “c” may mean any city or may refer to the geographical area of a city (e.g., the
properties in the city.)
Co-housing: Co-housing is an innovative type of collaborative housing that originated in
Denmark in the 1960s. Co-housing communities consist of individually owned, private homes
clustered around common facilities and amenities in a walkable, sustainable environment.
Common features may include a community garden, recreational areas, and a common house
where day care and meals can be shared. The communities are managed by the residents who
have chosen to live in a close-knit neighborhood. Hundreds of co-housing communities currently
exist throughout the country in a variety of settings, including communities in Berkeley,
Oakland, Pleasant Hill, Cotati, Grass Valley, Davis and Santa Barbara.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG): A grant program administered by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) on a formula basis for entitlement
communities, and by the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for
non-entitled jurisdictions. This grant allots money to cities and counties for housing rehabilitation
and community development, including public facilities and economic development.
Compatible: Capable of existing together without conflict or ill effects.
Conditional Use Permit (CUP): The Conditional Use Permit process in Sausalito allows Planning
Commission level of review for selected land use proposals. Conditional Use Permits are required
for uses which may be suitable only in specific locations in a zoning district, or which require
special consideration in their design, operation or layout to ensure compatibility with surrounding
uses.
Condominium: Condominiums in Sausalito include “community apartments” (developments
where an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any
apartment located thereon) and “stock cooperative”. Condominiums also include an estate in real
property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property
developed for marina or yacht harbor purposes, together with a separate interest in a berthing
space in such marina or yacht harbor.
Condominium conversion: The conversion of existing real estate and/or structures to separate,
salable condominium units, potentially involving new construction and/or improvements.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                           Page F - 4
 Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                        Adopted January 13, 2015

Consistent: Free from variation or contradiction. Programs in the General Plan are to be
consistent, not contradictory or preferential. State law requires consistency between a general
plan and implementation measures such as the zoning code.
County: County with a capital “C” generally refers to the government or administration of a county
(e.g., Marin County). County with a lower case “c” may mean any county or may refer to the
geographical area of a county (e.g., the county’s 15 cities).
Density: The measure of the ratio of population to the area of land occupied by that population,
which is expressed as dwelling units per acre. “Gross density” is the number of lots derived from
dividing the area of a site by the area required for each lot or dwelling unit. “Net density” is the
number of lots resulting from subtracting the area required for streets (in the case of a
subdivision) from the total area of the undivided site, and then dividing the remaining area by the
area required for each lot. Density control indicates a limitation on the occupancy of land. Density
can be controlled through zoning in the following ways: use restrictions, minimum lot-size
requirements, floor area ratios, land use-intensity ratios, setback and yard requirements,
minimum house-size requirements, ratios comparing number and types of housing units to land
area, limits on units per acre, and other means. Allowable density often serves as the major
distinction between residential districts.
Density Bonus: An increase in the density (number of dwelling units allowed per acre or parcel),
above that normally allowed by the applicable zoning district, in exchange for a public benefit (e.g.,
provision of affordable housing or senior housing).
Under California law, projects with at least 5 units may request a density bonus. Depending on
the level of affordability, the bonus may be between 5% and 35% of the base density (California
Government Code Section 65915 – 65918).
Design Review: The comprehensive evaluation of a development and its impact on neighboring
properties and the community as a whole, from the standpoint of site and landscape design,
architecture, materials, colors, lighting, and signs, in accordance with a set of adopted criteria and
standards.
Developable Land: Land that is suitable as a location for structures and that can be developed free
of hazards to, and without disruption of, or significant impact on, natural resource areas. Net
developable acres refers to the portion of a site that can be used for density calculations. Some
communities calculate density based on gross acreage. Public or private road rights-of-way are not
included in the net developable acreage of a site.
Developer: An individual who or business that prepares raw land for the construction of buildings
or causes to be built physical building space for use primarily by others, and in which the
preparation of the land or the creation of the building space is in itself a business and is not
incidental to another business or activity.
Development: The physical extension and/or construction of urban land uses. Development
activities include subdivision of land; construction or alteration of structures, roads, utilities, and
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                           Page F - 5
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                        Adopted January 13, 2015

other facilities; installation of septic systems; grading; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials;
and clearing of natural vegetative cover (with the exception of agricultural activities). Routine
repair and maintenance activities are exempted.
Development Fees: Also known as impact fees, these are fees charged to developers or builders
as a prerequisite to construction or development approval. The most common are: (1) impact
fees (such as parkland acquisition fees, school facilities fees, or street construction fees) related
to funding public improvements which are necessitated in part or in whole by the development;
(2) connection fees (such as water line fees) to cover the cost of installing public services to the
development; (3) permit fees (such as building permits, grading permits, sign permits) for the
administrative costs of processing development plans; and, (4) application fees (rezoning, CUP,
variance, etc.) for the administrative costs of reviewing and hearing development proposals.
As Proposition 13 put a cap on property taxes, limiting the main source of funding for new
school facilities, California law allows school districts to impose school impact fees on new
developments to offset their impacts on area schools.
Development Rights: The right to develop land by a land owner who maintains fee-simple
ownership over the land or by a party other than the owner who has obtained the rights to
develop. Such rights usually are expressed in terms of density allowed under existing zoning. For
example, one development right may equal one unit of housing or may equal a specific number of
square feet of gross floor area in one or more specified zone districts. (See “Interest, Fee.”)
District: (1) An area of a city or county that has a unique character identifiable as different from
surrounding areas because of distinctive architecture, streets, geographic features, culture,
landmarks, activities, or land uses. (2) A portion of the territory of a city or county within which
uniform zoning regulations and requirements apply (aka, a zoning district).
Diversity: Differences among otherwise similar elements that give them unique forms and
qualities. E.g., housing diversity can be achieved by differences in unit size, tenure, or cost.
Duplex: A single residential building containing two dwelling units.
Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms (including sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation
facilities, but not more than one kitchen), which constitutes an independent housekeeping unit,
occupied or intended for occupancy by one household on a long-term basis. In Sausalito,
     • Multi-family refers to three or more dwelling units on one lot.
     • Single-family refers to one dwelling unit on one lot.
     • Two-family refers to two dwelling units on one lot.
Emergency Shelter: A facility that provides immediate and short-term housing and supplemental
services for the homeless. Shelters come in many sizes, but an optimum size is considered to be 20
to 40 beds. Supplemental services may include food, counseling, and access to other social
programs. (See “Homeless” and “Transitional Housing.”)
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                            Page F - 6
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                         Adopted January 13, 2015

Encourage, v: To stimulate or foster a particular condition through direct or indirect action by the
private sector or government agencies.
Enhance, v: To improve existing conditions by increasing the quantity or quality of beneficial uses
or features.
Environmental Impact Report (EIR): A report required of general plans by the California
Environmental Quality Act and which assesses all the environmental characteristics of an area and
determines what effects or impacts will result if the area is altered or disturbed by a proposed
action. (See “California Environmental Quality Act.”)
Exaction: A contribution or payment required as an authorized precondition for receiving a
development permit; usually refers to mandatory dedication (or fee in lieu of dedication)
requirements found in many subdivision regulations.
Fair Market Rent: The rent, including utility allowances, determined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for purposes of administering the Section 8
Existing Housing Program.
Family: (1) Two or more persons related by birth, marriage, or adoption [U.S. Bureau of the
Census]. (2) An individual or a group of persons living together who constitute a bona fide
single-family housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, not including a fraternity, sorority, club, or other
group of persons occupying a hotel, lodging house or institution of any kind [California].
Feasible: Capable of being done, executed, or managed successfully from the standpoint of the
physical and/or financial abilities of the implementer(s). “Technically feasible” means an action is
capable of being implemented because the industrial, mechanical, or application technology
exists.
Finding(s): The result(s) of an investigation and the basis upon which decisions are made. Findings
are used by government agents and bodies to justify action taken by the entity.
Flag Lot: A lot which does not have direct frontage on a road or street, and which is connected to a
road or street by a narrow fee ownership appendage that is primarily used to provide access to the
building site on the lot.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): Abbreviated as FAR, this is a measure of development intensity. FAR is
the floor area of the building or buildings on a parcel divided by the net area of the parcel. For
instance, a one-story building that covers an entire lot has an FAR of 1. Similarly, a one-story
building that covers 1/2 of a lot has an FAR of 0.5. Sausalito has established FAR limits for each
zoning districts.
Garage or Carport: A garage is a structure dedicated for the parking of vehicles that is enclosed on
at least three sides; a carport is enclosed on no more than two sides.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                         Page F - 7
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                      Adopted January 13, 2015

General Plan: A statement of policies, including text and diagrams setting forth objectives,
principles, standards, and plan proposals, for the future physical development of the city or
county (see Government Code Sections 65300 et seq.). California State law requires that a
General Plan include elements dealing with seven subjects—circulation, conservation, housing,
land use, noise, open space and safety—and specifies to various degrees the information to be
incorporated in each element.
Granny Unit: Also referred to as an Accessory Dwelling Unit or Secondary Dwelling Unit, this
typically refers to a second dwelling attached to or separate from the main residence that
houses one or more elderly persons. California Government Code 65852.1 enables cities and
counties to approve such units in single-family neighborhoods.
Guidelines: General statements of policy direction around which specific details may be later
established.
Handicapped: A person determined to have a physical impairment or mental disorder expected to
be of long or indefinite duration. Many such impairments or disorders are of such a nature that a
person’s ability to live independently can be improved by appropriate housing conditions.
Historic; Historical: A historic building or site is one that is noteworthy for its significance in local,
state, or national history or culture, its architecture or design, or its works of art, memorabilia, or
artifacts.
Historic Preservation: The preservation of historically significant structures and neighborhoods
until such time as, and in order to facilitate, restoration and rehabilitation of the building(s) to a
former condition.
Homeless: Persons and families who lack a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residence.
Includes those staying in temporary or emergency shelters or who are accommodated with friends
or others with the understanding that shelter is being provided as a last resort. California Housing
element law, Section 65583(c)(1), requires all cities and counties to address the housing needs of
the homeless. (See “Emergency Shelter” and “Transitional Housing.”)
Houseboat: A floating boat, vessel, or industrial or commercial structure on, or in, the waters of
the State, which is designed, fitted out, or used principally for residential purposes and is not
principally used for active navigation. Multiple unit residential houseboats require Conditional Use
Permits in the Houseboat Zoning District, and may not exceed three units.
Household: A single individual, doing his own cooking, and living upon the premises as a separate
housekeeping unit, or a collective body of persons, with a legally responsible head of household,
doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, club, fraternity, sorority or
hotel.
Householder: The head of a household.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                            Page F - 8
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                         Adopted January 13, 2015

Households, Number of: The count of all year-round housing units occupied by one or more
persons. The concept of household is important because the formation of new households
generates the demand for housing. Each new household formed creates the need for one
additional housing unit or requires that one existing housing unit be shared by two households.
Thus, household formation can continue to take place even without an increase in population,
thereby increasing the demand for housing.
Housing and Community Development Department of the State of California (HCD): The State
agency that has principal responsibility for assessing, planning for, and assisting communities to
meet the needs of low- and moderate-income households.
Housing Authority: A housing agency established in State law, subject to local activation and
operation. Originally intended to manage certain federal subsidies, but vested with broad powers
to develop and manage other forms of affordable housing. In Sausalito, the housing authority is
the Housing Authority of Marin County (or Marin Housing).
Housing Element: One of the seven State-mandated elements of a local general plan, it assesses
the existing and projected housing needs of all economic segments of the community, identifies
potential sites adequate to provide the amount and kind of housing needed, and contains adopted
goals, policies, and implementation programs for the preservation, improvement, and
development of housing. Under State law, Housing elements must be updated every five years.
Housing and Urban Development, U.S. Department of (HUD): A cabinet-level department of the
federal government that administers housing and community development programs.
Housing Unit: The place of permanent or customary abode of a person or family. A housing unit
may be a single-family dwelling, a multifamily dwelling, a condominium, a modular home, a mobile
home, a cooperative, or any other residential unit considered real property under State law. A
housing unit has, at least, cooking facilities, a bathroom, and a place to sleep. It also is a dwelling
that cannot be moved without substantial damage or unreasonable cost. (See “Dwelling Unit,”
“Family,” and “Household.”)
Impact: The effect of any direct man-made actions or indirect repercussions of man-made actions
on existing physical, social, or economic conditions.
Implementation: Actions, procedures, programs, or techniques that carry out policies.
Improvement: The addition of one or more structures or utilities on a parcel of land.
Infill Development: Development of vacant land (usually individual lots or left-over properties)
within areas that are already largely developed.
Infrastructure: Public services and facilities, such as sewage-disposal systems, water-supply
systems, other utility systems, and roads.
 Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                             Page F - 9
 Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                          Adopted January 13, 2015

In Lieu Fee: Cash payments that may be required of an owner or developer as a substitute for a
dedication of land or construction of below-market-rate housing, and referred to as in lieu fees or
in lieu contributions.
Institutional Use: (1) Publicly or privately owned and operated activities that are institutional in
nature, such as hospitals, museums, and schools; (2) churches and other religious organizations;
and (3) other nonprofit activities of a welfare, educational, or philanthropic nature that cannot be
considered a residential, commercial, or industrial activity.
Jobs/Housing Balance; Jobs/Housing Ratio: The availability of affordable housing for employees.
The jobs/housing ratio divides the number of jobs in an area by the number of employed
residents. A ratio of 1.0 indicates a balance. A ratio greater than 1.0 indicates a net in-commute;
less than 1.0 indicates a net out-commute.
Land Use Regulation: A term encompassing the regulation of land in general and often used to
mean those regulations incorporated in the General Plan, as distinct from zoning regulations
(which are more specific).
Lease: A contractual agreement by which an owner of real property (the lessor) gives the right of
possession to another (a lessee) for a specified period of time (term) and for a specified
consideration (rent).
Liveaboard: A navigable vessel, regulated by Sausalito Zoning Ordinance Section 10.44.170, with
liveaboard residential occupant(s).
Lot or Parcel: A portion of land shown as a unit on a recorded subdivision map or an approved
minor subdivision map, parcel map or otherwise existing as of record with the Office of the
Recorder of the County of Marin.
Low-income Household: A household earning less than 80% of the Marin County median income
based on information provided by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
Manufactured Housing: Residential structures that are constructed entirely in the factory, and
that since June 15, 1976, have been regulated by the federal Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974 under the administration of the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD). (See “Mobile Home” and “Modular Unit.”)
Marina: A marina is a dock or basin with moorings and supplies for yachts and small boats. A
marina does not handle large passenger ships or cargo from freighters. There are eight marinas
in Sausalito with over 1,500 vessels where several hundred boat owners reside on their boats as
permanent “liveaboard” housing.
Ministerial (Administrative) Decision: An action taken by a governmental agency that follows
established procedures and rules and does not call for the exercise of judgment in deciding
whether to approve a project.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page F - 10
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                      Adopted January 13, 2015

Minor Use Permit: Minor Use Permits provide for review of discretionary land uses that generally
meet the purposes of the applicable district but which require special consideration in their design
or operation to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses.
Mitigate, v : To ameliorate, alleviate, or avoid to the extent reasonably feasible.
Mitigation Measure:  The California Environmental Quality Act requires that when an adverse
environmental impact or potential impact is identified, measures must be proposed that will
eliminate, avoid, rectify, compensate for or reduce those environmental effects.
Mixed-use: The combination of various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional, and
residential, in a single building or on a single site in an integrated development project with
significant functional interrelationships and a coherent physical design. A “single site” may include
contiguous properties. In Sausalito, residential uses are permitted on the floors above ground level
in Commercial Zoning Districts. However, no residential use is permitted in the CN-2 Zoning
District.
Mobile Homes: A manufactured housing structure transportable in one or more sections,
designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units to be used with or without a
foundation system. Sausalito’s Zoning Ordinance Section 10.44.060 has specific use requirements
applicable to mobile homes.
Moderate-income Household: A household earning 80% to 120% of the Marin County median
income based on information provided by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
Mortgage Credit Certificate: Under a County-operated program, gives a first-time homebuyer a
federal income tax credit of up to 20 percent of the mortgage interest paid on the first mortgage
loan, for each year the buyer keeps the same mortgage loan and lives in the same house.
Maximum initial household income limits and maximum initial home purchase prices apply and
are adjusted annually. The Mortgage Credit Certificate (MCC) program administered by Marin
Housing provides qualified first time homebuyers with a federal income tax credit of up to 15%
of the annual interest paid on the homebuyer’s mortgage.
Multifamily Building: A detached building designed and used exclusively as a dwelling by three or
more families occupying separate suites.
Municipal Code: The Municipal Code of the City of Sausalito, including Title 10, the Zoning
Ordinance.
Need: A condition requiring supply or relief. The City or County may act upon findings of need
within or on behalf of the community.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page F - 11
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                     Adopted January 13, 2015

Non-conforming Use: A use of land that was lawfully established, but that is no longer identified
as an allowable use by the Sausalito Zoning Ordinance, and which does not conform to the
regulation for the zoning district in which it is located.
Notice (of Hearing): A legal document announcing the opportunity for the public to present their
views to an official representative or board of a public agency concerning an official action pending
before the agency.
Objective: A specific statement of desired future condition toward which the City or County will
expend effort in the context of striving to achieve a broader goal. An objective should be
achievable and, where possible, should be measurable and time-specific. The State Government
Code (Section 65302) requires that general plans spell out the “objectives,” principles, standards,
and proposals of the general plan. “The addition of 100 units of affordable housing by 2005” is an
example of an objective.
Ordinance: A law or regulation set forth and adopted by a governmental authority, usually a city
or county.
Overlay: A land use designation on the Land Use Map, or a zoning designation on a zoning map,
that modifies the basic underlying designation in some specific manner.
Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E): is the utility that provides natural gas and electricity to
most of the northern two-thirds of California, from Bakersfield almost to the Oregon border.
Parcel: see “Lot”.
Parking, Shared: A public or private parking area used jointly by two or more uses.
Planned Community: A large-scale development whose essential features are a definable
boundary; a consistent, but not necessarily uniform, character; overall control during the
development process by a single development entity; private ownership of recreation amenities;
and enforcement of covenants, conditions, and restrictions by a master community association. In
Sausalito, planned communities are regulated by the Planned Residential (PR) Zoning District.
Planning Area: The Planning Area is the land area addressed by the General Plan (and hence, by
the Housing element). For a city, the Planning Area boundary typically coincides with the Sphere of
Influence that encompasses land both within the City Limits and potentially annexable land.
Planning Commission: A commission appointed by the city council or board of supervisors to
consider land use planning matters. The commission's duties and powers are established by the
local legislative body and might include hearing proposals to amend the general plan or rezone
land, initiating planning studies (road alignments, identification of seismic hazards, etc.), and
taking action on proposed subdivisions.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                      Page F - 12
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                     Adopted January 13, 2015

Policy: A specific statement of principle or of guiding actions that implies clear commitment but is
not mandatory. A general direction that a governmental agency sets to follow, in order to meet its
goals and objectives before undertaking an action program. (See “Action Statement.”)
Poverty Level: As used by the U.S. Census, families and unrelated individuals are classified as being
above or below the poverty level based on a poverty index that provides a range of income cutoffs
or “poverty thresholds” varying by size of family, number of children, and age of householder. The
income cutoffs are updated each year to reflect the change in the Consumer Price Index.
Preserve, v: To keep safe from destruction or decay; to maintain or keep intact. (See “Maintain.”)
Principle: An assumption, fundamental rule, or doctrine that will guide general plan policies,
proposals, standards, and implementation measures. The State Government Code (Section 65302)
requires that general plans spell out the objectives, “principles,” standards, and proposals of the
general plan. “Adjacent land uses should be compatible with one another” is an example of a
principle.
Protect, v: To maintain and preserve beneficial uses in their present condition as nearly as
possible. (See “Enhance.”)
Quarters: Quarters generally refer to housing for living in, i.e. living quarters. Group quarters refer
to residential living arrangements, other than the usual house, apartment, or mobile home, in
which two or more unrelated persons share living quarters and cooking facilities. Institutional
group quarters include nursing homes, orphanages, and prisons. Non-institutional group quarters
include dormitories, shelters, and large boarding houses.
Recognize, v: To officially (or by official action) identify or perceive a given situation.
Redevelop, v: To demolish existing buildings; or to increase the overall floor area existing on a
property; or both; irrespective of whether a change occurs in land use.
Redevelopment Agency: A local agency created under California Redevelopment Law, or a local
legislative body that has elected to exercise the powers granted to such an agency, for the purpose
of planning, developing, re-planning, redesigning, clearing, reconstructing, and/or rehabilitating all
or part of a specified area with residential, commercial, industrial, and/or public (including
recreational) structures and facilities. The redevelopment agency’s plans must be compatible with
the adopted community general plan, including the housing element. Also sometimes known as a
Community Redevelopment Agency.
Regional: Pertaining to activities or economies at a scale greater than that of a single jurisdiction,
and affecting a broad geographic area.
Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RNHA): A quantification by a Council of Government or by
the Housing and Community Development Department of the State of California, of existing and
projected housing need, by household income group, for all localities within a region. The Council
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page F - 13
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                      Adopted January 13, 2015

of Government in the Bay Area is the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), which
determines the regional housing needs allocation pertaining to Sausalito.
Regulation: A rule or order prescribed for managing government.
Rehabilitation: The repair, preservation, and/or improvement of substandard housing.
Residential: Land designated in the City or County General Plan and zoning code for buildings
consisting only of dwelling units. May be improved, vacant, or unimproved. (See “Dwelling Unit.”)
Residential Accessory Uses: In Sausalito, residential accessory uses includes any use that is
customarily part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to, a residence and does not change the
character of the residential use. Such uses include accessory structures such as swimming pools,
spas and hot tubs, workshops, studios, greenhouses, garages, solar panels, propane tanks, and
similar equipment. Residential accessory uses include home receiving antennae for
Residential Care Homes: Facilities providing residential social and personal care for children, the
elderly, and people with some limits on their ability for self-care, but where medical care is not a
major element. Residential care homes include: children’s homes, halfway houses, orphanages,
rehabilitation centers, self-help group homes.
Residential, Multifamily: Usually three or more dwelling units on a single site, which may be in the
same or separate buildings.
Residential, Single-family: A single dwelling unit on a building site.
Restrict, v: To check, bound, or decrease the range, scope, or incidence of a particular condition.
Rezoning: An amendment to the map and/or text of a zoning ordinance to effect a change in the
nature, density, or intensity of uses allowed in a zoning district and/or on a designated parcel or
land area.
Second Mortgage Program: The lending by a public or private agency of a portion of a required
down payment to a developer or first-time homebuyer, usually with restrictions requiring that the
units assisted through the program remain affordable to very low- and low-income households.
Secondary Dwellings: (see Accessory Dwelling Units)
Section 8 Rental Assistance Program: A federal (HUD) rent-subsidy program that is one of the
main sources of federal housing assistance for low-income households. The program operates by
providing “housing assistance payments” to owners, developers, and public housing agencies to
make up the difference between the “Fair Market Rent” of a unit (set by HUD) and the
household’s contribution toward the rent, which is calculated at 30 percent of the household’s
adjusted gross monthly income (GMI). “Section 8” includes programs for new construction,
existing housing, and substantial or moderate housing rehabilitation.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                     Page F - 14
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                    Adopted January 13, 2015

Senior Housing Projects: Multi-family residential projects where occupancy is limited to people of
55 years or older (except in the case of double occupancy of a unit where only one resident need
be 55 or older) and no persons under 18 years of age are permitted as residents. Senior housing
projects include Senior Independent Living Centers (referred to as SILCs) and senior apartments, as
follows:
     •    Senior Independent Living Centers (SILCs). A senior housing project that consists of, but is
          not limited to, individual apartment units, community dining centers, and common
          recreation areas. The facilities must be physically accessible to elderly citizens, and the
          project is intended to provide a comfortable standard of living for its residents.
     •    Senior Apartments. A senior housing project designed to meet the needs of citizens of 55
          years of age or older. The dwelling units are independent and self-contained, and easily
          accessible to elderly citizens.
Senior housing projects in the Senior Housing overlay district in Sausalito are typically allowed a
density bonus of 33% over the density allowed by the base zoning district, pursuant to Section
10.44.120 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Setback: An area on a lot where no buildings, structures, or additions may be located, and which
thereby becomes a yard area.
Shared Living: The occupancy of a dwelling unit by persons of more than one family in order to
reduce housing expenses and provide social contact, mutual support, and assistance. Shared living
facilities serving six or fewer persons are permitted in all residential districts by Section 1566.3 of
the California Health and Safety Code.
Single Room Occupancy (SRO): A single room, typically 80 - 250 square feet, with a sink and closet,
but that requires the occupant to share a communal bathroom, shower, and kitchen.
Site: A parcel of land used or intended for one use or a group of uses and having frontage on a
public or an approved private street. A lot.
Specific Plan: A plan addressing land use distribution, open space availability, infrastructure, and
infrastructure financing for a portion of the community. Specific plans put the provisions of the
local general plan into action.
Sphere of Influence: The probable ultimate physical boundaries and service area of a local agency
(city or district) as determined by the Local Agency Formation Commission of the County.
Standards: (1) A rule or measure establishing a level of quality or quantity that must be complied
with or satisfied. The State Government Code (Section 65302) requires that general plans spell out
the objectives, principles, “standards,” and proposals of the general plan. For example, the
number of acres of park land per 1,000 population that the community will attempt to acquire and
improve, or the “traffic Level of Service” (LOS) that the plan hopes to attain. (2) Requirements in a
zoning code that govern building and development as distinguished from use restrictions—for
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                         Page F - 15
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                        Adopted January 13, 2015

example, site-design regulations such as lot area, height limit, frontage, landscaping, and floor area
ratio.
Street: Right-of-way, easement, or prescriptive right-of-way dedicated to, and under the authority
of, the City of Sausalito; a state highway; a private road, easement, or prescriptive right-of-way;
and which is customarily used for automobile travel and for providing vehicular access to abutting
property.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected on the ground, the use of which requires attachment
to the ground, or over 120 square feet in area or over six feet in height, or any structure that
requires a building permit, including any building, but not including fences or walls six feet or less
in height, or concrete flat work such as driveways, patios, or planters less than 12 inches in height.
Includes permanent tents.
Subdivision: The division of a tract of land into defined lots, either improved or unimproved, which
can be separately conveyed by sale or lease, and which can be altered or developed. “Subdivision”
includes a condominium project as defined in Section 1350 of the California Civil Code and a
community apartment project as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code.
The Subdivision Map Act is Division 2 (Sections 66410 et seq.) of the California Government code,
which vests in local legislative bodies the regulation and control of the design and improvement of
subdivisions, including the requirement for tentative and final maps.
Subsidize: To assist by payment of a sum of money or by the granting of terms or favors that
reduce the need for monetary expenditures. Housing subsidies may take the forms of mortgage
interest deductions or tax credits from federal and/or state income taxes, sale or lease at less than
market value of land to be used for the construction of housing, payments to supplement a
minimum affordable rent, and the like.
Substandard Housing: Residential dwellings that, because of their physical condition, do not
provide safe and sanitary housing.
Substantial: Considerable in importance, value, degree, or amount.
Tax Credit: A dollar amount that may be subtracted from the amount of taxes owed.
Transitional Housing: Shelter provided to the homeless for an extended period, often as long as 18
months, and generally integrated with other social services and counseling programs to assist in
the transition to self-sufficiency through the acquisition of a stable income and permanent
housing. (See “Homeless” and “Emergency Shelter.”)
Urban Services: Utilities (such as water, gas, electricity, and sewer) and public services (such as
police, fire, schools, parks, and recreation) provided to an urbanized or urbanizing area.
Use: The purpose for which land or a structure is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which
either land or a structure is or may be occupied or maintained. A conditional use is a land use that
is identified as allowed, subject to minor use or conditional use permit approval in a particular
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page F - 16
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                      Adopted January 13, 2015

zoning district. A non-conforming use refers to the use of land that was lawfully established, but
that is no longer identified as an allowable use by the Sausalito Zoning Ordinance, and which does
not conform to the regulation for the zoning district in which it is located.
Use Permit: The discretionary and conditional review of an activity or function or operation on a
site or in a building or facility.
Vacant: Lands or buildings that are not actively used for any purpose.
Very Low-income Household: A household with an annual income usually no greater than 50
percent of the area median family income, based on the latest available eligibility limits
established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the Section 8
Housing Program. (See “Area.”)
Zoning: The division of a city or county by legislative regulations into areas, or zones, which specify
allowable uses for real property and size restrictions for buildings within these areas; a program
that implements policies of the General Plan.
Zoning Ordinance: Regulations adopted by a local jurisdiction which govern the use and
development of land within the jurisdictions boundaries.
Zoning District: A designated section of a city or county for which prescribed land use
requirements and building and development standards are uniform.
Zoning, Incentive: The awarding of bonus credits to a development in the form of allowing more
intensive use of land if public benefits—such as preservation of greater than the minimum
required open space, provision for low- and moderate-income housing, or plans for public plazas
and courts at ground level—are included in a project. (Also see “Density Bonus”.)
Zoning, Inclusionary: Regulations that increase housing choice by providing the opportunity to
construct more diverse and economical housing to meet the needs of low- and moderate-income
families. Often such regulations require a minimum percentage of housing for low- and
moderate-income households in new housing developments and in conversions of apartments to
condominiums.
Zoning Map: The map adopted by the City Council of Sausalito as part of the Zoning Ordinance
which identifies the zoning districts within the City.
  Housing Element Update 2015-2023                                                                       Page F - 17
  Appendix F – Housing Element Glossary                                                      Adopted January 13, 2015

Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart
      IMPORTANT NOTES:
        Please see Chapter III and Appendix C for a detailed explanation on the purpose of this site inventory, and the calculation methodology. 
        The visual condition of existing buildings was assessed through field verification on November 3, 2011 November 8, 2011 and December 14, 2011. The scale 
        for visual condition ranges from poor – fair – satisfactory – good – excellent. Poor refers to buildings that are blighted and uninhabitable. Fair and satisfactory 
        refer to buildings that have a declining external appearance to varying degrees, such as peeling paint or decaying wood panels. Good and excellent refer to 
        buildings with a well‐maintained and/or newer external appearance, to varying degrees.
                                                                           Max Density (du/sf)
                                                       General Plan Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Total Units
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Resulting Density          Income Category
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Actual additional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Visual Condition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Existing (Resid)       Age of Existing
                                                                                                                                         Development                                                                                                                                                        possible based on                                                    units after Visual
                       Status      Zoning   Category   Use                                       Address           Parcel Size           Assessment                                                                                     Ave. Slope          Units                  Bldg                     max density
        APN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Checks
   #1   064-135-24     Underutilize CN-1    Commercial Neighborhoo 1 du/ 1,500                   BRIDGEWAY AND                   6,000 Combined parcels (single-ownership) straddled by L-shaped three-          Building is in good                 13.6                      0                     1975
                       d                               d           sf                            OLIVE                                 story office building with tuck under parking. Older structure built in   condition, although
                                                       Commercial                                                                      1975 without apparent exterior upgrades. Building appears to look         older (1975) without
                                                                                                                                       like former apartments, making conversion back into apartments            the upgrades
                                                                                                                                       fairly efficient. Parcel may be subject to VMU* requirements.             necessary to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 command market                                                                                                                                Very Low/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8                       29.0                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rents.                                                                                                                                          Low
   #2   064-135-28     Underutilize CN-1    Commercial Neighborhoo 1 du/ 1,500                   2015 BRIDGEWAY                  6,000                                                                                                               10.0                      0                      NA
                       d                               d           sf
                                                       Commercial
   #3   064-141-05     Underutilize CN-1    Commercial Neighborhoo 1 du/ 1,500                   1901 BRIDGEWAY                  6,000 Combined parcels (single ownership) developed with 1966                                                        7.3                      0                     1966
                       d                               d           sf                                                                  comercial strip center and surface parking lot. Tenants include 7-
                                                       Commercial                                                                      Eleven, coin laundry, and Integrated Fitness. Structure in
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Buildings in
                                                                                                                                       satisfactory condition with assessed value under $150,000. Parcel                                                                                                                                                       Very Low/
                                                                                                                                                                                                          satisfactory                                                                                                          8 29.0                                                           8
   #4   064-141-06     Underutilize CN-1    Commercial Neighborhoo 1 du/ 1,500                   510 EASTERBY ST                 6,000 may be subject to VMU* requirements.                                                                           8.2                      0                     1966                                                        Low
                                                                                                                                                                                                          condition.
                       d                               d           sf
                                                       Commercial
   #5   064-135-26     Underutilize CN-1    Commercial Neighborhoo 1 du/ 1,500                   2005 BRIDGEWAY                  3,000 One story building tenanted by FLO De-stressing wellness center. Building is in good                           4.0                      0                     1920                       2                         14.5 Moderate                          1
                       d                               d           sf                                                                  The roof space could be reconfigured to accommodate a residential condition.
                                                       Commercial                                                                      unit above the shop space. Parcel may be subject to VMU*
                                                                                                                                       requirements.
   #6   064-135-29     Underutilize CN-1    Commercial Neighborhoo 1 du/ 1,500                   2007 BRIDGEWAY                  6,000 A one-story restaurant with a partial two-story portion used for     Building is in good                      12.6                      0                     1950                       2                         14.5 Moderate                          1
                       d                               d           sf                                                                  office, with parking access from the back. As the parcel is unlikely condition.
                                                       Commercial                                                                      to have underutilized FAR, the office space on the second floor
                                                                                                                                       could be converted to a residential unit. There is adequate parking
                                                                                                                                       on the lot. Parcel may be subject to VMU* requirements.
   #7   064-141-01     Underutilize CN-1    Commercial Neighborhoo 1 du/ 1,500                   1919 BRIDGEWAY                  3,000 This is a one-story building tenanted by Hair Solutions. The building Building is in good                      4.4                      0                     1931                       2                         14.5 Moderate                          1
                       d                               d           sf                                                                  can have an additional floor for residential use. Parcel may be       condition.
                                                       Commercial                                                                      subject to VMU* requirements.
   #8   065-238-25     Underutilize CN-1    Commercial Neighborhoo 1 du/ 1,500                   203 SECOND ST                   3,300 One story building tenanted by Carousel Laundry & Cleaners. More Building is in good                          13.5                      0                     1923                       1                         13.2 Moderate                          1
                       d                               d           sf                                                                  than two-thirds of the property is vacant, and additional floors could condition.
                                                       Commercial                                                                      be added to the building to accommodate residential units. Parcel
                                                                                                                                       may be subject to VMU* requirements.
   #9   065-238-41     Underutilize CN-1    Commercial Neighborhoo 1 du/ 1,500                   217 SECOND ST                   9,526 This site has infill potential. There is an existing 2-story building  Building is in good                    14.5                      2                     1909                       3                         13.7 Moderate                          1
                       d                               d           sf                                                                  surrounded by parking space, with a Frank Howard Allen office on condition.
                                                       Commercial                                                                      the ground floor. There are also two existing units at the back and
                                                                                                                                       on the upper floor, and therefore only one more unit can be
                                                                                                                                       counted. Under existing zoning, additional buildings up to 3 stories
                                                                                                                                       could be built adjoining the current building, with space reserved for
                                                                                                                                       parking either at the back or on the side. Parcel may be subject to
                                                                                                                                       VMU* requirements.
Housing Element Update 2015‐2023                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page G ‐ 1 
Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart                                * VMU = Vertical Mixed Use (see Implementation Program 8a for additional information.                                                                                                                                                                  Adopted January 13, 2015

Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart
                                                                            Max Density (du/sf)
                                                        General Plan Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Total Units
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Resulting Density       Income Category
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Actual additional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Visual Condition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Existing (Resid)       Age of Existing
                                                                                                                                          Development                                                                                                                                                                possible based on                                                 units after Visual
                       Status      Zoning   Category    Use                                       Address            Parcel Size          Assessment                                                                                             Ave. Slope          Units                  Bldg                     max density
        APN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Checks
  #10   065-267-37     Underutilize CN-1    Commercial Neighborhoo 1 du/ 1,500                    107 SECOND ST                     9,900 One story office building with medical office tenants including       Buildings are in                              10.1                      0                     1967                       4                       17.6 Moderate                         4
                       d                               d           sf                                                                     Soluna Health, and surface parking. To add residential units under satisfactory
                                                       Commercial                                                                         existing zoning, both buildings could be reconfigured and a new       condition.
                                                                                                                                          structure up to three stories would be built, with ground-floor
                                                                                                                                          commercial and upper floor residential. As an example, the building
                                                                                                                                          next door has parking spaces and commercial on the ground floor
                                                                                                                                          partially sunk into the site. This site has known view impact issues.
                                                                                                                                          Parcel may be subject to VMU* requirements.
  #11   064-166-04     Underutilize CR      Commercial Mixed         1 du/ 1,500                  302 CALEDONIA ST                  8,625 Offices with a parking lot taking up about one-third of the lot. There Building is in                                0.0                      0                     1981                       5                       25.3 Moderate                         4
                       d                               Residential & sf                                                                   are 6 suites and 4 suites are currently empty. These suites could      excellent condition.
                                                       Commercial                                                                         be converted into apartments, or a new building with first-floor
                                                                                                                                          parking could be built on the same lot to add units. Parcel may be
                                                                                                                                          subject to VMU* requirements.
  #12   064-167-27     Underutilize CR      Commercial Mixed         1 du/ 1,500                  333 CALEDONIA ST                 12,000 2 warehouses on site tenanted by Studio 333. Both warehouses           Buildings are in                             11.5                      0                     1946                       8                       29.0 Very Low/                        8
                       d                               Residential & sf                                                                   could be reconfigured to make way for a new three-story building       satisfactory                                                                                                                                           Low
                                                       Commercial                                                                         with parking on the ground floor. If warehouses are not                condition.
                                                                                                                                          reconfigured, a new building with less units could still be erected on
                                                                                                                                          the Litho St side of the lot. Parcel may be subject to VMU*
                                                                                                                                          requirements.
  #13   065-052-03     Underutilize CR      Commercial Mixed         1 du/ 1,500                  209 CALEDONIA ST                  3,000 Both floors currently have a commercial use. The upper floor could Building is in                                    4.4                      0                     1894                       2                       29.0 Moderate                         2
                       d                               Residential & sf                                                                   be converted to a residential apartment. There is adequate street  excellent condition.
                                                       Commercial                                                                         parking. Parcel may be subject to VMU* requirements.
  #14   065-052-23     Underutilize CR      Commercial Mixed         1 du/ 1,500                  201 CALEDONIA ST                  4,200 Existing two-story building on the lot, with Tyray Jewelers and a         Building is in                             3.1                      1                     1912                       2                       20.7 Moderate                         1
                       d                               Residential & sf                                                                   fine framing shop on the ground floor. More than half of the lot is       satisfactory
                                                       Commercial                                                                         currently garden space. One more building could be added to               condition.
                                                                                                                                          create another unit. Parcel may be subject to VMU*
                                                                                                                                          requirements.
  #15   065-053-05     Underutilize CR      Commercial Mixed         1 du/ 1,500                  326 PINE ST                       3,185 Both floors currently have a commercial use. The upper floor could Building is in good                               3.8                      0                     1920                       2                       27.4 Moderate                         2
                       d                               Residential & sf                                                                   be converted to a residential apartment. There is adequate parking condition.
                                                       Commercial                                                                         at the back of the lot. Parcel may be subject to VMU*
                                                                                                                                          requirements.
  #16   065-055-02     Underutilize CR      Commercial Mixed         1 du/ 1,500                  1103 BRIDGEWAY                    4,320 Two parcels under single ownership. Currently developed as a                     Building is in good                 0.0                      0
                       d                               Residential & sf                                                                   small independent Bridgeway Gas station, meaning it could be a                       condition.
                                                       Commercial                                                                         brownfield and could require clean-up. The site is entirely flat and
                                                                                                                                          could easily support redevelopment. Parcel may be subject to                                                                                                                                                               Very Low/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1958                        6                          25.3                                      6
  #17   065-055-03     Underutilize CR      Commercial Mixed         1 du/ 1,500                  JOHNSON ST                        6,000 VMU* requirements.                                                                                                   3.4                      0                                                                              Low
                       d                               Residential & sf
                                                       Commercial
  #18   065-055-06     Underutilize CR      Commercial Mixed         1 du/ 1,500                  42 CALEDONIA ST                   4,000 The site has a one story building with ground floor retail, and has      Building is in good                         2.5                      0                     1925                       2                       21.8 Moderate                         2
                       d                               Residential & sf                                                                   potential for 2 residential units to be built on top. Adding residential condition.
                                                       Commercial                                                                         floors would be in keeping with the current street character. Parking
                                                                                                                                          for the new unit would require coordination with an adjacent
                                                                                                                                          property. Parcel may be subject to VMU* requirements.
  #19   065-056-02     Underutilize CR      Commercial Mixed         1 du/ 1,500                  41 CALEDONIA ST                   3,500 1-story building tenanted by Plate Shop restaurant. There is              Building is in good                        2.9                      1                     1927                       2                       24.9 Moderate                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mixed Use
                       d                               Residential & sf                                                                   potential for more units to be built on top of existing buildings or at   condition.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            51 units
                                                       Commercial                                                                         the back of the property. Parking for the new unit would require
                                                                                                                                          coordination with adjacent property. Parcel may be subject to
                                                                                                                                          VMU* requirements.
  #20   064-274-03     Vacant      R-1-20   Residential Very Low            1 unit/               WOLFBACK RIDGE                    5,700 Vacant triangular lot.                                                    Site is currently                         25.3                      0                      NA                        1                        7.6 Above                            1
                                                        Density             parcel                ROAD                                                                                                              vacant.                                                                                                                                           Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #21   064-276-23     Vacant      R-1-20   Residential Very Low            1 unit/               3 WOLFBACK                       29,947 Vacant site. On Approved list for new Single Family Development,          Site is currently                         41.0                      0                      NA                        1                        1.5 Above                            1
                                                        Density             parcel                RIDGE ROAD                              no Building Permit issued yet.                                            vacant.                                                                                                                                           Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #22   200-240-10     Vacant      R-1-20   Residential Very Low            1 unit/               WOLFBACK                         20,273 Vacant site.                                                              Site is currently                         61.7                      0                      NA                        1                        2.1 Above                            1
                                                        Density             parcel                TERRACE ROAD                                                                                                      vacant.                                                                                                                                           Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #23   200-240-23     Vacant      R-1-20   Residential Very Low            1 unit/               WOLFBACK                          9,851 Vacant site.                                                              Site is currently                         54.6                      0                      NA                        1                        4.4 Above                            1
                                                        Density             parcel                TERRACE ROAD                                                                                                      vacant.                                                                                                                                           Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #24   200-310-01     Vacant      R-1-20   Residential Very Low            1 unit/               WOLFBACK RIDGE                   13,407 Vacant site.                                                              Site is currently                         35.4                      0                      NA                        1                        3.2 Above                            1
                                                        Density             parcel                ROAD                                                                                                              vacant.                                                                                                                                           Moderate
                                                        Residential
Housing Element Update 2015‐2023                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Page G ‐ 2 
Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart                                 * VMU = Vertical Mixed Use (see Implementation Program 8a for additional information.                                                                                                                                                                        Adopted January 13, 2015

Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart
                                                                           Max Density (du/sf)
                                                       General Plan Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Total Units
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Resulting Density       Income Category
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Actual additional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Visual Condition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Existing (Resid)       Age of Existing
                                                                                                                                         Development                                                                                                                                                         possible based on                                                 units after Visual
                       Status     Zoning    Category   Use                                       Address            Parcel Size          Assessment                                                                                      Ave. Slope          Units                  Bldg                     max density
        APN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Checks
  #25   200-310-03     Vacant     R-1-20    Residential Very Low           1 unit/               WOLFBACK RIDGE                    7,643 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     16.9                      0                      NA                        1                        5.7 Above                            1
                                                        Density            parcel                ROAD                                                                                                           vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #26   200-310-04     Vacant     R-1-20    Residential Very Low           1 unit/               WOLFBACK RIDGE                    6,610 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     36.1                      0                      NA                        1                        6.6 Above                            1
                                                        Density            parcel                ROAD                                                                                                           vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #27   200-310-05     Vacant     R-1-20    Residential Very Low           1 unit/               WOLFBACK RIDGE                   30,032 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     39.0                      0                      NA                        1                        1.5 Above                            1
                                                        Density            parcel                ROAD                                                                                                           vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #28   200-310-06     Vacant     R-1-20    Residential Very Low           1 unit/               WOLFBACK RIDGE                   29,166 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     46.6                      0                      NA                        1                        1.5 Above                            1
                                                        Density            parcel                ROAD                                                                                                           vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #29   200-310-08     Vacant     R-1-20    Residential Very Low           1 unit/               WOLFBACK RIDGE                   24,287 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     52.4                      0                      NA                        1                        1.8 Above                            1
                                                        Density            parcel                ROAD                                                                                                           vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #30   200-310-09     Vacant     R-1-20    Residential Very Low           1 unit/               WOLFBACK RIDGE                   17,874 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     49.5                      0                      NA                        1                        2.4 Above                            1
                                                        Density            parcel                ROAD                                                                                                           vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #31   200-310-12     Vacant     R-1-20    Residential Very Low           1 unit/               CLOUDVIEW TRAIL                  33,792 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     59.6                      0                      NA                        1                        1.3 Above                            1
                                                        Density            parcel                                                                                                                               vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #32   200-310-16     Vacant     R-1-20    Residential Very Low           1 unit/               WOLFBACK RIDGE                   14,469 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     41.7                      0                      NA                        1                        3.0 Above                            1
                                                        Density            parcel                ROAD                                                                                                           vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #33   064-242-10     Vacant     R-1-8     Residential Low Density        1 unit/               GEORGE LANE                       9,546 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     36.8                      0                      NA                        1                        4.6 Above                            1
                                                        Residential        parcel                                                                                                                               vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
  #34   064-204-03     Vacant     R-1-6     Residential Medium Low 1 unit/                       PLATT AVE                         6,624 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     54.4                      0                      NA                        1                        6.6 Above                            1
                                                        Density     parcel                                                                                                                                      vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #35   064-204-35     Vacant     R-1-6     Residential Medium Low 1 unit/                       CAZNEAU AVE                       5,969 Vacant site on a slope.                                                Site is currently                     57.4                      0                      NA                        1                        7.3 Above                            1
                                                        Density     parcel                                                                                                                                      vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #36   064-213-22     Vacant     R-1-6     Residential Medium Low 1 unit/                       CAZNEAU AVE                       5,406 Vacant site on a slope.                                                Site is currently                     71.2                      0                      NA                        1                        8.1 Above                            1
                                                        Density     parcel                                                                                                                                      vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #37   064-243-22     Vacant     R-1-6     Residential Medium Low 1 unit/                       GEORGE LANE                       5,058 Vacant site.                                                           Site is currently                     56.4                      0                      NA                        1                        8.6 Above                            1
                                                        Density     parcel                                                                                                                                      vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                        Residential
  #38   065-222-05     Vacant     R-1-6     Residential Medium Low 1 unit/                       105 CRESCENT AVE                  5,040 Was approved by the City in 2011 for a new single-family               Site is currently                     40.0                      0                     1961                       1                        8.6 Above                            1
                                                        Density     parcel                                                               residence, but no Building Permit has been applied for yet.            vacant.                                                                                                                                       Moderate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19
                                                        Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               units   R-1
  #39   064-062-14     Under-     R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  175 TOMALES ST                    6,000 One house on corner lot with space in backyard. Adequate               Building is in good                   16.5                      1                     1931                       2                       14.5 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                         Density     sf                                                                   driveway space for parking and street parking.                         condition.
                                                        Residential
  #40   064-062-15     Under-     R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  163 TOMALES ST                    6,000 Has space at the back for another unit.                                Building is in good                   15.4                      1                     1915                       2                       14.5 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                         Density     sf                                                                                                                                          condition.
                                                        Residential
  #41   064-062-19     Vacant     R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 1,500                  TOMALES STREET                    3,000 Has a small road running through it to neighboring house. This site Site is currently                        19.0                      0                      NA                        2                       29.0 Moderate                         2
                                                        Density     sf                                                                   is owned by the City of Sausalito.                                  vacant. There
                                                        Residential                                                                                                                                          appears to be a
                                                                                                                                                                                                             garden currently on
                                                                                                                                                                                                             the site.
  #42   064-131-07     Vacant     R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  OLIVE STREET                      5,240 Site is currently vacant and has development potential.             Site is currently                        22.0                      0                      NA                        2                       16.6 Moderate                         2
                                                        Density     sf                                                                                                                                       vacant.
                                                        Residential
  #43   064-135-03     Under-     R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  510 SPRING ST                     6,000 Garage in front and house at the back, has potential for another       Garage and house                      11.4                      1                     1914                       2                       14.5 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                         Density     sf                                                                   building to be placed in the middle of the site.                       are in fair condition.
                                                        Residential
  #44   064-135-06     Under-     R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 1,500                  522 SPRING ST                     3,000 This is a substandard lot. There is potential for an additional        Building is in good                   14.4                      1                     1930                       2                       29.0 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                         Density     sf                                                                   building to be built behind the existing building. There is adequate   condition.
                                                        Residential                                                                      street parking.
Housing Element Update 2015‐2023                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Page G ‐ 3 
Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart                                * VMU = Vertical Mixed Use (see Implementation Program 8a for additional information.                                                                                                                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart
                                                                             Max Density (du/sf)
                                                         General Plan Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Total Units
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Resulting Density       Income Category
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Actual additional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Visual Condition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Existing (Resid)       Age of Existing
                                                                                                                                           Development                                                                                                                                                         possible based on                                                 units after Visual
                       Status      Zoning     Category   Use                                       Address            Parcel Size          Assessment                                                                                      Ave. Slope          Units                  Bldg                     max density
        APN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Checks
  #45   064-135-23     Under-      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 2 du/ 2,500                  511 OLIVE STREET                  6,000 There is currently one unit on the site and an additional house or       Building is in                      17.8                      1                     1914                       2                       14.5 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                           Density     sf                                                                   ADU may be built behind the existing building.                           satisfactory
                                                          Residential                                                                                                                                               condition.
  #46   064-136-03     Under-      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  155 WOODWARD                      8,220 This site has a single two-story house in good condition with an         Building is in good                 17.9                      1                     1945                       3                       15.9 Moderate                         2
                       utilized                           Density     sf                           AVE                                     undeveloped backyard.                                                    condition.
                                                          Residential
  #47   064-137-03     Under-      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 1,500                  107 PEARL ST                      3,500 This is a substandard lot. There is potential for an additional          Building is in good                 14.6                      1                     1930                       2                       24.9 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                           Density     sf                                                                   building to be built behind the existing building for a second unit on   condition.
                                                          Residential                                                                      the lot. Street parking is adequate, or parking in the driveway is
                                                                                                                                           possible.
  #48   064-138-02     Under-      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  254 WOODWARD                      6,240 Only one house on the property, large yard space. An additional          Building is in                      33.9                      1                        0                       2                       14.0 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                           Density     sf                           AVE                                     unit is possible. Street parking is available, or the driveway could     excellent condition.
                                                          Residential                                                                      be expanded.
  #49   064-141-10     Under-      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 1,500                  530 EASTERBY ST                   3,000 This is a substandard lot. There is potential for an additional          Building is in                       8.0                      1                     1991                       2                       29.0 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                           Density     sf                                                                   building or extension to be built behind the existing building.          excellent condition.
                                                          Residential
  #50   064-141-13     Under-      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  523 SPRING ST                    22,592 There are 4 houses on Spring St (5 units), 1 house on Pearl St (1 Buildings are in                            9.5                      6                        0                       9                       17.4 Moderate                         3
                       utilized                           Density     sf                                                                   unit), and parking spaces on Pearl St for the Spring St houses. The good condition.
                                                          Residential                                                                      site is large and can support reconfiguration to add an additional
                                                                                                                                           building or two for a total of three additional units.
  #51   064-141-17     Vacant      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  511 SPRING ST                     6,000 Currently empty yard and parking garage only.                            Garage is in                         9.9                      0                        0                       2                       14.5 Moderate                         2
                                                          Density     sf                                                                                                                                            satisfactory
                                                          Residential                                                                                                                                               condition.
  #52   064-141-18     Underutilize R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 1,500                  518 EASTERBY ST                   3,000 This is a substandard lot. There is potential for an additional          Building is in                      14.2                      1                     1955                       2                       29.0 Moderate                         1
                       d                                  Density     sf                                                                   building or extension to be built behind the existing building.          excellent condition.
                                                          Residential
  #53   064-142-29     Vacant      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  EASTERBY ST                       5,000 The site is vacant and has direct road access.                           Site is currently                   19.0                      0                      NA                        2                       17.4 Moderate                         2
                                                          Density     sf                                                                                                                                            vacant.
                                                          Residential
  #54   064-142-30     Under-      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  515 EASTERBY ST                   5,460 May have some room for a smaller ADU behind the existing                 Building is in good                 15.9                      1                     1920                       2                       16.0 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                           Density     sf                                                                   building.                                                                condition.
                                                          Residential
  #55   064-163-06     Vacant      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  BONITA STREET                     6,491 There is an easement with stairs going lengthwise through the site. Site is currently                        29.0                      0                      NA                        2                       13.4 Moderate                         2
                                                          Density     sf                                                                   The remaining area is able to support 2 units on the site.          vacant.
                                                          Residential
  #56   064-163-07     Under-      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  417 BONITA ST                     8,640 Single house plus terraced decks at the back. There is space for         Building is in good                 30.1                      1                     1943                       3                       15.1 Moderate                         2
                       utilized                           Density     sf                                                                   two more units at the back.                                              condition.
                                                          Residential
  #57   064-181-01     Under-      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  21 GORDON ST                     12,675 Single house plus terraced gardens up the slope at the back.             Building is in                      35.6                      1                     1951                       5                       17.2 Moderate                         4
                       utilized                           Density     sf                                                                   Additional units could be created in the terraced areas.                 excellent condition.
                                                          Residential
  #58   064-181-24     Under-      R-2-2.5    Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                  812 SPRING ST                     6,048 Has space at the back for another unit.                                  Building is in good                 27.8                      1                     1920                       2                       14.4 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                           Density     sf                                                                                                                                            condition.
                                                          Residential
Housing Element Update 2015‐2023                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page G ‐ 4 
Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart                                  * VMU = Vertical Mixed Use (see Implementation Program 8a for additional information.                                                                                                                                                                 Adopted January 13, 2015

Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart
                                                                             Max Density (du/sf)
                                                         General Plan Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Total Units
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Resulting Density       Income Category
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Actual additional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Visual Condition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Existing (Resid)       Age of Existing
                                                                                                                                           Development                                                                                                                                                          possible based on                                                  units after Visual
                       Status      Zoning    Category    Use                                       Address            Parcel Size          Assessment                                                                                       Ave. Slope          Units                  Bldg                     max density
        APN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Checks
  #59   064-182-06     Under-      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                   38 GORDON ST                      9,600 Single-story house with a lawn. This lot could support another small Building is in                           16.9                      1                     1960                        3                       13.6 Moderate                         2
                       utilized                          Density     sf                                                                    structure, or have another story added. Part of the site is an       excellent condition.
                                                         Residential                                                                       easement for driveway access.
  #60   064-192-02     Under-      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                   141 WOODWARD                      5916 Another building could be built adjacent to the existing 1-story unit, Building is in good                     12.4                      1                     1954                        2                       14.7 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                          Density     sf                            AVE                                    or another floor could be added to the unit. Adequate street           condition.
                                                         Residential                                                                      parking.
  #61   064-201-01     Under-      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 1,500                   35 MARIE ST                       4,056 This is a substandard lot. This property has some room for an          Building is in fair                    14.2                      1                     1969                        2                       21.5 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                          Density     sf                                                                    additional building at the back of the site. Additional parking spaces condition.
                                                         Residential                                                                       on site are also possible.
  #62   064-342-07     Under-      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                   20 BUCHANAN DR                    6,000 The existing 1-story building could be reconfigured for 2 units.         The existing building                 7.9                      1                     1956                        2                       14.5 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                          Density     sf                                                                                                                                             is in fair condition.
                                                         Residential
  #63   064-342-11     Under-      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                   11 TOMALES ST                     6,000 There is potential for an additional building to be built behind or in   The existing building                 8.8                      1                     1955                        2                       14.5 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                          Density     sf                                                                    front of the existing building. It is also possible that the existing    is in fair condition.
                                                         Residential                                                                       building could be reconfigured and a new house with two units built
                                                                                                                                           in its place.
  #64   065-231-17     Under-      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 1,500                   211 WEST ST                       3,600 This is a substandard lot. This building appears to be vacant and is     Building is in a poor                26.7                      0                     1941                        2                       24.2 Moderate                         2
                       utilized                          Density     sf                                                                    in a dilapidated condition. Considered to have zero existing units.      condition.
                                                         Residential
  #65   065-236-04     Under-      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 1,500                   209 FOURTH ST                     3,300 This is a substandard lot. This building appears to be vacant and is Building is in a poor                    19.9                      0                     1930                        2                       26.4 Moderate                         2
                       utilized                          Density     sf                                                                    in a dilapidated condition. Considered to have zero existing units. condition.
                                                         Residential
  #66   065-252-64     Vacant      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                   37-39 CRESCENT                    8,512 Was approved by City in 2009 for 2 new detached residences, but          Site is currently                    71.0                      0                                                 3                       15.4 Moderate                         2
                                                         Density     sf                            AVE                                     no Building Permit has been issued yet as of 2011.                       vacant.
                                                         Residential
  #67   065-253-02     Vacant      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                   MAIN STREET                       5,330 Site is currently vacant and has development potential.                  Site is currently                    28.0                      0                      NA                         2                       16.3 Moderate                         2
                                                         Density     sf                            THROUGH TO                                                                                                       vacant.
                                                         Residential                               CRESCENT AVE
  #68   065-261-04     Under-      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 1,500                   107 FOURTH ST                     3,300 This is a substandard lot. There is potential for an additional          The garage is in                      9.1                      1                     1957                        2                       26.4 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                          Density     sf                                                                    building to be built between the existing building and the garage.       satisfactory
                                                         Residential                                                                                                                                                condition and the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    house is in good
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    condition
  #69   065-264-12     Under-      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                   110 FOURTH ST                     5,500 This lot has a one story building. There is space at the back for        Building is in                       31.6                      1                     1952                        2                       15.8 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                          Density     sf                                                                    another building, or an additional floor may be built, or the existing   satisfactory
                                                         Residential                                                                       building could be reconfigured for two units.                            condition.
  #70   065-301-05     Under-      R-2-2.5   Residential Medium High 1 du/ 2,500                   115 SOUTH STREET                  6,000 On Approved List for a new Duplex/Condo, No Building Permit              Site is currently                    54.0                      0                                                 2                       14.5 Moderate                         2
                       utilized                          Density     sf                                                                    issued yet.                                                              vacant.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        50 units   R-2-2.5
                                                         Residential
  #71   064-151-02     Vacant      R-3       Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  1757 BRIDGEWAY                   17,932 The existing buildings on the site are blighted and therefore the site Current buildings                      22.0                      0                      NA                        11                       26.7 Very                           11
                                                         Residential sf                                                                    may be considered vacant (per HCD direction).                          blighted, therefore                                                                                                                             Low/Low
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  site considered
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  vacant.
  #72   064-151-06     Underutilize R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  1733 BRIDGEWAY                    7,470 Has a house on the lot, three units currently on the site. Has         Building is in                         32.4                      3                        0                        4                       23.3 Moderate                         1
                       d                                 Residential sf                                                                    roadway access. An additional unit could be built in front over the satisfactory
                                                                                                                                           current parking spaces.                                                condition.
  #73   064-151-16     Under-      R-3       Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  412 NAPA ST                      10,000 The existing building on this site is near the rear end of the site.     Building is in good                  32.0                      1                     1950                        6                       26.1 Moderate                         5
                       utilized                          Residential sf                                                                    Additional buildings can be built on the undeveloped portion near        condition.
                                                                                                                                           the front and middle of the site.
  #74   064-167-03     Under-      R-3       Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  408 LOCUST ST                     3,000 There is potential for an additional building to be built behind the     Building is in                       21.4                      1                     1951                        2                       29.0 Moderate                         1
                       utilized                          Residential sf                                                                    existing building.                                                       excellent condition.
Housing Element Update 2015‐2023                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page G ‐ 5 
Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart                                  * VMU = Vertical Mixed Use (see Implementation Program 8a for additional information.                                                                                                                                                                   Adopted January 13, 2015

Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart
                                                                           Max Density (du/sf)
                                                       General Plan Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Total Units
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Resulting Density       Income Category
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Actual additional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Visual Condition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Existing (Resid)       Age of Existing
                                                                                                                                         Development                                                                                                                                                       possible based on                                                        units after Visual
                       Status     Zoning   Category    Use                                       Address           Parcel Size           Assessment                                                                                    Ave. Slope          Units                  Bldg                     max density
        APN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Checks
  #75   064-167-21     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  411 LITHO ST                     6,000 Single house plus lawn at the back. There is existing access to the Existing building is                    14.3                      2                     1963                        4                       29.0 Moderate                               2
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                   backpart of the lot.                                                in good condition.
  #76   065-052-26     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  419 LOCUST ST                    8,053 There are 3 meters and 3 mailboxes on this property.                   Buildings are in fair                13.8                      3                      NA                         5                       27.0 Moderate                               2
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                                                                                          condition.
  #77   065-056-07     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  416 JOHNSON ST                   6,000 One story building in front and 2 stories at the back, with driveway   Building is in good                   9.8                      2                        0                        4                       29.0 Moderate                               2
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                   and backyard. A new building could be built at the back for 2 units,   condition.
                                                                                                                                        and include parking spaces for existing units. Next door is a good
                                                                                                                                        example of infill at the rear of the lot (420 422 Johnson St)
  #78   065-063-07     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  925 BRIDGEWAY                    8,050 There is one building on the lot with three existing units. The        Building is in fair                  35.1                      3                     1922                        5                       27.1 Moderate                               2
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                   undeveloped portion of the lot is in front of the existing building.   condition.
  #79   065-063-08     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  911 BRIDGEWAY                    8,000 This site appears to have four existing units and therefore has        Building is in fair                  34.5                      4                     1925                        5                       27.2 Moderate                               1
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                   potential for only one more unit under the maximum density             condition.
                                                                                                                                        allowed.
  #80   065-071-22     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  30 EXCELSIOR LN                 11,000 This site has a five unit apartment building on the lot. There is       Building is in good                 21.7                      5                     1955                        7                       27.7 Moderate                               2
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                   space for two units to be built in a single building, with a carport on condition.
                                                                                                                                        the ground floor.
  #81   065-072-12     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  10 READE LN                      7,980 There are 4 meters for the property, indicating that there are 4       Building is in good                  20.3                      4                        0                        5                       27.3 Moderate                               1
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                   units. Only one more unit can be added under the maximum               condition.
                                                                                                                                        density. Part of the lot is underutilized, and access or parking for
                                                                                                                                        the additional unit could come off of Reade Lane
  #82   065-235-46     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  303 SECOND ST                    3,300 There is potential for an additional building to be built behind the   Building is in good                  25.9                      1                     1926                        2                       26.4 Moderate                               1
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                   existing building for a second unit on the lot.                        condition.
  #83   065-238-15     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  214 THIRD ST                     7,500 Combined with a strip of land at the back of this lot, which is under Existing building is                  13.0                      3                     1970                        5                       29.0 Moderate                               2
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                   the same owner, this lot would add up to a 8,250 sf lot. Half of the in good condition.
                                                                                                                                        lot is currently used for parking only and can be built on to add two
  #84   065-241-10     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  210 RICHARDSON                   4,800 Theidbackti lof the
                                                                                                                                                         it lot
                                                                                                                                                             i isl not
                                                                                                                                                                    i easily
                                                                                                                                                                        f    ki
                                                                                                                                                                             visible from the street, however Building is in                        20.3                      1                     1965                        3                       27.2 Moderate                               2
                       utilized                        Residential sf                            ST                                     Google Earth aerials show that more than half the lot is a vacant     excellent condition.
                                                                                                                                        backyard. It is possible to put another structure on the back of the
                                                                                                                                        lot.
  #85   065-241-12     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  214 RICHARDSON                   3,840 There is potential for an additional building to be built closer to    Building is in                       24.3                      1                     1986                        2                       22.7 Moderate                               1
                       utilized                        Residential sf                            ST                                     Richardson St where the garden currently is. There is adequate         excellent condition.
                                                                                                                                        space on the site for parking.
  #86   065-267-41     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  104 THIRD ST                     6,573 Two single-story buildings on property with a backyard.                Building is in good                   9.2                      2                        0                        4                       26.5 Moderate                               2
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                   Constructing new units with more stories would be in keeping with      condition.
                                                                                                                                        the street character.
  #87   052-322-02     Under-     R-3      Residential High Density 1 du/ 1,500                  330 Ebbtide                     32,477 Site contains two small houses (currently used as rentals), a 525 sf Buildings are in fair                  40.8                      2 1900 (not w/in                                 21                       28.1 Very Low/                            21
                       utilized                        Residential sf                                                                   cottage and a dilapidated garage. Street frontage on both            condition, garage in                                                 City Historic                                                              Low                                    59
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dist, or on
                                                                                                                                        Bridgeway and Ebbtide, beneficial for site access. Adjacent 7,700 poor condition.                                                                                                                                                                           units
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  local, State or
                                                                                                                                         f      l d                     hi       idi        t it f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Total Units                179
Housing Element Update 2015‐2023                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Page G ‐ 6 
Technical Appendix G ‐ Vacant and Underutilized Site Inventory Chart                                * VMU = Vertical Mixed Use (see Implementation Program 8a for additional information.                                                                                                                                                                Adopted January 13, 2015
































































































































