CITY OF MONTEREY
          GENERAL PLAN
Adopted:    January 2005 (Resolution No. 05-03)
  Amended:     June 2006 (Resolution No. 06-79)
           October 2007 (Resolution No. 07-182)
              June 2009 (Resolution No. 09-086)
              July 2009 (Resolution No. 09-105)
         November 2010 (Resolution No. 10-161)
           August 2013 (Resolution No. 13-131)
            March 2016 (Resolution No. 16-042)
Table of Contents
Introduction ......................................................................................................................................2
Urban Design Element .....................................................................................................................5
Land Use Element ..........................................................................................................................14
Circulation Element .......................................................................................................................22
Housing Element ............................................................................................................................46
Conservation Element ....................................................................................................................65
Open Space Element ......................................................................................................................72
Safety Element ...............................................................................................................................77
Noise Element ................................................................................................................................88
Economic Element .........................................................................................................................95
Social Element .............................................................................................................................100
Historic Preservation Element .....................................................................................................107
Public Facilities Element .............................................................................................................111
Glossary .......................................................................................................................................122
List of Figures
1.      Planning Area………………………………………………………………………………4
2.      Special Places………….…….……………………………………………………………13
3.      Land Use……………………………………………..…………………………………....22
4.      Mixed Use Neighborhoods …………………………….………………………………....23
5.      Street Classifications………….…………………………………………………...………46
6.      Visitor Routes…………………………………………………………………………..…47
7.      Truck Routes………………….…………………………………………………………...48
8.      Special Status Species Occurrences……………………………………………………….71
9.      Habitat Management Areas…………………………..……………………………………72
10.     Parks, Recreation and Open Spaces…………………………………….…………………75
11.     Seismic Hazards…………………………..……………………………………………….84
12.     Steep Slopes…………………………..…………………………………………………...85
13.     Flood Zones……………………………………………………………………………….86
14.     Fire Hazards……………………..………………………………………………………...87
15.     Evacuation Routes………………………………………………………………………...88
16.     Noise Contours……………………………………………………………………………94
17.     Airport Noise Contours……...…………………………………………………………….95
List of Tables
1.      Citywide Anticipated Development Potential …………………………………………..18
2.      Mixed Use Neighborhoods ……….…………………………………………………......19
3.      Area Plans and Implementing Plans …………………………………………………….20
4.      Functional Street Classifications ………………………………………………………..31
5.      Truck Routes …………………………………………………………………………….34
6.      Visitor Routes ……………………………………………………………………………34
7.      Roadway Level of Service (LOS) Standard …………………………………………......45
8.      Noise Exposure Standards ……….……………………………………………………...91
9.      Land Use and Noise Compatibility Standards ………………………………………......92
10.     Levels of Workforce Housing ……….………………………………………………….124
                                                                       1

Introduction
What is a general plan?
State Requirements
California State law requires that each city adopt a comprehensive, long-term general plan for the
physical development of the area under its jurisdiction. This general plan must include seven
elements that together compose an integrated set of goals, policies, and action programs. These
seven required elements are land use, circulation, housing, conservation, open space, safety, and
noise. In addition, a city may adopt optional elements that relate to the physical development of
the community.
The City of Monterey General Plan contains the following elements:
     Urban Design
     Land Use
     Circulation
     Housing
     Conservation
     Open Space
     Safety
     Noise
     Economic
     Social
     Historic Preservation
     Public Facilities
Regardless of whether a city is revising its entire general plan or amending only part, it must follow
certain requirements:
    1. Every new element or addition to the general plan must be consistent with the other
        adopted elements.
    2. A general plan must cover all territory within its jurisdiction and any lands outside
        that relate to its planning effort. The City's planning area is defined in more detail in the
        following sections.
    3. A general plan must be long term. It must project future conditions and needs and the
        impacts of city policies in the General Plan. Both intermediate (five to ten years) and long-
        range (10 to 20 years) projections are used in this plan. These projections should be
        updated as often as necessary to keep them current.
    4. A general plan must include extensive citizen participation. The City of Monterey's
        General Plan was drafted with the assistance of a citizen's advisory group representing a
        wide cross section of various community groups interested in the future development of the
        city.
    5. A general plan must be prepared and implemented in close cooperation with other
                                                    2

         public agencies. The City has been fortunate in that most Monterey Peninsula cities and
         the County have been revising all or major parts of their general plans during the past two
         years. This has facilitated the interchange of ideas and projections on the future growth of
         the region.
    6. A general plan must meet the requirements of the California Environmental Quality
         Act (CEQA). An Environmental Impact Report (EIR) on this plan was prepared by a
         private consulting firm.
An Effective General Plan
In addition to the state requirements, a general plan should measure up to the following practical
criteria to be a worthwhile, usable, and effective planning document. It should:
    1. Be a living document. The policies and programs in this general plan should be updated
         on an annual basis to ensure it reflects current City attitudes.
    2. Address all issues the City feels is important. In addition to the seven state-required
         elements or subject areas, this general plan includes elements such as urban design, historic
         preservation, public facilities, social services, and economics.
    3. Be the main source of overall City goals and policies on the future development of the
         community. This general plan is intended to be the primary document to which the City
         Council, City commissions, residents, and developers turn for determining prevailing values
         and attitudes on the future development of the community.
    4. Be realistic, up to date, and include truthful statements about what is and is not
         tolerated in the community.
    5. Be available, readable, and understandable. The plan should be clear and concise, free
         of jargon and abstract terminology.
The Planning Area
As indicated above in the State Requirements section, a city's general plan should cover any areas
outside its boundaries that, in the city's judgement, bear relation to its planning. Since issues do not
respect political boundaries, the law provides for planning outside these boundaries. In this way,
the city can consider the plans of neighboring cities and the county for land adjacent to Monterey's
city limits.
There are four types of areas that a city should consider in planning for future development. All
four of these areas are considered within Monterey's planning area for this general plan. These four
areas are:
    1. Area within the current city limits;
    2. Unincorporated territory that may ultimately be annexed (called sphere of influence);
    3. Unincorporated territory that is not planned for future annexation but bears some relation to
         the city's planning; and
    4. Incorporated territory of other cities that bears some relation to Monterey's planning.
                                                      3
Figure 1, Showing Planning Area
                                4
Urban Design Element
Introduction
The renowned scenic environment of Monterey and the Peninsula stems from its two dominant
features: the coastline and the central ridge of wooded hills. The preservation of these two
features is essential to maintain the scenic character of the Peninsula.
The wooded ridgeline runs through the heart of the Peninsula, separating Monterey from Del
Monte Forest, Carmel, and Carmel Valley. This ridgeline terminates in a hill covered with pines
at the top of the Presidio. Numerous fingers of open space extend outward from this ridge to the
sea, helping to define the Peninsula communities.
The City of Monterey is bounded on the south by this pine-covered ridgeline and to the north by
the crescent-shaped southerly end of Monterey Bay. The series of wooded canyons, which radiate
from the ridge to the bay, are separated by a series of mesas. Each mesa is isolated from the
others, allowing the natural separation of various types of land uses. The Monterey Peninsula
Airport is located on the most easterly mesa. On the next mesa to the west are the Josselyn
Canyon and Fisherman’s Flats, Deer Flats Park, and Aguajito Oaks residential subdivisions. Next
is the Del Monte Golf Course. Isolated by canyon and wooded areas to the west is the higher-
density Navy housing development called La Mesa Village. Monterey Peninsula College is next
on its own mesa. Alta Mesa is an adjacent residential area bordered by two wooded greenbelts.
The same pattern runs through Monterey Vista and Monte Regio to the Presidio, although this
part of the city has been developed more homogeneously into single family homes.
Many of the canyons act as the circulation links serving the mesas. Highway 68, Josselyn Canyon
Road, Aguajito Road, Iris Canyon Drive, and Pacific Street all run through canyons, which
connect with Fremont Street. Two of these canyons are already city parks. The beauty of
Highway 68 (Monterey-Salinas Highway) stems from its location in a wooded canyon. These
roads thus serve the mesas as wooded, park-like drives, and provide visually pleasing and
environmentally sensitive open space within the City.
Monterey growth has responded to these physical features: Downtown commercial on the flatter
old marsh area, lighter commercial and medium-density residential on the sloping mesas,
neighborhoods separated by the wooded canyons, and low-density residential in the steep
wooded foothills.
The goals and resultant policies included in this overview were developed to guide future urban
design decisions. They focus on preserving and enhancing Monterey’s aesthetic environment,
and were developed around two central concepts: Monterey’s special physical setting and its
image as a town.
Monterey’s image is that of a small-scale residential community beside the bay, framed by a
forested hill backdrop and drawing its charm from a rich historical background, certain
commercial enterprises, and natural scenic beauty.
More than 20 percent of the land in Monterey is owned by other governmental agencies, which
are not subject to local laws. Land use decisions for areas outside the City limits are made by the
                                                  5

County. Coordination and collaboration with these other government agencies is essential to
assure that urban design goals are met.
Goals and Policies
a.       Shoreline and Bay
The water’s edge is a particularly important natural feature because of the broad range of
activities it supports. In order to maximize public use and enjoyment, City policy is to improve
vistas and access; clean up beaches, protect remaining sand dunes, and protect the natural rocky
shoreline character; protect the harbor from future landfill of any kind; screen or otherwise soften
the intrusion of automobiles.
Goal a. Balance natural resources and public use of the shoreline and Bay, based on natural
features, historic setting, maritime activities, and public access (see Figure 1).
Beach and Dunes
Policy a.1. Conserve and enhance the environment of the beaches and sand dunes as natural
attractions, and improve public access consistent with dune preservation goals. Integrate the
beaches and dunes into a continuous natural setting.
Window on the Bay and Beach
Policy a.2. Develop for active park and beach use, but minimize parking and building intrusion
into the park.
Marina, Shoreline Park, Wharves, and Breakwater
Policy a.3. Retain active waterfront activities, including commercial and sport fishing, working
wharves, boat access, and boat repair, which show Monterey’s historic interface with the Bay.
Maintain a natural appearance and maritime use of the water’s edge.
Inner and Outer Harbor
Policy a.4. Keep random mooring concept intact in the outer harbor because of its special scenic
value.
Policy a.5. Do not overcrowd the harbor with boat slips and moorings. A limited number of boat
slips and moorings are appropriate where they help maintain the visual qualities of the maritime
setting.
San Carlos Beach Park
Policy a.6. Maintain views, active park use, and the rocky shoreline at San Carlos Beach Park.
Cannery Row
Policy a.7. Protect the rugged coastline and open up the view to the water and rocky shore as
much as possible while also respecting historic resources and building footprints over the water,
as noted in the Cannery Row Local Coastal Program.
Policy a.8. Preserve and maintain the natural environment of the Ed Ricketts underwater park
and tidelands.
                                                    6

Policy a.9. Enhance the visual qualities of the Monterey Bay Coastal Trail. Preserve and enhance
views from the Trail to natural features as much as possible and encourage access from the trail
to the Bay.
b.      Wooded Skyline and Foothills
The pine- and oak-covered ridge and foothills are perceived as part of Monterey. Although
portions are beyond the city limits, these important visual elements are within the City’s area of
concern. The continuity of Monterey’s forested backdrop should remain intact.
Goal b. Preserve the wooded skyline and foothills, which provide the southern and eastern
framework for the City, including areas within and beyond the City limits.
Policy b.1. The visual skyline and foothills beyond the city limits should be under the City’s
control. One method of achieving this would be annexation. The City should engage in active
collaboration with other governmental agencies and advocate for preservation of the forested
areas.
Policy b.2. New development in the ridge areas should be sensitively located to preserve the
forested setting. Development in the ridge areas should not silhouette against the skyline.
Policy b.3. Trees in forested areas should be preserved, and denuded areas should be reforested
where feasible.
Policy b.4. Foothill areas can be preserved by allowing low-density development, or clustered
development with open space.
Policy b.5. Development in forested areas should not create obvious holes in the forest.
Policy b.6. Trails in forested areas are encouraged to allow for passive public enjoyment of the
natural setting.
c.      Wooded Canyons
Most of Monterey’s neighborhoods sit on various gently sloping mesas, and are defined by and
insulated from other neighborhoods by wooded canyons. These canyons are wonderful natural
barriers, which limit neighborhood size and have allowed neighborhoods to grow with unique
characteristics and architectural styles. In many cases the canyons also are the location of scenic
roads. The interconnecting system of canyons is vital to natural drainage and wildlife habitat.
Goal c. Respect and retain the wooded canyons as distinctive natural features, as the natural
separation of neighborhoods, as locations for scenic roadways, and as recreational opportunities.
Policy c.1. Maintain the canyons and their native vegetation throughout their lengths.
d.      Lakes and Waterways
Lake El Estero, Washerwoman’s Pond, Del Monte Lake at the Naval Postgraduate School, and
Laguna Grande to the east of Monterey are significant visual resources and recreation
opportunities. The waterways feeding these lakes are part of the system of wooded canyons,
which help define the community.
                                                  7

Goal d. Maintain lakes and waterways, and natural drainage.
Policy d.1. Discourage proliferation of surface parking and other hard surface, man-made
improvements at Lake El Estero.
Policy d.2. Coordinate with the Naval Postgraduate School to allow use of Del Monte Lake as an
historic public view and recreation resource.
Policy d.3. Coordinate with the City of Seaside to assure that Roberts Lake and Laguna Grande
remain as marsh habitat and scenic resources for both Seaside and Monterey.
e.      Historic Buildings
The number and concentration of adobes in Monterey, the broad range of other historic buildings
with state, national, and international historic significance, and the wealth of locally significant
historic buildings makes the City of Monterey special and historically very significant.
Goal e. Historic buildings, gardens, districts, and their settings should continue to be protected
and restored, keeping the flavor of the past. (See also the Historic Preservation Element.)
Policy e.1. Protect and enhance the setting of historic buildings.
Policy e.2. Respect the scale of historic buildings by careful design of adjacent buildings.
Policy e.3. Maintain the downtown path of history and develop additional paths of history in
areas like Cannery Row, Presidio of Monterey and other historic areas.
f.      Vistas
Vistas which focus on Monterey’s most scenic amenities should be added wherever possible, and
improved where existing.
Goal f. Maintain existing vistas and seek to improve new vista points seen from roadways, parks,
and other public spaces. Collaborate with other agencies to protect city vistas and scenic
amenities.
Policy f.1. Campuses: Maintain large campuses as open space amenities within Monterey (e.g.,
Monterey Peninsula College, Naval Postgraduate School, Defense Language Institute, Monterey
Peninsula Unified School District, and private school and college sites). Fencing and walls on
these large sites should be screened by landscape elements, rather than being placed between
landscape elements and streets or vistas.
Policy f.2. Monterey Bay Park: Complete Monterey Bay Park.
Policy f.3. Wharf and Cannery Row: Maintain and enhance vistas.
Policy f.4. Del Monte Lake at Navy School: Open up and maintain the vista of Del Monte Lake
from Del Monte Avenue.
                                                    8

Policy f.5. Freeway: Preserve and enhance the view of the bay, the dunes, Laguna Grande,
Roberts Lake, and wooded hillsides.
Policy f.6. Del Monte Avenue: Screen the commercial area along Del Monte Avenue from
Seaside to Washington Street.
Policy f.7. Lighthouse Curve: Preserve and enhance views of the Presidio and the Harbor.
City-Wide
Policy f.8. Remove overhead wires.
Policy f.9. : Discourage high levels of ambient light and maintain night skies where stars can be
seen.
Policy f.10. Encourage parking to be placed underground or away from the street to improve the
pedestrian experience.
g.     Landscaping
Goal g. Landscape elements should be consistent and compatible within each area.
Policy g.1. Use landscaping for framing vistas.
Policy g.2. Favor native species.
Policy g.3. Discourage noxious invasive plants such as genista, pampas grass, ice plant, and
Kukui grass where appropriate by direct action and educating the public that these are not
appropriate landscape materials.
Policy g.4. Use landscaping to screen parking lots and structures, including Del Monte Center,
from freeway.
Policy g.5. Protect existing cypress, Monterey pine, and coast live oak trees in urban and historic
contexts, replant when removal is necessary, and retain the health of the stands.
Policy g.6. Use trees to soften existing parking structures.
Policy g.7. Use landscaping to screen parking where appropriate.
Policy g.8. Encourage planting of trees on public and private land throughout the City of
Monterey.
h.     Scenic Entrances and Corridors
All major roads leading to Monterey are scenic corridors. The setting of each varies, and their
sum imparts a strong and lasting impression of natural beauty. These scenic gateways, which
everyone experiences upon both arriving and leaving town, should be protected and enhanced.
The missing links should be filled in, the scenic edges should be extended to natural boundaries
where possible, and unnecessary man-made visual barriers should be removed. Elements which
                                                  9
detract from the natural setting (such as utility lines and large signs) should be eliminated or
screened.
A major consideration in the design and review of development proposals within scenic corridors
is their impact on views from the scenic roadways.
Past City of Monterey and county general plans have recommended that a system of “parkways”
be created along these scenic wooded entrance roadways. These plans indicated that such a
system would be one of the Peninsula’s major attractions. Residents and visitors alike gain their
major impressions of the area from the views from our principal roads.
There is one state and one county officially adopted scenic highways in the City’s planning area.
The state scenic highway is Highway One, from Monterey-Salinas Highway to the Carmel River.
The county scenic highway is Monterey Salinas-Highway from Highway 1 to the Salinas River.
Goal h. Protect and enhance scenic entrances shown on Figure 2, which follow a parkway
concept.
Policy h.1. Significant natural features within scenic corridors should be preserved and enhanced
to the maximum extent possible in the design and construction of scenic entrances. These natural
features include: ridgelines, hilltops, rock outcroppings, stream and creek beds, scenic vistas,
wildlife habitats, Monterey pine and oak groves, and other significant natural vegetation.
Policy h.2. Highway construction grading should not take place outside the roadway right-of-
way.
Policy h.3. Consideration should be given to using bridges for crossing wooded canyons.
Highways should be designed to blend with the natural topography and prevent large cut-and-fill
operations.
Policy h.4. Roadway lighting and signing should be minimized, of low-profile design, and
designed to enhance the scenic character of the corridor.
Policy h.5. Bridge abutments and drainage structures should be blended into the natural terrain as
much as possible.
Policy h.6. Where feasible, direct driveway access to scenic entrances should not be permitted
from individual properties. Most of the scenic corridors run through wooded canyons and create
a rural feeling. This effect will be destroyed if residences are permitted to line the roadway in a
manner similar to Josselyn Canyon Road.
Policy h.7. Frontage roads should not parallel scenic freeway lanes unless screened by terrain or
vegetation. Frontage roads detract from the scenic qualities of an area and should be located
within an adjacent development or screened by natural features where possible.
Policy h.8. Landscaped greenbelt areas should be established along the borders of scenic
entrances.
                                                   10

Policy h.9. Landscape buffers should be provided at least 100 feet in width from the ultimate
planned right-of-way of State-designated scenic highways.
Policy h.10. Developments visible from Scenic Entrances should blend into the natural
surroundings and not detrimentally impact significant natural features such as the wooded
ridgeline, hilltops, etc.
Highway 1
Policy h.11. Maintain existing vistas of the city, forest, bay and dunes.
Policy h.12. Prohibit new commercial signing which is oriented to freeways and phase out
existing commercial signing which is oriented to freeways.
Policy h.13. Screen industrial elements.
Policy h.14. Work with CalTRANS to maintain or reinforce native landscaping, with appropriate
planting.
Policy h.15. Encourage designation of all of Highway 1 as a scenic highway.
 Holman Highway
Policy h.16. Reverse the visual degradation of scenic forests.
Policy h.17. Avoid further illumination from Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula.
Policy h.18. Screen buildings close to the Highway with native vegetation, such as Monterey
pines, oaks, and cypress.
Monterey-Salinas Highway
Policy h.19. Reverse the visual degradation of scenic forests.
Policy h.20. Avoid further illumination along Ryan Ranch and Garden Road Business Park
areas.
Policy h.21. Screen buildings close to the Highway with native vegetation, such as Coast Live
Oak.
Policy h.22. Maintain the scenic corridor.
Munras Avenue
Policy h.23. Encourage use of native trees on the motel side of the street to be more compatible
with Don Dahvee Park.
Del Monte Avenue
                                                 11
Policy h.24. Enhance the excellent scenic value in the central portion by the Naval Postgraduate
School, and make the scenic resources more evident to the public.
Policy h.25. Enhance both ends by filling in missing portions of landscaping and eliminating
clutter from signs, wires, poles, etc.
Aguajito, Jacks Peak, and Monhollan Roads
Policy h.26. Maintain a low-speed scenic road and retain the informal and natural quality.
Pacific Street
Policy h.27. Plant out the Heritage Harbor parking structure using native trees such as cypress.
Policy h.28. Maintain the natural setting of upper Pacific Street and the street tree canopy along
lower Pacific Street.
                                                12
Figure 2, Showing Special Places
                                 13
Land Use Element
Introduction
This Land Use Element is a summary of the expected future land use in Monterey, consistent
with the goals, policies and programs in the other elements of the General Plan.
The main part of this Land Use Element is the Land Use Plan map. This map illustrates the land
use implications of all elements of the General Plan. The Land Use Plan map does not address
urban design issues such as the height of buildings and general aesthetics. It also cannot address
many social, economic, and public facilities issues. The policies and programs dealing with these
important issues are found here in the Land Use Element and in the other elements of the General
Plan.
The General Plan is a comprehensive, long-term plan for physical development of the City. The
California Supreme Court has declared the General Plan to be the “constitution for all future
developments.” The General Plan is a policy-level document that governs future land use, but it
is not the implementing tool. The Zoning Ordinance is the primary implementation tool for
General Plan land use policies. Zoning is a legal and technical concept that was created in the
early part of the last century to help local government control and regulate the uses of land. A
zoning district regulates the use of the land, the height and use of buildings, and other standards
and regulations regarding how the land can be used.
A proposed private or public project must be found consistent with the recommendations of the
general plan before it can be approved by the city. Consistency with the general plan under state
law means that a proposed project must conform or agree with the goals, policies, objectives,
land uses, and programs specified in the general plan.
The City of Monterey covers 8.4 square miles of land area, or 5,382 acres. Approximately 3.5
square miles of water area in Monterey Bay is also within the Monterey City limits.
a.       Land Use Plan
The Land Use Plan is a representation of what the community could look like with a continuation
of local and regional market forces and the comprehensive implementation of General Plan
policies. The Land Use Plan is divided into five land use categories: residential; public/semi-
public; parks, recreation, and open space; industrial; and commercial. The plan also indicates the
location of park sites, public schools, and hospitals.
The Land Use Plan serves a number of purposes. It is a summary of all the policies and pro-
grams which can be mapped, a general guide for preparing more detailed plans for specific areas
or neighborhoods of the city, and a guide for the zoning and development of individual parcels of
land in the city where there are no adopted area plans.
Residential. The single largest land use category in the City of Monterey is residential.
Single-family homes occupy the vast majority of residential land. Single-family (R-1) zoning is
the most restrictive and will require a zone change by the City Council before the land could be
put to other uses.
                                                  14

In 1994, the City’s zoning standards were changed to encourage mixed commercial and
residential use in commercial zones. Commercial areas are now a primary site for new housing,
both mixed use (i.e. a mix of commercial and residential buildings and dwellings), and
apartments. Many of the commercial areas have strong amenities, access to services, jobs, and
transportation, and public infrastructure which make them desirable for housing as well as
commercial use.
Commercial. The main commercial areas are: The downtown area, focused around three-
block-long Alvarado Street; Del Monte regional shopping center; commercial development along
Lighthouse Avenue, Del Monte Avenue, and North Fremont Street; visitor commercial areas in
downtown, Cannery Row, Fisherman's Wharf, and along Munras Avenue; and medical offices
concentrated around the Pacific -El Dorado-Cass Street area.
Industrial. Less than one percent of the city land area is devoted to industrial uses. In an attempt
to broaden the city's economic base and provide an area for industrial development, a 300-acre
Ryan Ranch area east of the city at the intersection of State Highways 68 and 218 was annexed in
1968 and is the primary reservoir of industrial land.
Public/Semi-Public/Military. The military and other public facilities categories cover 46% of the
city's land area. This is due in large part to the streets and highways and the school facilities of:
the Monterey Peninsula Unified School District, the Defense Language Institute, Monterey
Peninsula College, Santa Catalina School, Monterey Institute of International Studies, Naval
Postgraduate School, and other public and private schools.
Goal a. Maintain a Land Use Plan Map to guide future development and land use.
Policy a.1. Implement the Land Use Plan using the Land Use Plan Map (Figure 3) and the
following land use categories:
Residential. The Residential category is further divided into the following three sub-categories:
    Very Low Density Residential. This category applies to single-family residential areas where
    the average density is less than two dwellings per acre. The intent of this designation is to
    provide for housing in areas with scenic and natural resources. Preservation of scenic and
    natural resources is a primary goal, and project densities may be within the range as necessary
    to protect these resources.
    Low Density Residential. This category applies to single-family residential areas where the
    average density is between two to eight dwellings per acre.
    Medium Density Residential. This category applies to multiple-family residential areas where
    the average density is from eight to thirty dwellings per acre. Residential land uses in this
    category include duplexes, condominiums, and apartments.
Public/Semi-Public. This category applies to all publicly owned facilities and those private
facilities operated to serve the general public except for parks and recreation facilities, which are
a separate category. Included in this category are: public schools, military facilities, the airport,
cemetery, large public parking facilities, hospitals, museums, conference center, and some
                                                    15

publicly-owned historic buildings.
Parks, Recreation, and Open Space. This category applies to all parks and recreation facilities
such as neighborhood, community and county parks; community centers; and greenbelt and other
open space areas.
Industrial. This category applies to existing and future industrial areas in the city. There are four
areas in this category in the Land Use Plan. In most cases, industrial areas are taking the form of
business parks with a combination of office and industrial uses.
Commercial. This category applies to all types of commercial areas and allows the full range of
commercial uses, including retail, office, visitor commercial and professional offices.
Commercial areas are also a primary resource for new housing in mixed use or apartment
developments. The maximum allowed residential density in the commercial designations is 30
dwelling units per acre. However, higher density projects may be allowed under certain
circumstances as defined in the zoning ordinance, specific plans, or area plans.
b.      Future Population Growth Alternatives
The zoning and the Land Use Plan maps allow more development than is anticipated within the
20-year General Plan period. The Circulation Element roadway capacity is based on a defined
level of residential and employment growth in identified areas. Growth within the levels shown
in Table 1 is consistent with the Circulation Element. A General Plan review for Circulation
Element consistency will be required if growth exceeds 80% of the levels shown in Table 1.
Three alternatives were evaluated for future growth – Baseline market-rate growth (status quo),
the “Mixed Use Neighborhood” model, and the larger undeveloped areas South of Highway 1.
This Land Use Element supports the “Mixed Use Neighborhood” alternative, which is a mix of
residences, retail shops, services and jobs in close proximity. These areas are designed to be well
served by transit and bicycle routes and have a welcoming pedestrian environment. It is
estimated that new development within the identified Mixed Use Neighborhoods will generate at
a minimum 30% fewer automobile trips than the same amount of development elsewhere in the
City. The planned Mixed Use Neighborhoods are the commercial areas of Downtown/East
Downtown, Cannery Row/Lighthouse Avenue, and North Fremont Street.
Each mixed use neighborhood is unique. For each mixed use neighborhood, area specific
development and design guidelines, capital improvement programs, and multi-modal
(automobile, transit, bicycle and pedestrian) level of service, and other planning techniques will
be created to encourage this type of development. It is critical that the design concept maintains
the character of the neighborhood and compatibility with the neighborhood's architecture.
Specific issues such as height, bulk, scale, landscaping, parking, setbacks, streetscapes, and
alleys will be addressed in the development and design guidelines. Additional residential
development adjacent to existing residential neighborhoods should be carefully analyzed by City
Commissions to minimize additional traffic and parking problems. It should also be analyzed for
any building height concerns.
Goal b. Direct future population growth into mixed use neighborhoods. The City's goal is to
create and nurture mixed use neighborhoods that: 1) Reduce automobile trips; 2) Improve the
quality of the pedestrian experience; 3) Create walkable neighborhoods; 4) Provide more
                                                  16

ownership opportunities; 5) Increase the stock of housing affordable to Monterey's work force;
6) Require high-quality design to complement Monterey's image; and 7) Improve neighborhood-
oriented services.
Policy b.1. Create implementation tools, such as specific plans, to include design concepts,
development guidelines, and capital improvement programs for mixed use neighborhoods.
Emphasize attractive pedestrian, bicycle and transit access, which may require improved
sidewalks, crosswalks, and various public way improvements. The City encourages owner
occupied units, innovative site planning and tailoring the design and density to fit with the
neighborhood. Mixed use developments are encouraged to be attractive in design, hide parking
from the street, share parking, create a pleasant pedestrian environment, and provide a transition
into the residential zones through good site planning and design.
Policy b.2. Follow the existing policy directions in the Highway 68 Plan and Old Capitol Site
Memorandum of Understanding for residential development south of Highway 1. Workforce
housing on the City owned Ryan Ranch and mixed use housing in the Ryan Ranch Business Park
may be considered in order to provide housing in proximity to a major employment center.
Policy b.4. Reinforce the visual, pedestrian, and bicycle connection between City neighborhoods
and the Bay so that residents have exceptional non-automobile access to the Bay.
This chart represents the City's best estimate of foreseeable development for the next twenty
years. It is not a maximum calculation of future development.
The Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) prepared by the Association of Monterey Bay
Area Governments has identified a future housing need in Monterey of 1,302 new dwelling units
for 2000-2007. The City's General Plan is required to show adequate sites for the 1,302 units to
be in compliance with State law requirements. The City's goal is to provide this housing in the
proposed Mixed Use Neighborhoods which can accommodate higher density housing due to
transit, recreation, and commercial opportunities. A more detailed analysis and discussion of the
RHNA is included in the Housing Element. AMBAG's 20-year forecast for new residential
development in the City is 1,789 housing units. Both the RHNA and estimated 20-year buildout
can be accommodated in the City as demonstrated in the following table.
Table 1: Citywide Anticipated Development Potential
       Anticipated Development Potential
       Development Areas                    Dwelling Units
       R-1 District (1)                     163
       R-3 District (2)                     500
       Commercial/ Industrial Districts 1,302
       Defense Language Institute (3)       136
       Naval Post Graduate School (4) 34
       Total                                2,135
Notes:
1) R-1 development potential anticipates one house per vacant lot.
2) During the past General Plan period (1983-2003), the City gained approximately 500 new
                                                  17
multi-family dwelling units. This equals approximately 25 new units annually. Given the City's
incentives and disincentives for residential development, it is anticipated that 500 new residential
units will be the maximum in R-3 Zoning District.
3 and 4) Telephone Conversations with POM and DLI representatives about proposed residential
development on the POM and DLI. Thirty four housing units are planned on the Naval Post
Graduate School campus, and the Navy is not planning to replace the housing units removed in
the La Mesa Housing village.
Table 2: Mixed-Use Neighborhoods
      Proposed Mixed Use Neighborhoods               Anticipated Dwelling Units with Mixed
                                                     Use Neighborhoods Incentives
      Downtown                                       456
      East Downtown                                  456
      Cannery Row/Lighthouse                         260
      North Fremont                                  130
      Total                                          1,302
The Downtown/ East Downtown area has the most development potential and is currently well
served by transit. It also contains a variety of commercial and recreational opportunities. As a
result, the majority of new development (approximately 70%) was assigned to the
Downtown/East Downtown Mixed Use Neighborhood.
The Cannery Row/ Lighthouse Avenue Mixed Use Neighborhoods are within the current WAVE
Shuttle area. However, there are more restrictions to development in this area due to traffic and
parking problems. The Coastal Commission has also placed a numerical cap of 183 dwelling
units in the Cannery Row LCP area. Staff assumes that 20% of the new development would be
slated for this Mixed Use Neighborhood.
The North Fremont area is served by MST but not the WAVE Shuttle. There would appear to be
the greatest need for private investment to make a mixed-use neighborhood work in this area.
This is a longer-term development opportunity for the City. As a result, staff assigned only 10%
of the anticipated new development to the North Fremont area.
c.       Relationship to Area Plans and Implementing Plans
Monterey is a city of neighborhoods, and many residential and commercial neighborhoods now
have Area Plans. In addition there are implementing plans for a variety of City services such as
parks and recreation and bicycle routes. The Area Plans are adopted using the same hearing and
adoption process as the General Plan. In the event of a conflict between the General Plan and
Area Plans, the General Plan is the controlling document; however Area Plan policies and
programs that are more precise but consistent with the General Plan have the same standing as
General Plan policies. Implementing Plans guide specific city actions and must be consistent
with the General Plan, but they do not have the same standing as General Plan policies.
Implementing Plans may be adopted by the Planning Commission or City Council and do not
need to meet state prescribed process for adoption of a General Plan. Area Plans and
Implementing Plans as of 2012 are listed in Table 3 below.
                                                  18
Table 3: Area Plans and Implementing Plans
Plan                                                     Adoption Date Amendment Date
Redevelopment Plans were originally prepared under Federal and State legislation to
provide public improvements and encourage private development in Downtown and
Cannery Row. Per AB 1484, the authority over these documents has been transferred from
the Redevelopment Agency to the City as the Successor Agency
   Cannery Row Redevelopment Plan                             1981
   Custom House Urban Renewal Redevelopment Plan              1965               1972
   Greater Downtown Area Redevelopment Plan                   1983
Residential Neighborhood Area Plans are prepared for residential areas of the City.
   Casanova/Oak Knoll Area Plan                               1985               1991
   Del Monte Grove Area Plan                                  1978
   Highway 68 Area Plan (mainly outside of City               1984
   Limits)
   New Monterey Area Plan                                     1980               1991
   Oak Grove Area Plan                                        1990               1998
Commercial Area Plans are prepared for commercial areas of the City.
   Downtown Area Plan                                         1991
   East Del Monte Avenue Area Plan                            1986
   Lighthouse Area Plan                                       1987
   North Fremont Street Area Plan                             2000
   Wharf Master Plan                                          1986
Specific Plans
   Downtown
   Lighthouse
   North Fremont
Coastal Plans are prepared for segments of the City’s coastal zone.
   Cannery Row Land Use Plan                                  19801              1999
                                                                   2
   Del Monte Beach Land Use Plan                              1983
   Harbor Land Use Plan                                       19863
   Roberts Lake/Laguna Grande Land Use Plan                   19814
   Skyline Land Use Plan                                      19835
Implementing Plans
   Multi-Modal Mobility Plan                                  2012
   Library Master Plan                                        2001
   Parks and Recreation Master Plan                           1986               2000
    1. certified November 1981, under Review 2002 (serves as commercial area plan)
    2. certified with modifications November 1983, under Review 2002 (Serves as
        neighborhood area plan)
    3. certified with modifications November 1983, under Review 2002
    4. certified with modifications March 1982, under Review 2002
    5. certified November 1983, under Review 2002
                                              19

Figure 3, Land Use
                   20
Figure 4, Mixed Use Neighborhoods
                                  21
Circulation Element
Vision
Monterey will be a City where alternative forms of transportation are so attractive that the use of
an automobile is a choice, not a necessity. The transportation system will be safe for all users,
and support the local economy while maintaining the historic character of the City.
Introduction
The primary role of the Circulation Element is to provide policy guidance for planning and
implementing the transportation system needed to serve proposed development as defined in the
land-use element of the General Plan. The transportation system affects the growth patterns,
environment, and quality of life of Monterey’s residents and workers. Much of Monterey’s charm
for both residents and visitors springs from its historic buildings, irregular street pattern, old
plazas, and waterfront views. Trying to solve traffic problems by simply widening roads will
negatively impact the quality of life that residents enjoy. Building expensive parking
improvements to serve peak seasonal demand will lead to facilities being underutilized most of
the year when demand is not at peak. This element’s policies and programs are intended to reduce
the overall duration and frequency of traffic congestion and parking shortages without relying on
expansive infrastructure projects. This requires a multi-modal transportation system that provides a
high multi-modal level of service (MMLOS), defined as one that is easily available, efficient, and
well coordinated. Design and implementation of this multi-modal transportation system will be
expressed through the City’s Multi-Modal Mobility Plan (MMMP). The Circulation Element
relies on alternative modes of transportation to reduce auto use but also identifies long-term
roadway solutions along the principal arterial streets.
The Land Use Element and Circulation Element establish a mutually supporting relationship,
with higher-density land uses directed to areas best served by alternative modes of transportation.
The principles of transit-oriented and pedestrian-oriented developments will be applied to rein-
force the use of public transportation and provide an alternative to traditional suburban develop-
ment. This in turn allows innovative traffic and parking mitigation measures that preserve
Monterey’s natural and historic environment. To make this work, there must be exceptional tran-
sit service, safe bicycle connections, and attractive pedestrian connections throughout the city.
Tourism is a vital component of Monterey’s economy. This Circulation Element plans to serve
the mobility needs of visitors with alternative transportation modes to minimize the traffic impacts
on residents. The City of Monterey has successfully used the Waterfront Area Visitor Express
(WAVE) to mitigate summer traffic and parking impacts generated by Cannery Row develop-
ment. The WAVE is currently a fun, fast, and free transit shuttling visitors between the City’s big-
gest tourist attractions and satellite parking in the downtown area. The Circulation Element
includes “WAVE” service in the “local transit system.” The Circulation Element recommends
expanded local transit system operation throughout the year to better serve residents, especially
in areas planned for higher-density mixed-use development. Residents will benefit directly from
an expanded local transit system service that provides an attractive alternative to driving a car
around town and introduces a reliable commute alternative for those who work in the commercial
business districts. The proposed system also provides an indirect benefit to residents by
minimizing the traffic impacts of visitors and reducing unwelcome cut-through traffic on
                                                    22

residential streets.
The following Circulation Element goals, policies, and programs assist Monterey in meeting its
vision to be a city where people can circulate without cars.
Goals, Policies, and Programs
a.       Transportation and Parking Management Program
The public expectation that roadway capacity can be increased to relieve traffic congestion is no
longer realistic. The Circulation Element envisions auto use as a choice rather than a necessity
during the peak hours of congestion. The policies and programs in this element seek to provide
attractive alternatives to driving a car.
The City should make the most efficient use possible of the land devoted to parking. The city’s
overall parking supply is generally sufficient to meet the demand for all except for a few peak
weeks each year, but employees and customers often attempt to avoid parking fees by using free
parking spaces in adjacent residential neighborhoods.
The Transportation and Parking Management Program is comprised of the Transportation Systems
Management (TSM) program, the MMMP, and parking programs that include implementation
mechanisms and identify dedicated funding sources. It is critical to the city’s economic health that
this new approach not only serves the transportation needs of the entire community but also
supports visitors arriving in cars.
Goal a. Improve transportation and parking systems by managing them more effectively before
investing in costly roadway and parking expansion projects.
Policy a.1. Adopt a Transportation Systems Management (TSM) program to improve the
effectiveness of the transportation system. The TSM will include:
      a traffic-adaptive signal system that interconnects and coordinates traffic signals to
         optimize the flow of traffic along the arterial street network;
      directional and variable message signs (VMS) located at the main entrances to the city
         directing visitor traffic to parking supply and uncongested routes; dynamic signs located
         close to public parking that display available parking spaces using real-time information
         and flexible parking rates developed in the parking programs;
      advance traveler information (ATI) via the Internet (for example, satellite parking,
         preferred routes for special events); and
      performance standards for the Recreation Trail.
Policy a.2. Adopt and update every five years an MMMP that defines a pedestrian and bicycle
network and supports the local transit system. The MMMP shall:
      increase connectivity between neighborhoods and major destinations, such as transit,
         parks, public facilities, schools, commercial service and employment centers, residential
         neighborhoods, and parking structures,
      promote transit service for residents, employees, and visitors;
      identify a long-term funding program for local transit system service and facilities with
         dedicated revenue sources (e.g., citywide traffic impact fees, dedicated sales tax); and
      identify programs that encourage employers to use flexible work schedules, and provide
                                                   23

         preferential treatment to rideshare vehicles (e.g., reserved parking spaces and/or reduced
         parking fees in city lots).
Policy a.3. Adopt parking programs that maximize occupancy of public parking spaces to minimize
parking impacts in adjacent residential neighborhoods. The parking programs shall:
     establish clear guidelines for providing, coordinating, and managing parking in the City
         according to the policies and programs identified in the Parking section of the Circulation
         Element, Area Plans, Specific Plans or Master Plans;
     provide for long-term parking needs;
     identify satellite parking east of Lighthouse Tunnel to serve visitors during peak periods of
         demand and ensure transit system service to those locations;
     optimize parking resources, enhance public safety, support City businesses, and encourage
         increased use of alternative transportation;
     develop on-site parking requirements along local transit system routes that avoid creating
         parking impacts on adjacent residential neighborhoods; and
     establish a parking fee structure for public parking to promote (a) use of alternative modes
         of transportation while discouraging personal vehicle trips; (b) visitor parking for long
         periods of time and use of the local transit system; and (c) employee use during off-peak
         periods without significantly reducing revenues.
b.       Transportation and Land Use
The Land Use and Circulation Elements establish a mutually supportive relationship. Higher-
density land uses along the main transportation corridors provide the ridership needed to support
increased transit service, while alternative mobility strategies provide access to these land uses.
This growth pattern minimizes traffic impacts and supports the local economy. The mobility
needs of the community must be met while preserving natural and historic resources.
Goal b. Apply land-use planning tools and strategies that support the City's circulation goals and
direct growth to areas best served by alternative modes of transportation.
Policy b.1. Use land-use policies to concentrate development within walking distance of the
transit system to reduce the overall demand for travel and minimize the traffic impacts of
development.
Program b.1.1. Encourage master plans that incorporate transit/pedestrian-oriented design
(TOD/POD) standards for areas planned for development of mixed-use neighborhoods.
Policy b.2. Adopt a parking impact fee and traffic impact fee for all new development within the
mixed-use neighborhoods defined in the Land Use Element that will fund alternative modes of
transportation as outlined in the MMMP.
Policy b.3. Encourage mixed-use development to maximize the shared use of on-site parking
spaces.
Policy b.4. Incorporate retail, office, or residential community uses into the design of public
parking structures.
                                                    24

Policy b.5. Do not support non-aviation uses within the Monterey Peninsula Airport District that
create unnecessary traffic impacts in adjacent residential neighborhoods.
c.       Roads
Monterey’s street and highway network provides for the movement of people and goods into, out
of, and through the city. The street network must do more than simply serve automobiles; it must
continue to be the place for connection, commerce, and community. The public expectation that
roadway capacity must be increased to relieve traffic congestion is no longer realistic. Most of the
drivers caught in recurring traffic congestion have made the conscious choice to use an automobile
instead of other alternatives. With the decision to rethink transportation priorities and solutions,
the Circulation Element replaces traditional auto-oriented LOS standards with multi-modal LOS
goals that promote transit, bicycle, and pedestrian-oriented development in areas best served by
these alternative modes of transportation (e.g., Downtown, North Fremont, Cannery Row, and
Lighthouse areas). The following goals, policies, and programs are, therefore, not intended to
eliminate traffic congestion but rather to further the Circulation Element Vision of Monterey as a
multi-modal-oriented City where alternative forms of transportation make the use of an
automobile a choice, not a necessity.
Goal c. Provide a safe, efficient, well-maintained, and environmentally sound roadway system
that supports the “complete streets” concept of equality of choice among all modes of
transportation.
Policy c.1. Monitor the transportation system to determine when transportation management
programs must be implemented.
Policy c.2. Continue to work closely with Army officials to reopen to civilian automobile traffic
at least one route across the Presidio of Monterey.
Policy c.3. Identify and implement street improvements to address high accident rates for
motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists, even if such improvements result in increased traffic
congestion.
Program c.3.1. Reduce unsafe conflict points on all major and minor arterial streets by avoiding
trap lanes and providing left-turn lanes at intersections.
Program c.3.2. Place the highest priority on projects that reduce high accident rates.
Program c.3.3. Develop roadway safety improvement projects that result in self-enforcing
conditions and require a minimum amount of signage in order to reduce driver confusion.
Policy c.4. Create and maintain a roadway system that is safe, unobtrusive, and easy to use for all
modes of transportation.
Program c.4.1. Consider the needs of buses, bicyclists, and pedestrians when planning road
improvements.
Program c.4.2. Update the directional signage program to primary destinations.
                                                    25

Policy c.5. Preserve the city’s character and valuable resources in future roadway improvements
to the transportation system.
Program c.5.1. Respect the character and type of surrounding land uses through the design and
use of streets.
Program c.5.2. Preserve natural and historic resources and maintain scenic views when siting
and developing new roads.
Program c.5.3. Incorporate appropriate landscaped medians, parkways, signs, utilities, street
furniture, sidewalks, and bicycle lanes into transportation projects.
Program c.5.4. Maintain the major entrances to the city as scenic, landscaped corridors.
Program c.5.5. Establish landscaped greenbelt areas along the borders of scenic highways.
Policy c.6. Implement a street classification system (Figure 5 and Table 4) that identifies the
functions of streets according to the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO) street classifications.
Program c.6.1. Limit direct access from private property to State highways.
Program c.6.2. Through-traffic movement along major arterial streets takes precedence over
access to adjacent land uses and traffic access from side streets.
Program c.6.3. Avoid mid-block median openings and direct driveway access for individual
properties along major arterial streets.
Program c.6.4. Design minor arterial streets to carry traffic along the fringe of and around
residential neighborhoods.
Program c.6.5. Discourage and impede through traffic on local streets through residential
neighborhoods.
Program c.6.6. Carry the local transit routes on minor arterial streets.
Program c.6.7. Provide direct access to adjacent land uses and circulation within residential
neighborhoods and commercial districts on collector streets.
Policy c.7. Continue to maintain streets using the City’s Pavement Management System (PMS).
Policy c.8. Minimize traffic impacts in residential neighborhoods by routing truck and through
traffic onto highways and arterial streets, even where such routing is not the shortest distance
between two points.
Program c.8.1. Implement the truck route system (Figure 7 and Table 5) by posting truck route
signage directing truck traffic around residential areas.
                                                  26

Program c.8.2. Implement the visitor route system (Figure 6 and Table 6).
Policy c.9. Implement design and self-enforcing solutions rather than traffic control devices to
slow and discourage through traffic in residential areas.
Program c.9.1. Encourage implementation of the adopted City Traffic Calming Program.
Program c.9.2. Install traffic calming devices (e.g., textured crosswalks and landscaped
medians) according to adopted neighborhood traffic calming plans.
Program c.9.3. Limit the use of speed limit signs and warning signs to alert motorists to
conditions or laws that are not obvious.
Policy c.10. Complete the widening of Del Monte Avenue.
Policy c.11. Improve traffic flow on Del Monte Avenue at Washington Street.
Program c.11.1 Install an attractive landscape median at the intersection of Washington Street
and Del Monte Avenue to restrict pedestrians and vehicles from crossing Del Monte Avenue.
Include operational improvements to Figueroa Street and converting Tyler Street to two-way
between Del Monte Avenue and Franklin Street.
Program c.11.2 Improve the pedestrian connection from Washington Street and Del Monte
Avenue to the Alvarado Mall.
Program c.11.3 To better link the Downtown with the waterfront, construct an attractive
pedestrian bridge between Spanish Plaza and the Wharf parking lot to provide a direct bicycle
connection from Downtown to the Recreation Trail.
Policy c.12. Maintain two-way traffic on Lighthouse Avenue to enhance the pedestrian
experience and business environment and improve traffic safety.
Program c.12.1. Implement a capital improvement project to design, fund and operate a long-
term traffic solution for Lighthouse Avenue.
Policy c.13. Support capacity improvements on State highways because these routes are the
primary entrances into the City.
Program c.13.1. Support Holman Highway 68 widening to four lanes along the entire length.
The design of this project should minimize impacts along the ridgeline and to the forested
environment.
Program c.13.2. Support Monterey-Salinas Highway 68 widening to four lanes of expressway or
a new off-alignment bypass facility.
Program c.13.3. Support Highway 1 widening to six lanes between Highway 218 and the
Fremont Boulevard interchange in Sand City.
                                                27
Program c.13.4. Support State Highway 156 widening to four lanes from Highway 1 to Highway
101.
Policy c.14. Implement operational improvements on major arterial streets so that traffic can
safely enter the city without backing up on Highway 1.
Program c.14.1. Improve the intersection operations of Fremont Street Interchange and Camino
Aguajito to maximize flow along the major arterial and reduce congestion.
Policy c.15. Continue to coordinate with Caltrans and TAMC to identify improvements and
funding for improvements to Highway 1, Highway 68 and other locations within the City deemed
important to the function of the regional transportation network so that the LOS standards for
such facilities are met.
Table 4. Functional Street Classifications
Major Arterial Streets
Street                   Limits
Aguajito Road            Fremont Street to Mark Thomas Drive/Highway 1 NB Exit Ramp
Del Monte Avenue         Lighthouse Avenue/Washington Street to East City Limit
Foam Street              Lighthouse Avenue to Reeside Avenue
Fremont Street           Highway 1/Aguajito Road to Camino El Estero
Lighthouse Avenue        Washington/Del Monte Avenue to Reeside Avenue
Soledad Drive            Munras Avenue to Barnett Segal Drive/Viejo
Minor Arterial Streets
Street                   Limits
Abrego Street            Eldorado Street to Pearl Street/Washington Street
Camino El Estero         Del Monte Avenue to Franklin Street
David Avenue             Wave Street to Devisadero Street (West City Limit)
Del Monte Avenue         Washington Street to Pacific Street
English Avenue           Del Monte Avenue to Highway 1 NB Exit Ramp
Figueroa Street          Franklin Street to Del Monte Avenue
Foam Street              Reeside Avenue to David Avenue
Franklin Street          Pacific Street to Camino El Estero
Fremont Street           Camino El Estero to Munras Avenue
Lighthouse Avenue        Reeside Avenue to Central Avenue (North City Limit)
Munras Avenue            Fremont Street to Alvarado Street
Munras Avenue            Eldorado Street/Abrego Street to Highway 1 SB Ramps
North Fremont Street     Highway 1 to East City Limits
Olmsted Drive            Monterey/Salinas Highway (SR68) to Monterey Peninsula Airport Entrance
Pacific Street           Lighthouse Avenue to Soledad Drive
Soledad Drive            Pacific Street to Munras Avenue
Tyler Street             Lighthouse Avenue to Franklin Street
Washington Street        Pearl Street to Del Monte Avenue
                                                   28
Table 4. Functional Street Classifications Continued
Collector Streets
Street                Limits
Aguajito Road         Highway 1 to Monhollan Road
Airport Road          Monterey Peninsula Airport to North Fremont Street
Alvarado Street       Munras Avenue to Del Monte Avenue
Barnett Segal Drive   Soledad Drive to Iris Canyon Road
Camino Aguajito       Del Monte Avenue to Fremont Street
Camino El Estero      Franklin Street to Fremont Street
Casa Verde Way        Del Monte Avenue to Fairground Road
Del Monte Avenue      Pacific Street to Van Buren Street
Drake Avenue          Wave Street to Lighthouse Avenue
Eldorado Street       Munras Avenue to Pacific Street
English Avenue        Highway 1 NB Exit Ramp to Montecito Avenue
Fairground Road       Airport Road to Garden Road
Franklin Street       Pacific Street to Presidio of Monterey Entrance
Garden Road           Fairground Road to Olmsted Road
Glenwood Circle       Aguajito Road/Via Lavandera to Iris Canyon Road
Hawthorne Street      Reeside Avenue to Line Street/North City Limit
Herrmann Drive        Larkin Street/Madison Street to Via Del Rey
High Street           Presidio of Monterey Entrance to Jefferson Street
Hoffman Street        Wave Street to Lighthouse Avenue
Jefferson Street      Pearl Street to Veterans Drive
Josselyn Canyon Road  Mark Thomas Drive to Monterey/Salinas Highway (SR68)
Madison Street        Larkin Street/Herrmann Drive to Calle Principal
Mar Vista Drive       Monte Vista Drive to Skyline Drive (south intersection)
Mar Vista Drive       Soledad Drive (north intersection) to Skyline Drive
Mark Thomas Drive     Aguajito Road to Garden Road
Martin Street         Pacific Street to Via Gayuba/San Bernabe Drive
Monhollan Road        Within City Limits
Monte Vista Drive     Mar Vista Drive to Soledad Drive
Montecito Avenue      English Avenue to Casa Verde Way
                                               29
Table 4. Functional Street Classifications Continued
Collector Streets (continued)
Street                 Limits
Olmsted Road           Monhollan Road to Monterey/Salinas Highway (SR68)
Pearl Street           Munras Avenue to Camino Aguajito
Pine Street            Line Street (North City Limit) to Pvt. Bolio Road
Polk Street            Calle Principal to Alvarado Street/Munras Avenue
Prescott Avenue        Devisadero Street/West City Limits to Wave Street
Ragsdale Drive         Monterey/Salinas Highway (SR68) to Lower Ragsdale Drive
Reeside Avenue         Cannery Row to Hawthorne Street
Rancho Saucito Road    Upper Ragsdale Drive to South Boundary Road
Skyline Drive          Mar Vista Drive (south intersection) to Veterans Drive
Skyline Forest Drive   Skyline Drive to Holman Highway (SR68)
Sloat Avenue           Mark Thomas Drive to Del Monte Avenue
Soledad Drive          Mar Vista Drive to Pacific Street
South Boundary Road    York Road to West City Limit
Taylor Street          Prescott Avenue to Presidio of Monterey Entrance
Third Street           Camino Aguajito to Sloat Avenue
Van Buren Street       Del Monte Avenue to Madison Street
Veterans Drive         Jefferson Street to Skyline Drive
Via Gayuba             San Bernabe Drive/Martin Street to Mar Vista Drive
Wilson Road            York Road to Lower Ragsdale Drive
York Road              Monterey/Salinas Highway (SR68) to South Boundary Road
Proposed Road          Connect Airport Road to Garden Road
                                                30
Table 5. Truck Routes
Street               Limits                                                Truck Parking
Abrego Street        Eldorado Street to Pearl Street/Washington Street     Yes
Aguajito Road        Fremont Street to Mark Thomas Drive/Highway 1 NB      Yes
                     Exit Ramp
Camino El Estero     Del Monte Avenue to Franklin Street                   Yes
David Avenue         Wave Street to Devisadero Street (West City Limit)    No
Del Monte Avenue Pacific Street to East City Limit                         Yes
English Avenue       Del Monte Avenue to Highway 1 NB Exit Ramp            Yes
Figueroa Street      Franklin Street to Commercial Wharf II                Yes
Foam Street          Lighthouse Avenue to David Avenue                     Yes
Franklin Street      Pacific Street to Camino El Estero                    Yes
Fremont Street       Highway 1/Aguajito Road to Abrego Street              Yes
Hannon Avenue        Del Monte Avenue to Highway 1 SB Entrance Ramp        Yes
Lighthouse Avenue Washington/Del Monte Avenue to North City Limit          Yes
Munras Avenue        Eldorado Street/Abrego Street to Highway 1 SB Ramps   Yes
North Fremont Street Highway 1 to East City Limit                          Yes
Olmsted Drive        Monterey/Salinas Highway (SR68) to Monterey           Yes
                     Peninsula Airport Entrance
Pacific Street       Lighthouse Avenue to Franklin Street                  Yes
Soledad Drive        Munras Avenue to Highway 1 NB Entrance Ramp           No
Tyler Street         Lighthouse Avenue to Franklin Street                  Yes
Washington Street    Pearl Street/Abrego Street to Del Monte Avenue        Yes
Table 6. Visitor Routes
Street                  Limits
Abrego Street           Eldorado Street to Pearl Street/Washington Street
Aguajito Road           Fremont Street to Mark Thomas Drive/Highway 1 NB Exit
                        Ramp
Alvarado Street         Munras Avenue to Del Monte Avenue
Camino El Estero        Fremont Street to Del Monte Avenue
David Avenue            Wave Street to Devisadero Street (West City Limit)
Del Monte Avenue        Pacific Street to East City Limits
Foam Street             Lighthouse Avenue to David Avenue
Fremont Street          Highway 1/Aguajito Road to Munras Avenue
Lighthouse Avenue       Washington/Del Monte Avenue to North City Limit
North Fremont Street    Highway 1 to East City Limits
Munras Avenue           Fremont Street to Alvarado Street
Munras Avenue           Eldorado Street/Abrego Street to Highway 1 SB Ramps
Pacific Street          Lighthouse Avenue to Del Monte Avenue
Soledad Drive           Munras Avenue to Highway 1 NB Entrance Ramp
Washington Street       Pearl Street/Abrego Street to Del Monte Avenue
                                               31
d.       Bicycle & Pedestrian Circulation
Attractive bicycle and pedestrian routes are important throughout the city so that residents and
visitors can use alternative forms of transportation without feeling inconvenienced. With its
manageable scale, good weather, and historic attractions, Monterey is an excellent setting for
bicycling and walking trips by residents and visitors alike, especially near the waterfront.
Walking is clean, easy on the infrastructure, healthy for the individual, and integral to community
livability. People who walk know their neighbors and their neighborhood. A community that is
designed to support walking is livable and attractive. Monterey has a history of creating
wonderful pedestrian paths and bike routes. The city’s Recreation Trail runs the entire length of
Monterey’s waterfront and provides excellent coastal access for bicyclists and pedestrians. The
Recreation Trail forms the backbone of the city’s bicycle and pedestrian network and is enjoyed
by thousands of residents and visitors each day.
Goal d. Promote a pedestrian/bicycle-friendly environment where public spaces, streets, and off-
street paths offer a level of convenience, safety, and attractiveness that encourage and reward the
use of alternative modes of transportation.
Policy d.1. Build on the success of the Recreation Trail to make walking and bicycling through
Monterey safe and enjoyable.
Program d.1.1. Implement and maintain the continuous network of safe and convenient
bikeways specified in the City’s MMMP to provide a viable alternative to making short auto
trips.
Program d.1.2. Install adequate lighting along Class I bike trails.
Program d.1.3. Plan and support a continuous east west Class I/Class II bikeway that connects the
Monterey Peninsula with Salinas.
Program d.1.4. Enhance public awareness of bicycling laws and the proper use of bikeways
through enforcement, bicycle safety programs, and bikeway design.
Policy d.2. Provide ample space on the Recreation Trail to reduce conflicts between different
users, including bicyclists, in-line skaters, non-motorized scooters, pedestrians, and surreys.
Program d.2.1. Maintain a minimum width of 6.7 meters (22 feet) on high-volume segments and
a minimum width of 4.3 meters (14 feet) on other segments.
Program d.2.2. Limit the number of surreys that may be rented for use on the Recreation Trail at
any one time.
Policy d.3. Create an integrated, safe, and convenient pedestrian system connecting city
neighborhoods, schools, recreation areas, commercial areas, and places of interest. Develop,
implement, and maintain a pedestrian chapter of the MMMP to include:
     sidewalks and paths to complete a continuous pedestrian network throughout the
         community,
     sidewalk design standards requiring a minimum width of 6 feet for a pleasant pedestrian
         and wheelchair environment in commercial business districts and a minimum usable,
                                                  32

         unobstructed width of 4 feet clear space for Special Needs Groups; and
        amenities for alternative transportation methods, such as bicycles, scooters, and mopeds
         in the commercial districts and along the Recreational Trail (e.g., special parking places,
         bicycle racks, storage lockers, etc.).
Policy d.4. Establish and maintain pedestrian-friendly environments in commercial areas.
Program d.4.1. Require newly proposed developments in commercial areas to provide sidewalks
or pedestrian connections to surrounding areas, adjacent transit facilities, and/or other travel
facilities during development review.
Program d.4.2. Underground utilities in commercial business districts to maintain adequate
space for pedestrians and to improve the shopping environment.
Program d.4.3. Create an attractive pedestrian environment by providing “buffers” separating
pedestrians and vehicular traffic (e.g., street trees, on-street parking, and public furniture).
Program d.4.4. Improve pedestrian circulation in the downtown area by improving pedestrian
connections between Calle Principal and Washington Streets.
Program d.4.5. Improve pedestrian circulation between Cannery Row and Lighthouse Avenue.
Policy d.5. Design intersections to improve pedestrian safety, minimize pedestrian crossing
distances, and reduce signal time needed to serve non-vehicle movements.
Program d.5.1. Install curb extensions to minimize the time needed for pedestrians to cross busy
streets.
Program d.5.2. Provide sidewalk curb ramps in all major activity areas and commercial centers
in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Policy d.6. Develop pedestrian and bicycle paths in hillside and other open-space areas as part of
the regional trail system and/or as links between major greenbelt and recreation areas.
Policy d.7. Cooperate with other Peninsula cities to complete the Monterey Bay Coastal Trail as
planned, including connections to parks and green belts.
Policy d.8. Maintain designated bicycle routes as attractive and safe transportation facilities that
provide a viable alternative to auto travel into and throughout the city.
Program d.8.1. Encourage bike lanes, bike racks, bike lockers, employee shower and changing
facilities in new developments.
Policy d.9. Maintain the Recreation Trail as an attractive and safe recreation facility along the
waterfront area that also provides a critical link for non-auto travel throughout the city.
Program d.9.1. Identify in the MMMP a Class I or Class II bike route connecting each
neighborhood to the Recreation Trail.
                                                   33

Program d.9.2. Include a Class II bike route connecting Fremont Street to the Recreation Trail
along the Camino Aguajito alignment in the City’s MMMP.
Policy d.10. Support efforts by regional and state agencies to establish bike and pedestrian paths
along Monterey/Salinas Highway (Highway 68).
e. Parking
Parking conditions and policies influence residents’ and visitors’ perceptions of commercial areas
and visitor attractions, which can have a great impact on the local economy. Providing too much
parking in the Downtown, Wharf, and Cannery Row areas results in an underutilization of valuable
land. In planning for parking needs, it is important to maintain an attractive, pedestrian-oriented
environment while accommodating the space needs of the automobile. By doing so, the City can
plan for future parking demand while supporting Monterey’s businesses and improving the quality
of life here. On-site parking requirements are a major issue in areas where the City provides public
parking. This means that an increasing number of drivers will not be able to park at a convenient
location near their destination. In support of economic goals, the City will endeavor to supply
appropriate parking to meet the diverse needs of the business community. Shared parking, a system
where different users with staggered peak parking requirements can share the same parking facility,
is an efficient strategy for optimizing Monterey’s existing parking supply.
Goal e. Optimize the use of Monterey’s existing parking supply to minimize the amount of land
dedicated to parking needs, especially in commercial business districts and along the scenic
coastline.
Policy e.1. Explore opportunities to provide additional parking to serve employees in the south
Downtown.
Policy e.2. Study the use of assessment districts to fund and develop new parking solutions
where shortages exist (for example, the Cass / Eldorado Area).
Policy e.3. Establish appropriate time limits for parking in commercial business districts to support
local businesses and encourage use of the local shuttle.
Policy e.4. Survey land uses, public parking supplies, and available alternative modes of
transportation prior to considering changes in parking requirements.
Policy e.5. Design attractive pedestrian ways through parking lots to enable pedestrians to reach
their destinations in a safe manner.
Policy e.6. Establish locations for visitor recreational vehicle parking that are served by the local
shuttle.
Policy e.7. Major special events with limited parking should provide direct and affordable transit
service to satellite parking locations.
Policy e.8. Identify affordable employee parking locations in the Downtown and Cannery Row
areas to minimize the impacts on residential neighborhoods.
                                                    34

Program e.8.1. Identify and develop peripheral and satellite parking facilities for employees.
Work with businesses to fund the construction and maintenance of parking facilities, and to
develop shuttle service where necessary.
Program e.8.2. Work with employers in business districts to offer incentives for employees to
take transit, ride bikes, or walk to work or to park in designated areas.
Policy e.9. Improve utilization of existing parking and create new parking opportunities through
partnerships and cooperation in order to meet parking needs with fewer total spaces.
Program e.9.1. Rely on shared parking to minimize the number of parking spaces left
unoccupied during peak demand.
Program e.9.2. Work with businesses and churches to make on-site parking spaces available for
the general public during hours those parking spaces would otherwise be unused.
Program e.9.3. Create joint-use agreements to share parking at existing facilities for the use of new
developments at locations with complementary parking patterns (e.g., residential and office).
Program e.9.4. Dedicate van/carpool parking spaces in public parking lots based on demand.
Program e.9.5. Dedicate motorcycle parking spaces in public parking lots and on-street where
feasible.
Program e.9.6. If existing parking lots are developed with new construction, investigate
opportunities to replace the lost parking spaces.
Program e.9.7. Investigate partnerships with public and private entities for multi-purpose parking
facilities.
Policy e.10. Reduce employee and student parking spillover into neighborhoods using residential
permit parking.
Program e.10.1. Establish or expand residential permit parking areas where parking occupancy
levels exceed 70% of capacity and a majority of residences have signed a petition supporting
proposed permit.
Program e.10.2. Periodically review neighborhoods with residential permit parking programs to
maximize the effectiveness of the program.
f.       Transit
Transit serves special transportation needs, providing a means for all residents to actively
participate in the community. Senior citizens, disabled individuals, and people without a personal
vehicle must rely on transit as a vital link to jobs, shopping, education, and health care. As
Monterey’s population continues to age, demand is likely to grow for special transportation
services providing mobility for those with disabilities who are not able to own a personal
automobile or use regular transit services. Monterey-Salinas Transit (MST) is the principal public
                                                   35

transit operator serving Monterey. MST is a joint powers agency with a board of directors that
includes a representative from the City of Monterey. Thirteen of MST’s 27 fixed bus routes
operate in Monterey, serving a large part of the city. The hub of MST’s transit service in
Monterey is Simoneau Plaza, the downtown transfer center for all routes serving the Monterey
Peninsula. Senior and disabled passengers can use MST fixed-route and Direct Area Response
Transit (DART), a demand-responsive service providing flexible service between low-density
areas and MST’s trunk lines and transit centers. MST also operates the RIDES program, which
serves individuals with disabilities who are not able to use regular transit service.
The City of Monterey supports improvements to the transit system throughout the city.
Convenient transit service strengthens the fabric of our community, regardless of the number of
riders on a particular bus line. The City acknowledges those indirect benefits to the community
through its traffic impact fee program. Overly expensive transit fares (in comparison with the
indirect taxes imposed on automobile use) discourage transit use. It is no more reasonable to
expect transit to “pay its way” with the farebox than it is to expect automobile drivers to bear the
complete costs of using the roadway and highway systems. The following goals, policies, and
programs are intended to dramatically increase the convenience of public transit throughout the
city.
Goal f. Provide an attractive and convenient transit service for Monterey citizens, especially
those in the community who can not or choose not to own a private automobile.
Policy f.1. Work with MST to operate transit on the city’s major and minor arterial streets,
maintaining an average headway that does not exceed 20 minutes during the a.m. and p.m. peak
commute hours.
Policy f.2. Work with MST to keep fares low enough to obtain consistently high patronage and
encourage more off-peak use.
Policy f.3. Use MST’s demand-responsive DART service to provide service to low-density areas.
Expand DART service within the city where flexible routing is justified.
Policy f.4. Identify funding for fare subsidies or transit pass programs (e.g., employer fee program
to fund transit in lieu of providing on-site parking spaces, transit pass program for schools and large
employers, senior and youth discount passes, youth ridership programs to increase weekend and
nighttime ridership).
Policy f.5. Give transit vehicles priority over other vehicles.
Policy f.6. Work with MST and area jurisdictions to improve transit links between residential
areas and areas of major city employment.
Policy f.7. Improve and develop safe, convenient, and protected transit facilities that are
compatible in design with the surrounding area.
Program f.7.1. Require developers to provide transit amenities in accordance with the MST
Development Review Guidebook.
                                                    36

Program f.7.2. Work with MST to provide and maintain attractive amenities, such as benches,
shelters, lighting, news racks, decorative trashcans, and bicycle parking at transit stops.
Program f.7.3. Work with MST to continue to provide clear and easy-to-understand route
information, maps, and other computerized transit information systems at transit stops and on the
City’s Web site.
Policy f.8. Continue to provide cost-efficient, reliable transportation services to individuals with
disabilities for whom the use of fixed-route public transit is difficult.
Program f.8.1. Work with MST to maintain the RIDES paratransit service.
Program f.8.2. Provide information about the RIDES program on the City’s Web site and in
appropriate city publications.
g. Economic Considerations
Efficient movement of people and goods is critical to the economic health of Monterey. The
transportation system provides invaluable services to the business community by allowing cus-
tomers access to commercial areas and allowing businesses to deliver and receive goods. A key
to economic vitality is maintaining and enhancing the connection between businesses and their
customers, acknowledging that the pedestrian environment around a business is often more
important than the traffic flow in front of a store. By increasing the use of alternative modes of
transportation and reducing reliance on the automobile for commuting to work, business areas
will be able to improve access and the availability of parking for customers, thereby enhancing
economic vitality. Further development of the transportation system should improve access and
the mobility of people throughout the community and strengthen this relationship.
Goal g. Provide a transportation system that supports the local economy.
Policy g.1. Provide pedestrian-friendly environments in the commercial business districts to
extend the time spent in the commercial business districts and enhance the overall shopping
experience.
Policy g.2. Prioritize achieving a high level of multi-modal LOS in commercial business districts
and do not allow auto-oriented LOS standards negatively affect the shopping experience in
commercial business districts.
Policy g.3. Direct visitor traffic entering the City on Fremont to routes through Downtown during
off-peak times.
Policy g.3.a Direct traffic leaving Cannery Row to use David Avenue and Holman Highway 68
to go to Highway 1.
Policy g.4. Improve pedestrian experience in commercial areas.
Program g.4.1 Implement attractive streetscape designs and improve pedestrian and bicycle
connections to the Recreation Trail.
                                                   37

Program g.4.2 Provide visual cues to draw pedestrians and bicyclists toward commercial areas
along pedestrian and bicycle paths.
Policy g.5. Utilize the local transit system to serve the commercial business districts, providing
visitors the best opportunity to enjoy local businesses.
Policy g.6. Improve the pedestrian environment along North Fremont Street.
Program g.6.1 Prepare and implement a North Fremont Streetscape Study.
Policy g.7. Improve the connection between Downtown and the Waterfront through the Alvarado
Mall.
Program g.7.1. Work with the business community to provide a visual extension of Alvarado
Street.
Program g.7.2. Make Alvarado Mall and Portola Plaza visually interesting places with activities
that attract tourists and local residents.
h. Attractive Visitor Transportation Program (WAVE)
A key element of a tourist-friendly environment is avoiding the need for visitors to plan their
transportation so they can simply go places and enjoy their visit. The limited parking supply near
Cannery Row and roadway capacity through Lighthouse Tunnel limits the number of visitors that
can drive and park near the region’s biggest tourist attraction, the Monterey Bay Aquarium. As
part of the coordinated transportation system, information devices will direct visitors to satellite
parking sites east of the Lighthouse Tunnel served by the local transit system and connecting
with the city’s primary tourist destinations. Residents are directly affected by traffic congestion
caused by visitors making trips in their cars. Traffic congestion on the primary tourist routes
indirectly affects residents when locals start using alternative routes through residential
neighborhoods, especially during the summer tourist season. Visitors are more likely to use
alternative modes of transportation than residents are. The short trips made by visitors are ideally
suited for transit, especially if the trip enhances their experience of Monterey. This Circulation
Element therefore targets programs directed at getting visitors out of their cars to minimize these
traffic impacts on residents.
Goal h. Make public transportation in the City of Monterey an attractive alternative for tourists.
Policy h.1. Provide an exceptional local shuttle, scenic bicycle routes, and attractive pedestrian
paths.
Program h.1.1. Use unique “niche” vehicles in the local transit system to differentiate this
program from typical public transit service.
Program h.1.2. Create an attractive pedestrian environment on Del Monte Avenue near the
downtown parking structures to encourage visitors to walk to the downtown and Fisherman’s
Wharf.
Program h.1.3. Plan interactive, “smart” kiosks at the major parking structure exits to provide
                                                    38

real-time shuttle information (i.e., schedule, vehicle tracking information, attractions near stops)
using innovative technology to maximize the user-friendly benefits of the local transit system.
Program h.1.4. Add public art along popular tourist routes to enhance the pedestrian experience,
accentuate culture, and maintain the historic character of Monterey.
Program h.1.5. Provide comfortable seating with interpretive signs at adequate spacing along the
Recreation Trail and other popular pedestrian routes.
Program h.1.6. Expand and enhance the “Path of History,” including new paths along Cannery
Row and Lower Presidio.
Policy h.2. Adopt a taxi operations plan to ensure fair pricing, qualified drivers, clean and
efficient service, especially to tourist destinations, hotels and the airport.
i.       Rail and Air Transportation
The city’s primary gateways are congested highways. Traffic on Highways 1, 68, and 156 currently
exceeds capacity. The development of alternative transportation connections to Monterey, coordinated
with transit and other alternative transportation improvements within the city, can benefit Monterey by
limiting the hours of congestion, improving air quality, and improving safety for motorists and
pedestrians.
Direct rail service serving the San Francisco Bay Area can provide a vital connection to Monterey visitor
attractions, benefiting residents as well. The Transportation Agency for Monterey County (TAMC)
is currently working to fund a new direct rail service to the Monterey Peninsula. No direct inter-
city rail service is currently provided to the Monterey Peninsula. Amtrak operates a bus service
between Monterey and the Diridon Rail Station in San Jose, providing connections to CalTrain
and Amtrak’s Capitol Corridor passenger rail service. Amtrak service is also offered from
Salinas with MST bus service to the Monterey Peninsula.
Air transportation is an important regional mode of travel, connecting travelers to national as
well as international destinations. Linking passenger and commercial air service with a multi-
modal ground transportation system throughout the city can serve the mobility needs of residents
and visitors, while reducing automobile trips. The City must actively work through the Airport
District liaison, however, to ensure air transportation service does not adversely impact
residential neighborhoods. Commercial and general aviation air service is currently provided to the
Monterey Peninsula at the Monterey Peninsula Airport. National airlines and smaller feeder airlines serve
the airport. Service is primarily provided to San Francisco and Los Angeles.
Goal i. Support the movement of people, goods, and services by other transportation facilities,
such as air, rail, and water.
Policy i.1. Work with the Airport District and the hospitality industry to provide a direct and
affordable transit service between the Monterey Peninsula Airport and the local shuttle service
area to reduce congestion.
Policy i.2. Protect the potential for future rail transportation by supporting the efforts of the
Transportation Agency for Monterey County (TAMC) to provide additional passenger rail service to the
                                                        39

urban centers.
Program i.2.1. Plan to expand the local shuttle service area to nearby proposed rail stations.
Program i.2.2. Require grade separation crossings at all locations where rail service crosses a Class I
bike route or the Recreation Trail.
Program i.2.3. Require grade separation crossings at all locations where rail service intersects with a
major or minor arterial street.
Policy i.4. Provide safe crossings for bicycle and pedestrian trail and vehicle crossings along the
rail line.
Program i.4.1. Restrict at-grade railroad crossings of proposed rail service within the City.
Policy i.5. Maintain the ability to restore rail service to the Monterey Peninsula.
Program i.5.1. Consider the compatibility of proposed land use developments with the
establishment of future rail service into the City of Monterey.
Policy i.6. Balance the community’s need for air transportation service with community safety
and environmental needs.
Policy i.7. Direct vehicular traffic generated by airport land uses to arterial streets and highways
and away from residential neighborhoods.
Program i.7.1. Work with the Airport District to implement alternatives to the use of Airport
Road as an access road for non-aviation uses on the Airport grounds.
Policy i.8. Provide affordable shuttle service to the Monterey Peninsula Airport.
Policy i.9. Prohibit land-use activities that interfere with the safe operation of aircraft using the
airport.
Policy i.10. Support improvements and operational changes at the airport that promote safety and
noise reduction.
Program i.10.1. Actively work with the Airport District to maintain air service curfews.
Policy i.11. Plan for a multimodal facility in central Monterey that supports and encourages the
use of airport shuttles, regional transit, and local transit.
j.       Monitoring
Monitoring allows the City to determine how much progress is being made toward achieving the
Circulation Element Vision Statement. The Circulation Element is a long-range guide for the
maintenance and improvement of the transportation system. Implementation of Circulation
Element goals must be accomplished through a three-phased process of (1) establishing defined
benchmarks or objectives, (2) monitoring and measuring policy impacts and results, and (3)
                                                    40

developing response strategies should the City begin moving in a direction away from the Vision
Statement. Continual collection of data analyzing how the different pieces of the transportation system
are performing is critical to ensuring its efficient operation. The monitoring program must include
strong language, identify funding sources when possible, and provide time lines for each
program. Each policy and goal should have an associated program that assures corrective actions
are taken if the City determines that it is not moving toward its goals.
Automobile LOS for a roadway facility generally falls into six letter-grade levels, with “A”
describing smooth traffic flow and “F” describing the lowest (gridlock). LOS F occurs when too
many users want to use the facility at the same time. When looking at other modes of
transportation (e.g., bicycle, transit, and pedestrian), facilities must be planned comprehensively
so that adequate connections are available between likely origins and destinations. The MMMP
will reflect a circulation network for bicycles, pedestrians, and transit that provide these
connections. A lower LOS standard will be tolerated in mixed-use neighborhoods where the
automobile circulation system is saturated. Monitoring will therefore focus on progress made
towards implementation of the multi-modal network outlined in the MMMP.
Goal j. Measure the effectiveness of the transportation system and its ability to safely and
effectively move people and goods, not simply vehicles.
Policy j.1. Establish multi-modal LOS standards and automobile LOS standard for defined
neighborhoods that work together to measure the effectiveness of the transportation system, and
establish a mechanism for funding the implementation of the transportation system that fulfills
the vision of the Circulation Element.
Program j.1.1. Adopt and update every five years, a MMMP that will:
     define LOS standards for each neighborhood;
     provide a muiti-modal network that connects identified origins and destinations, provides
        safe links between transportation modes, and locates end of use facilities at popular
        destinations;
     define multi-modal corridors;
     define quantifiable objectives;
     monitor and measure policy impacts and results, and
     develop response strategies should the City begin moving in a direction away from the
        General Plan goals.
Program j.1.2. Establish LOS D as an acceptable automobile LOS standard for roadway
segments that are not within a multi-modal corridor.
Program j.1.3. Establish LOS E and LOS F as an acceptable automobile LOS on roadway
segments within a completed multi-modal corridor as defined in the MMMP.
Policy j.2. Require an analysis of the effects on the transportation network for projects that may
cause significant traffic impacts, as defined by the established multi-modal LOS and automobile
LOS and identify appropriate mitigation measures.
Program j.2.1. Define the traffic impact study area to be analyzed as all roadway segments
where project traffic is expected to increase the existing traffic by two percent (2%) or more.
                                                       41

Program j.2.2. Define a project’s traffic impact as significant if the project is expected to reduce
a roadway segment to an unacceptable level or further degrade an already unacceptable LOS
under cumulative traffic conditions during typical (i.e., non-summer) weekday traffic conditions.
Program j.2.3. Require projects to build or fund a pro-rata share toward improvements necessary
to mitigate significant traffic impacts, as defined by the MMMP or the General Plan EIR.
Program j.2.4. Adopt a traffic impact fee ordinance used to define the pro-rata share of a
development’s impact on the transportation system. The traffic impact fee will be used towards
roadway improvements identified in the General Plan EIR, bicycle infrastructure and pedestrian
infrastructure improvements as defined in the MMMP, and transit improvements.
Policy j.3. Monitor accident rates and trends to identify locations for possible transportation
safety improvements.
                                                  42

Figure 5, Showing Street Classifications
                                      43
Figure 6, Showing Visitor Routes
                                 44
Figure 7, Showing Truck Routes
                               45
Housing Element
Action Program
Introduction
The Housing Element consists of goals, policies, and programs to meet Monterey’s unique and
specific position in the regional housing market. Monterey is mostly built out and is the central
city of the Monterey Peninsula, so most new housing is higher-density and on previously
developed sites. Since 2005, the City has directed new housing development towards its mixed-
use neighborhoods, which are close to transit and services and minimize the need of an
automobile. The Housing Element has goals, policies, and programs to provide opportunities for
new housing development, particularly in the mixed-use neighborhoods in the Downtown,
Lighthouse/Foam, and North Fremont areas.
The State of California requires that each unit of local government provide adequate sites to meet
its portion of the statewide housing need. The State assigns a “fair share” number of housing
units to the regional government (Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments (AMBAG))
and the total is distributed among the various cities. The primary impediment to meeting
Monterey’s share of statewide housing goals is a virtual water moratorium imposed by another
state agency. Some properties have water credits that can be reused for new residential or
commercial development. While developing specific plans for each of the future growth areas in
the mixed-use district, the City created a database of underutilized properties and water credits
associated with each property. These opportunity sites are shown in the specific plans. Some
properties could be combined under a single ownership and redeveloped to provide new housing
units by sharing the water credits. However, the City cannot anticipate meeting these Housing
Element goals without a new water supply. To mitigate this problem, the City has incorporated
programs to address water capacity, including giving preference in the City’s water allocation
process to projects meeting fair-share housing goals and to affordable housing projects and
supporting the efforts of the California American Water Company in providing a new water
source to the City.
The City of Monterey has for many years supported a wide variety of housing programs: loans,
grants, and write-down of land costs for the Monterey Housing Authority and nonprofit agencies
to support construction of low-cost housing; inclusionary zoning to provide low- and moderate-
cost housing; and zoning for more apartments than will be built in the General Plan time frame.
The City has done so to provide the opportunity for the private market to construct low- and
moderate-cost housing. In addition, the City assists social service agencies and nonprofit housing
providers in a wide range of housing services and construction needs.
Unless otherwise specified, the programs in the Housing Element will be administered by the
Planning, Office and funded by the General Fund, and Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG).
                                                 46

Goals, Policies, and Programs
a.       Home Ownership
The percentage of owner-occupied housing in Monterey declined from 52 percent in 1950 to an
estimated 36 percent in 1990. Ownership increased to 39 percent in 2010, but the preponderance
of new housing will be cluster or apartment units, with the potential to reduce owner occupancy
to less than 25 percent at maximum General Plan buildout. By comparison, owner occupancy
statewide has remained almost constant, at 54 percent in 1950 and 56 percent in 2010.
The decreasing percentage of ownership housing results from two factors. First, the City is
essentially built out, with a limited number of large vacant sites available for new housing
construction. Second, the City’s future growth areas are zoned for mixed-use development,
which lends to multi-family/rental housing development.
The City has also adopted policies to encourage preservation of existing single-family housing in
apartment-zoned areas in order to preserve ownership opportunities where the zoning would
generally encourage removal of a potential owner-occupied unit.
Goal a. Promote construction of new ownership housing units and conservation of existing
ownership housing units to maintain and/or improve the existing balance between owner and
rental units in Monterey.
    Policy a.1. Encourage the production of new ownership housing units.
       Program a.1.1. The City will continue to update its list of larger developable sites and
       contact property owners to determine opportunities for housing construction. There will be
       an emphasis on constructing housing types that provide mixed-income and large family
       ownership opportunities.
       Implementation Timeline: Annually, 2015-2023
       Responsible Party: Planning Office, Housing Office
       Funding: General Fund
       Program a.1.2. Maintain existing single-family zoning throughout the City. Rezoning of
       single-family land to other uses should not occur without findings that the proposed use is
       more beneficial to the City than retaining single-family ownership opportunities.
       Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
       Responsible Party: Planning Office
       Funding: General Fund
       Program a.1.3. Continue to create and adopt development standards for mixed use areas
       that have development potential for new housing units.
       Implementation Timeline: Adopt Lighthouse Specific Plan by December 2016.
       Responsible Party: Planning Office
                                                  47

  Funding: General Fund
  Program a.1.4. Continue to work with the major employers in Monterey and the region to
  provide targeted homeownership opportunities for employees (see Programs h.1.1 and
  h.1.2).
  Implementation Timeline: Meet regularly with established working group, 2015-2023
  Responsible Party: Planning Office, Housing Office
  Funding: General Fund
  Program a.1.5. Monitor and evaluate the use permit process for new multi-family projects
  in the R-3 and Commercial districts to determine whether the process qualifies as a
  constraint to residential development. Identify strategies to be implemented by the City to
  remove any constraint identified by the evaluation. Provide a summary of the evaluation
  (and strategies, if identified) to HCD as a part of the City’s annual reporting requirement.
  Implementation Timeline: Annually, 2015-2023
  Responsible Party: Planning Office, Housing Office
  Funding: General Fund
Policy a.2. Encourage the conservation of existing homeownership opportunities, including
moderate-income units.
  Program a.2.1. The City will continue allowing additional floor area for single-family
  homes and eliminate additional parking requirements with building upgrades for historic
  properties.
  Implementation Timeline: Ongoing.
  Responsible Party: Planning Office
  Funding: General Fund
 Program a.2.2. Begin process for determining whether City can reduce the minimum lot
 size for single-family subdivisions on existing R-3 lots to increase the stock of affordable
 housing, while retaining the existing house where one is present and retaining
 neighborhood character. The program may use condominium, townhouse, or detached form
 of housing units and shall utilize design and construction methods to maximize privacy and
 minimize sound transmission.
  Implementation Timeline: Consider reducing the minimum lot size and amending the
  Zoning Code by June 2016.
  Responsible Party: Planning Office, Housing Office
  Funding: General Fund
  Program a.2.3. Evaluate the Down Payment Assistance Program to determine if it will be
  practical to assign the City’s purchase option to qualified buyers. Investigate opportunities
  to increase Down Payment Assistance loans for equity sharing for detached single-family
  houses.
  Implementation Timeline: Annually 2015-2023,
                                              48

      Responsible Party: Housing Office
      Funding: Redevelopment Housing Set-aside funds, CDBG funds.
b.      Rental Housing
Most new market-rate and lower-cost housing in Monterey is rental housing.
Most of the multi-family housing potential is in areas that are currently developed, either in R-3-
zoned areas that were formerly single-family neighborhoods or in mixed-use areas that have
existing single-family houses or commercial buildings. Because most of these sites require
removal of an existing building before new housing can be constructed, land costs are high and
growth of rental units has been gradual over the past eight years.
Mixed-use developments (apartments over commercial use) or apartment projects in commercial
areas typically provide the opportunity to build apartments in the affordable price ranges and
have the potential of serving extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income renters. The
City has developed specific plans for these areas that are form-based and removed many of the
impediments to mixed-use and apartment developments.
The City currently prohibits second units in the Single-Family Residential Zoning District
(R-1). This prohibition is based on findings that the historic character of the single-family
neighborhoods could be threatened by a proliferation of second units. The Multi-Family
Residential Zoning District (R-3) allows adaptive reuse of existing single-family residences
to create additional affordable units within existing structures. Detached second units are
also allowed on sites zoned R-3. Because the City has adequate capacity in the R-3 and
Specific Plan areas for additional units, there has not been a need to allow second units in
the R-1 districts to meet the City’s allocation for the Housing Element.
Goal b. Broaden the choice of rental housing types available to residents of Monterey in all price
ranges and for all family sizes, while maintaining neighborhood compatibility and, where
possible, using second units to encourage owner opportunities.
    Policy b.1. Provide the opportunity to construct new multi-family housing units in pockets of
    opportunity.
      Program b.1.1. Maintain multi-family densities at 30 units per acre in the R-3 zone,
      specific plan areas, and in commercial zones with the potential for density bonuses as
      outlined in Program i.1.2.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2014-2023
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: General Fund
      Program b.1.2. Assist the Housing Authority, nonprofit agencies, and private developers
      in providing extremely low-, low-, and very low-income housing as opportunities become
      available, using the current Housing Element as a basis for action.
                                                  49

     The City will continue to provide assistance by streamlining the permit process. A staff
     member is assigned to coordinate City reviews. The City will also coordinate with the
     developer to help make the project financially feasible, such as by providing low-interest
     loans and other incentives when affordable housing goals are met.
     Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
     Responsible Party: Housing Office, Housing Authority Funding: Redevelopment Housing
     Set-aside funds and HOME funds
     Program b.1.3. Evaluate the existing allocation of Housing Choice Vouchers and
     encourage and support the Housing Authority and private market landlords to expand
     utilization of the Housing Choice Voucher program.
        Encourage the Housing Authority to grant 20 percent rent exceptions for the
           Monterey area to provide a greater housing choice for very low-income renters.
        Encourage the Housing Authority to market the Housing Choice Voucher programs to
           Monterey landlords and post applications on the City’s website.
        Encourage the Housing Authority to recruit more Monterey families assisted by
           Housing Choice Voucher into the Family Self-Sufficiency Program.
     Implementation Timeline: Annually, 2014-2023
     Responsible Party: Housing and Property Management Office, Housing Authority
     Funding: Housing Choice Vouchers and HOME funds
     Program b.1.4. The City will encourage affordable rents by providing brochures that
     outline the City’s Voluntary Rental Guidelines, but discourage citywide rent control.
     Implementation Timeline: By June 2016
     Responsible Party: Housing Office
     Funding: Redevelopment Housing Set-Aside funds, CDBG
     Program b.1.5. Continue to require a minimum 5,000-square-foot lot size for new
     apartment developments.
     Implementation Timeline: 2014-2023, as new projects are processed through the Planning
     Office
     Responsible Party: Planning Office
     Funding: General Fund
c.     Opportunities for Families with Children
The number of children under the age of 20 decreased substantially between 2000 and 2010.
Apartment densities and floor area ratios generally result in small apartments without enough
room or play areas for families with children. The number of single-family houses can be
expected to decrease over time. As a result of these factors, family housing opportunities can be
expected to diminish unless specific action is taken to provide units with adequate size and
amenities for families with children. The main opportunities for family housing come from
conserving existing single-family units (see Section d, Rehabilitation and Conservation Issues),
                                                 50

providing housing types suitable for family housing, and providing some larger units in multi-
family housing developments or condominiums.
Rental housing is the primary source of housing for lower- and moderate-income families. New
apartment development should provide an adequate number of bedrooms and play areas for
families. Condominium and ownership townhouse development can provide family opportunities
if units and open space take family needs into account.
Goal c. Provide family housing opportunities on larger sites and for all income levels.
     Policy c.1. Encourage units suitable for family occupancy.
        Program c.1.1. Encourage larger units with two or more bedrooms and open spaces with
        sufficient area for children’s play in R-3 developments. The City will conduct a
        comprehensive review and revision of the current parking requirement to determine the
        feasibility of requiring at least one-third of any housing development over three units to
        provide two or more bedrooms. All housing projects will continue to be required to provide
        open space to give residents an opportunity for outside activities.
        Implementation Timeline: Conduct a comprehensive review and revisions of current
        parking requirements by June 2016.
        Responsible Party: Planning Office
        Funding: Redevelopment Agency, bonds, tax credits
        Program c.1.2. Encourage the Housing Authority and for-profit and nonprofit developers
        to build affordable housing for families with children whenever possible. The City will
        discuss family housing needs with potential developers and the financial and processing
        incentives that are available.
        Implementation Timeline: 2015-2023, as projects are approved through the Planning
        Department
        Responsible Party: Planning Office, Housing Office and Housing Authority
        Funding: General Fund
d.        Rehabilitation and Conservation Issues
It is estimated that as of 2008 the City had 880 units with serious deterioration, 2,140 units that
were clearly declining, and 4,830 units had deferred maintenance. There are two primary
contributors to deterioration. First is the age of housing stock. An estimated 46 percent of the
City’s housing is over 45 years old. Second is the number of long-term homeowners who have
difficulty affording maintenance and repairs. These owners often live in the oldest housing units
in the City. Monterey also has 24 affordable housing units which could be converted to market-
rate rents in the next ten years.
The City’s rental unit stock is further reduced when homeowners chose to pursue short-term
vacation rentals (less 30-days) instead of providing permanent housing.
                                                     51

Goal d. Encourage maintenance and rehabilitation of the entire housing stock. The City will
continue to advertise rehabilitation programs on the City’s website and provide brochures at the
City library and housing office.
    Policy d.1. Provide rehabilitation assistance to low-income households and encourage
    privately funded rehabilitation wherever deterioration is present.
       Program d.1.1. Provide emergency major repair assistance to low- and moderate-income
       households.
       Implementation Timeline: 2015-2023, as funding is available
       Responsible Party: Housing Offices
       Funding: CDBG funds
       Quantified Objective: Provide assistance to 5 households per year
       Program d.1.2. Provide rehabilitation assistance in the form of:
                Major rehabilitation loans;
                Emergency repair loans; and
                Home safety repair grants.
       Implementation Timeline: 2015-2023, as funding is available
       Responsible Party: Housing Office
       Funding: CDBG funds and any other funding sources that become available during the
       planning period
       Quantified Objective: Provide assistance to 5 households per year
       Program d.1.3. Continue the “Mr. Fixit” program to provide emergency repair assistance,
       weatherization and energy retrofits to an average of 10 units per year.
       Implementation Timeline: 2015-2023, as funding is available
       Responsible Party: Housing Office
       Funding: CDBG funds and any other funding sources that become available during the
       planning period
       Quantified Objective: Provide assistance to 5 households per year
    Policy d.2. Conserve existing low- and moderate-cost housing units.
       Program d.2.1. Investigate the option of purchasing inclusionary housing units or other
       units to replace them. Investigate programs, nonprofit sponsors, and funding sources to
       retain lower-income housing units at risk of conversion to market-rate rents.
       Implementation Timeline: Check on an annual basis whether projects are at risk of
       conversion to market rate
       Responsible Party: Housing Office
       Funding: Redevelopment Set-aside funds and other funding sources identified on a case-
       by-case basis
                                                  52

Program d.2.2. Maintain the affordability of low- and moderate- income rental units under
the Inclusionary Housing Program through the use of deed restrictions and continue to
implement the Purchase and Resale Program for owner-occupied inclusionary units.
Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
Responsible Party: Housing Office
Funding: Redevelopment Set-aside funds, CDBG
Program d.2.3. Continue to monitor at-risk units and gauge interest in renewal through
individual contacts and surveys. Meet with property owners to strategize what package of
incentives would retain the affordable units.
Implementation Timeline: Contact property owners annually to determine conversion
plans.
Responsible Party: Housing Office
Funding: General Fund
Program d.2.4. The City will continue to explore with local non-profits and other
affordable housing developers strategies and financing alternatives that can be employed to
produce new affordable extremely low, low and very low-income housing in the
community.
Implementation Timeline: Meet with local nonprofits annually.
Responsible Party: Housing Office
Funding: Redevelopment Set-aside funds, CDBG
Program d.2.5. Prioritize funding or acquire funding to assist nonprofits to purchase units
that may be lost from the Inclusionary Program or to acquire replacement units.
Implementation Timeline: Meet with local nonprofits annually.
Responsible Party: Housing Office
Funding: General Fund, apply for funding on a case-by-case basis
Program d.2.6. Analyze the feasibility of utilizing a City-sponsored rental rehabilitation
program to encourage at-risk units to be retained.
Implementation Timeline: Determine feasibility by June 2010.
Responsible Party: Housing Office
Funding: Identify a funding source based on feasibility of establishing a program.
Program d.2.7. Implement a program to reduce, waive, or subsidize local fees associated
with preservation or replacement of at-risk units.
Implementation Timeline: Implement a program by January 2017.
Responsible Party: Planning Office
Funding: Identify a funding source based on feasibility of establishing a program.
                                          53
e.     Equal Housing Opportunities
Monterey’s minority group population is generally distributed throughout the City. The City’s
housing mediation service has not processed an equal opportunity complaint over the past 12
months. The U.S. and California Constitutions guarantee certain housing rights to all residents.
These rights include the freedom to choose a home within the economic capacity of the
household and unhindered by discrimination.
Goal e. Provide for fair and equal housing opportunities for all persons, regardless of age, sex,
family size, race, creed, color, or national origin.
   Policy e.1. Assure that all persons in Monterey receive equal housing opportunities. Promote
   equal housing opportunities by making this information available at the City library, Housing
   Department office, and social service providers. Also, provide this information on the City’s
   website.
      Program e.1.1. Cooperate in countywide fair housing activities and federal government
      programs that emphasize educational and counseling activities.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
      Responsible Party: Housing Office
      Funding: CDBG funds, HOME funds
      Program e.1.2. Provide contract fair housing mediation for all fair housing complaints and
      questions. Advertise fair housing mediation services. Notify social service agencies of
      programs. Advertise programs consistent with the City’s Housing Consolidated Plan.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
      Responsible Party: Housing Office
      Funding: Redevelopment Set-aside funds, CDBG
      Program e.1.3. Distribute available housing subsidies to sites throughout the City to avoid
      concentrations of subsidized housing. Inclusionary housing units should be built on the site
      of market-rate housing. Inclusionary housing should be compatible with the surrounding
      neighborhood.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
      Responsible Party: Housing Office
      Funding: General Fund
      Program e.1.4. Continue to provide online applications for the City’s Purchase and Resale
      program waiting list to market affordable housing units on the City’s website.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
      Responsible Party: Housing Office
      Funding: General Fund
                                                   54

      Program e.1.5. Continue to provide service referrals to rental assistance, ownership
      assistance, homeless assistance, and general community services.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
      Responsible Party: Housing Office
      Funding: Redevelopment Set-aside funds, CDBG
      Program e.1.6. Continue to distribute Housing Choice Voucher applications at the City’s
      Housing Division and have staff available to help applicants with the process.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing
      Responsible Party: Housing Office, Monterey County Housing Authority
      Funding: Housing Choice Voucher funds, Redevelopment Set-aside funds, CDBG
f.      Special Housing Needs
Housing for the Elderly. In 2010, 15 percent of the population was over 65 years old. The main
housing concern among elderly renter households is overpaying for housing. Elderly ownership
households have a high incidence of overpayment, defined as spending more than 30 percent of
household income for housing. The need for elderly housing programs is a concern of both the
public and private sectors.
Single-Parent Head of Household. In 2010, 5 percent of the households in Monterey had single-
parent heads of household with children, virtually unchanged since 2000. The main concern
among these households is overpaying. In addition, 11 percent of Monterey households have
single-parent heads of household over 65 living alone. While there are no special programs
targeted toward single-parent heads of household, new policies for larger multi-family units will
help single-parent heads of household with children. The opportunity to construct lower-cost,
multi-family units will help single-parent-headed and elderly households overpaying for housing.
Disabled Households. The State defines disabled households as those having a householder with
an employment or transportation disability. There is a significant overlap between disabled
households and elderly households. In Monterey, one problem facing disabled people is the
predominance of apartments built over parking, which creates, in effect, second-story units that
are hard for the disabled to reach. The percentage of disabled households in Monterey is 9.1
percent, slightly less than the percentage in the County as a whole and approximately half the
statewide percentage. The public and private elderly housing projects in Monterey all have
provisions for disabled seniors.
Overcrowding/Large Families. Overcrowding is defined as more than 1.01 persons per room. It
is primarily associated with large households, but overcrowding can also be an issue with smaller
families in small rental units. Monterey has a low incidence of overcrowding when compared to
Monterey County and California as a whole. While there are no special programs that address
overcrowding, the provisions encouraging affordable rental housing may reduce the potential for
overcrowding for smaller families in very small units.
Homeless Persons and Families. The City of Monterey has an average of 542 homeless people.
Inability to pay rent or move-in costs is typically the main reason for homelessness, which would
                                                  55

indicate that low- and moderate-cost housing is one of the primary solutions to homelessness.
The opportunity to construct lower-cost multi-family housing would assist in these cases. The
immediate need for emergency housing for the homeless can be met by the provision of
emergency shelters.
Special Needs Housing Goals
Goal f. Remain sensitive to the needs of the elderly, single-parent-headed households, the
disabled and large families, and develop positive programs to assist the homeless.
    Policy f.1. Encourage construction of housing units that provide for special needs.
      Program f.1.1. Provide for needs of special housing needs groups by complying with ADA
      regulations in reviewing private development projects and in City-assisted housing
      projects.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023, as projects are processed through the
      Planning Department
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: Redevelopment Set-aside funds, CDBG funds, private developer funds
      Program f.1.2. Market low- and moderate-income housing programs through the use of
      direct advertising including, but not limited to, the City’s website, referrals, brochures,
      newspapers, and other media.
      Implementation Timeline: Information will be available on the website by June 2016.
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: Redevelopment Set-aside funds, CDBG
      Program f.1.3. Encourage the schools, students, and senior citizen groups to pursue
      roommate matching service to take advantage of underutilized homes in Monterey.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: Community Service grants
      Program f.1.4. Develop a program of emergency grants or loans to assist low-income
      households that are threatened with eviction. Provide funds on a one-time basis to assist
      households that could remain in their rental housing units if back rent is paid.
      Implementation Timeline: 2015-2023, as funding is available
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: Redevelopment Set-aside funds, CDBG, Community Service grants
      Program f.1.5. Continue to provide City assistance to nonprofit providers of services and
      temporary housing to Monterey homeless.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, as funding is available
                                                 56

Responsible Party: Planning Office
Funding: Redevelopment Set-aside funds, CDBG, Community Service grants
Program f.1.6. Amend the City’s Zoning Code to provide individuals with developmental
disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices, and procedures that may
be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose of this is to provide a process
for individuals with disabilities to make requests for reasonable accommodation in regard
to relief from the various land use, zoning, or building laws of the City. As part of this
program, the City will appoint a staff person to work with disabled persons who are
proposing improvements to accommodate their needs. The purpose is to streamline the
permit review process if needed.
Implementation Timeline: Amend the Zoning Code by June 2016.
Responsible Party: Planning Office
Funding: General Fund
Program f.1.7: Work with the San Andreas Regional Center in Salinas to implement an
outreach program that informs families within the City on housing and services available
for persons with developmental disabilities. Such collaboration should include
development of an informational brochure and information on services on the City’s
website, and providing housing-related training for individuals/families through
workshops.
Implementation Timeline: Development of Outreach Program by January, 2017
Responsible Party: Housing Office
Funding: General Fund
Program f.1.8: Develop a program to provide rental assistance to fill the gap between
income levels and the cost of housing for persons with Developmental Disabilities. The
program will include the following steps: Step One: Work with the regional center to
identify the housing needs of the clients and assist in identifying available housing that
meets those criteria. Step Two: Identify the gaps that limit access to housing for persons
with developmental disabilities (i.e. financial, accessibility). Step Three: Develop
Guidelines and market program
Implementation Timeline: Begin Program Development January, 2017.
Responsible Party: Housing Office
Funding: General Fund
Objective: Assist 10 persons with developmental disabilities.
Program f.1.9: Explore models to encourage the creation of housing for persons with
developmental disabilities and implement a program by 2017. Such models could include
assisting in housing development through the use of set-asides, scattered site acquisition,
new construction, and pooled trusts; providing housing services that educate, advocate,
inform, and assist people to locate and maintain housing; and models to assist in the
maintenance and repair of housing for persons with developmental disabilities. The City
shall also seek State and Federal monies for direct support of housing construction and
rehabilitation specifically targeted for housing for persons with disabilities.
                                            57

Implementation Timeline: Begin Program Development January, 2017.
Responsible Party: Housing Office
Funding: General Fund
Objective: Assist 10 persons with developmental disabilities.
Program f.1.10. Pursuant to Senate Bill 2, the City will amend the Zoning Ordinance to
allow emergency shelters as a permitted use in a newly created overlay zone along Del
Monte Avenue east of the Naval Postgraduate School, which has vacant and underutilized
parcels and is close to transit corridors and close to services. The City will create this
overlay zone with specific development standards for emergency shelters. In addition, the
City will evaluate adopting development and managerial standards that will be consistent
with Government Code Section 65583(a)(4). These standards may include such items as:
         Lighting;
         On-site management;
         Maximum number of beds or persons to be served nightly by the facility;
         Off-street parking based on demonstrated need; and
         Security during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation.
Implementation Timeline: Develop this overlay designation by June 2016.
Responsible Party: Planning Office
Funding: CDBG
Program f.1.11. Pursuant to Senate Bill 2, the City must explicitly allow both supportive
and transitional housing types in all zones that allow residential uses and treated the same
as any other housing type in the same zone. The City shall update its Zoning Ordinance to
include separate definitions of transitional and supportive housing as defined in Health and
Safety Code Sections 50675.2 and 50675.14. Both transitional and supportive housing
types will be allowed as a permitted use in all zones where residential uses are allowed,
subject to only the same restrictions on residential uses contained in the same type of
structure.
Implementation Timeline: Amend the Zoning Code by June 2016.
Responsible Party: Planning Office
Funding: General Fund
Funding: General Fund
Program f.1.12. To support the development of housing affordable to extremely low-
income households, the City shall apply for state and federal funding and grant priority to
projects that include units affordable to extremely low- income households, such as SROs.
Implementation Timeline: Annually, 2016-2023
Responsible Party: Planning, Office
Funding: General Fund
Program f.1.13. The City will support regional efforts to ensure that the need for
farmworker housing is met at a regional level. The City will also analyze zoning ordinance
on a regular basis for compliance with and Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6.
                                            58

      Section 17021.5. If any inconsistencies are found, amendments to achieve compliances
      shall be made within six months.
      Implementation Timeline: Annually, 2016-2023, zoning amendments within six months of
      discovery of inconsistency
      Responsible Party: Housing Office, Planning Office
      Funding: CDBG
      Program f.1.14. The City will support regional efforts and pursue the following to create
      adequate supportive housing for the community:
               Collaborate with Coalition of Homeless Service Providers and Monterey
            Homeless Exchange to develop a target for the number of Permanent Supportive
            Housing Units to be developed in the City. This will be a combination of some
            percentage of the current homeless population plus other populations in need of
            supportive housing.
               Pursue Tenant Based Rental Assistance funding from HOME Program to support
            the operations of permanent supportive housing communities.
               Work with the medical community, including CHOMP, the County, the Central
            California Alliance for Health and other providers to support case management and
            other tenancy support funding in new supportive housing communities. Studies have
            shown that stable housing results in better health outcomes and that less than 10% of
            the population uses a disproportionate amount of health care resources (“Super
            Utilizers”). By providing those Super Utilizers who are unstably house (or homeless)
            with stable housing, hospitals and providers can save money overall.
               Encourage and facilitate integration of data between homeless service providers,
            medical service providers and the criminal justice system to implement more effective
            discharge planning for patients and inmates.
               Provide capacity grants and support for fledgling organizations
      Implementation Timeline: Annually, 2016-2023
      Responsible Party: Housing Office
      Funding: CDBG
g.      Adequate Sites Analysis
State law requires the Housing Element to identify “adequate sites” with appropriate zoning and
public services to allow development of a variety of housing types for all income levels. Existing
zoning allows the capacity to meet the overall fair share and enables the types of units most likely
to support the fair share of very low-, low-, and moderate-income housing.
The Housing Element provides for the opportunity to construct housing for all income groups.
Nearly all new housing in the City will be built by private developers at market rates. The City
can only provide the opportunity for private developers to build different unit types, which could
provide for various income levels. The mixed-use designation provides the opportunity to
construct very low- and low-cost units. The multi-family unit designation provides the
opportunity to construct very low-, low-, and moderate-cost units. The single-family unit
designation provides the opportunity to construct above moderate-cost units.
                                                 59

The available sites analysis in the Housing Element Background Report identifies the realistic
potential to construct a total of over 1,000 units. The City’s current Regional Housing Needs
Allocation for 2015–2023 is 650. With a potential of more than 1,000 units, this gives the City a
surplus of more than 350 units. These units are appropriate for provide housing to all income
levels (extremely low, very low, low, moderate, and above moderate income).
Goal g. Provide adequate sites to build new housing units for all income levels and to meet the
City’s fair share of housing needs for 2015-2023.
    Policy g.1. Meet the Association of Monterey Bay Area Governments (AMBAG) Fair Share
    of regional housing needs for 2015-2023.
      Program g.1.1. Retain the zoning capacity to meet the AMBAG fair share housing goal
      between January 1, 2015, and July 30, 2023. Retain the opportunity to construct the
      remaining fair-share requirement of 157 very low-, 102 low-, 119 moderate-, and 272
      above moderate-income housing units with excess zoning capacity for housing in mixed-
      use areas, apartments in commercial zones, and apartments in R-3 zones.
      Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: General Fund
      Program g.1.2. Encourage exceptional design and innovative solutions for housing style,
      through the implementation of the Downtown and North Fremont specific plans. The City
      will soon adopt a specific plan for the Lighthouse area, another mixed-use/transit- oriented
      development neighborhood.
      Implementation Timeline: Continue to adopt and implement design guidelines for mixed-
      use/transit-oriented development neighborhoods (2015-2023).
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: General Fund
      Program g.1.3. The City will actively support the redevelopment of underutilized mixed-
      use sites to meet the City’s RHNA allocation and to provide additional affordable housing
      opportunities throughout the City near transit stops, jobs, and services. The City will assist
      in the development of these underutilized sites by offering the following assistance:
                The City will post a listing of underutilized sites on the City’s website and provide
             this list of sites to developers interested in developing mixed-use projects in the City.
                The City will, where appropriate and when funds are available, assist with the
             development of affordable housing projects on these underutilized sites.
                The City will also provide technical assistance with applying for additional
             funding to construct an affordable mixed-use project on an underutilized site.
                The City will provide flexibility in development standards on the construction of
             an affordable housing project on an underutilized site including but not limited to
             reduced setback requirements and reduced parking requirements on a case-by-case
             basis.
      Implementation Timeline: Provide a listing of sites to affordable housing developers in the
                                                     60

       area on a yearly basis and assist developers as projects are processed through the Planning
       Office, 2015-2023
       Responsible Party: Planning Office
       Funding: General Fund, RDA funds
h.       Workforce Housing
The need for housing for working moderate-income and visitor-service employees is a high
priority, reduces traffic congestion and greenhouse gas emissions, and encourages increased
collaboration between the private, nonprofit, and public sectors. The General Plan Economic
Element identifies housing workers at all income levels as a key to attracting and retaining
employees with the skills needed to maintain Monterey businesses.
Goal h. Provide housing that specifically meets the needs of the Monterey workforce.
    Policy h.1. Design a program with Monterey employers to pool resources to develop
    workforce housing.
       Program h.1.1. Encourage workforce housing programs for major Monterey employers,
       utilizing land and other resources available to those employers that could be devoted to
       workforce housing. Develop a program where land costs are removed or reduced as a cost
       of housing. Provide both owner and renter housing with a requirement for permanent cost
       reductions.
       Implementation Timeline: Continue meeting with working group on regular basis, 2015-
       2023
       Responsible Party: Housing Office
       Funding: General Fund
       Program h.1.2. Encourage workforce housing programs by the City of Monterey for
       Monterey City employees.
       Implementation Timeline: Develop programs for City Council consideration by 2017
       Responsible Party: Housing Office
       Funding: General Fund
       Program h.1.3. Utilize zoning tools such as Planned Unit Developments and Planned
       Community Zoning to provide flexibility in designing infill housing on larger development
       sites.
       Implementation Timeline: 2015-2023, as projects are submitted to the Planning
       Department
       Responsible Party: Planning Office
       Funding: General Fund
i.       Housing Incentive Programs and Inclusionary Housing Program
The City has adopted an inclusionary housing ordinance to assure that new housing construction
also includes affordable housing units. In addition to the inclusionary provisions, the City has
offered significant incentives, including financial support, parking relief, increased density, and
                                                  61
modification of site development standards, to projects that provide substantial affordable
housing in excess of the minimum inclusionary units. The incentive program is intended to
provide assistance to projects which meet the broad goals of the Housing Element.
Goal i. Provide incentives for affordable housing, workforce housing, and ownership housing to
meet the unique needs identified in the Housing Element. Provide incentives to complement the
inclusionary housing program, with a particular goal of maintaining inclusionary housing in
perpetuity and increasing the percentage of affordable units. Parking adjustment incentives
should not impact residential neighborhoods.
    Policy i.1. Provide incentives to meet the City’s unique housing needs in excess of the
    requirements in the inclusionary housing ordinance.
      Program i.1.1. Continue to encourage mixed-use/transit-oriented projects in the specific
      plan areas that include affordable units by offering height and parking exceptions to
      affordable housing projects.
      Implementation Timeline: 2015-2023, as projects are submitted to the Planning Office
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: General Fund
      Program i.1.2. Continue to allow density bonuses, as appropriate. Amend the zoning
      ordinance to state that:
               Density bonuses of up to 35 percent may be allowed for projects that exceed City
              inclusionary housing percentages or the state-mandated criteria for low-income,
              moderate-income, and special-needs housing; and
               Projects that receive density bonuses shall maintain affordability for the life of the
              project.
      Implementation Timeline: Amend ordinance by June 2016 and implement as projects are
      submitted.
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: General Fund
      Program i.1.3. If new water is available for future allocation, the City shall give preference
      to projects meeting fair-share housing goals.
      Implementation Timeline: 2015-2023, as projects are approved through the Planning,
      Office
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: General Fund
      Program i.1.4. Develop alternatives for long-term water supply both within and outside
      the framework of the Water Management District and the California American Water
      Company.
      Implementation Timeline: 2015-2023, develop long-term water alternatives
      Responsible Party: Plans and Public Works Department
      Funding: General Fund
                                                 62

  Program i.1.5. The City is committed to ensuring that there is enough water to meet the
  needs of all new residential units within the 2015-2023 RHNA period. California American
  Water (CalAm) is moving forward with its Monterey Peninsula Water Supply Project
  (MPWSP) consisting of slant intake wells, a desalination plant and related facilities. The
  project EIR has been completed and CPUC approval is expected in October 2016, prior to
  the December 2016 SWRCB CDO deadline. Pipeline, slant well, and desalination plant
  construction is expected to be completed in 2019. The City will continue its participation
  with the water authority and support the MPWSP.
  Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
  Responsible Party: Planning Office
  Funding: General Fund
  Program i.1.6. The City will continue to explore alternatives other than density bonus
  allowed in state law (Section 65915) to meet affordable housing goals.
  Implementation Timeline: Ongoing, 2015-2023
  Responsible Party: Planning Office
  Funding: General Fund
  Program i.1.7. The City will deliver the adopted housing element update to water and
  sewer service providers within a month after adoption. When submitting copies of housing
  elements to service providers the City will include a summary / quantification of the local
  government’s regional housing need allocation and any other appropriate housing
  information.
  Implementation Timeline: One month following adoption
  Responsible Party: Planning Office
  Funding: General Fund
Policy i.2. Continue the City’s Inclusionary Housing program to provide affordable housing
throughout Monterey.
  Program i.2.1. Continue to provide a minimum of 20 percent permanently affordable low-
  and moderate-income units for any project with six or more new housing units or for
  condominium conversion. The City will also explore means and methods to provide
  incentives to include inclusionary units in new apartment construction. Residential projects
  are encouraged to satisfy the requirement by providing a minimum of 20 percent
  inclusionary housing units on-site.
  Implementation Timeline: 2015-2023, as projects of 6 or more units are processed through
  the Planning Department
  Responsible Party: Planning Office
  Funding Source: General Fund
  Program i.2.2. Investigate a community housing trust to meet the need for workforce
  housing and other housing needs.
                                             63

      Implementation Timeline: Investigate a community housing trust by June 2017.
      Responsible Party: Planning Office and Housing Office
      Funding Source: General Fund
Sustainability and Energy Efficiency Programs
Goal j. The City will continue to promote sustainability and energy efficiency in residential
development to lower energy use through energy-efficient urban design and through better design
and construction in individual projects.
   Policy j.1. Implement state energy and green building and conservation standards.
      Program j.1.1. Encourage Transit Priority Projects, site designs, and use of building
      materials that promote energy efficiency.
      Implementation Timeline: Continue to implement specific plans.
      Responsible Party: Planning Office
      Funding: General Fund
                                                64
Conservation Element
Introduction
The Conservation Element provides direction regarding the conservation, development, and
utilization of natural resources. Its requirements overlap those of other General Plan Elements.
The Conservation Element is distinguished as being primarily concerned with natural resources.
Since Monterey is largely a built-out community and the natural resources are an integral part of
the City’s setting, economy, and physical development, many Conservation Element goals are
covered in the Urban Design Element, Open Space Element, Safety Element, and Land Use
Element. Soil and landslide hazards, including erosion, are covered in the Safety Element.
Flood hazards are included in the Safety Element. There are no commercial forests, agricultural
lands, or mineral resources of economic value classified under the Surface Mining and Geology
Act within the City.
The subjects covered in this Conservation Element are water supply, water quality, air quality,
flora and fauna and marine resources, and energy conservation.
Protection of the City's natural resources is a City goal. Policies and programs should reflect this
goal by providing ways to conserve and manage natural resources. Achievement of this goal will
result in maintaining and enhancing the quality of life valued by residents and visitors.
Goals, Policies, and Programs
a. Water Supply
Lack of available water is a primary obstacle to meeting General Plan goals; therefore, it must be
the goal of the City of Monterey and this Plan to obtain a long-term, sustainable water supply,
including evaluation of water supply options outside the present Monterey Peninsula Water
Management District (MPWMD) framework. Water is supplied to most of the Monterey
Peninsula by the California American Water Company (Cal Am) through wells in Carmel Valley,
dams on the Carmel River, and a well on the Seaside Aquifer. The City is wholly within the
MPWMD, which is responsible for developing long-term water supply for the Monterey
Peninsula cities in the District.
Most cities in the Cal Am service area have approached or reached the limit of available water.
Monterey has reached the limits of its allocation and has very little water available to meet
housing, economic, and public facility goals. The MPWMD has not provided a stable, long-term
source of water, and many of the alternatives proposed by the District would provide only enough
water for short-term needs. This Plan requires actions to provide adequate water supplies.
Prior to 1995, Cal Am water production was based in major part on an historic pumping of
approximately 14,106-acre feet of water from the Carmel River. The State Water Resources
Control Board determined in 1995 that Cal Am has the legal right to 3,376-acre feet of Carmel
River acquifer water and ordered Cal Am to ultimately reduce its pumping to 3,376 acre feet.
Cal Am may pump 11,285-acre feet of Carmel River water on an interim basis as long as there is
a diligent effort by Cal Am and by the District to find water sources to replace the shortfall. The
State Board also ordered that any water supply developed in the Cal Am service area must first
replace the 10,730 acre feet shortfall before more water could be allocated to cities for use.
                                                  65

The MPWMD has established water allocations for cities and jurisdictions within its district, but
these allegations are superceded by the State Water Resources Board interim limit of 11, 285 acre
feet. Combined with the currently allowed pumping limit set by the MPWMD of 4,000 feet from
the Seaside Aquifer, the water available for use stands at 15,285 acre feet. The City of Monterey
has established an internal allocation system, whereby water allotments are established for
residential, commercial and industrial uses. It also maintains a portion of the total allocation as a
citywide reserve.
The MPWMD has been evaluating a new dam on the Carmel River and other potential ways to
increase water supply, such as storm water diversion, desalination, or reclaimed water.
Goals and policies for water supply are addressed in the Public Facilities Element.
b. Water Quality
Pollutants contained in urban stormwater runoff are “non-point source” pollution. These include
metals, organic wastes, pesticides, and a variety of other pollutants, which are carried into the
drainage system by stormwater runoff. The City has developed a Model Urban Runoff Program
in conjunction with other local government agencies. This program is used as a nationwide
model for managing runoff in small communities.
Goal b.1. Protect creeks, lakes, wetlands, beaches, and Monterey Bay from pollutants
discharged to the storm drain system.
Policy b.1. Continue public education and outreach programs to eliminate use of storm drains
for dumping hazardous or inappropriate wastes, such as used motor oil.
Policy b.2. Minimize particulate matter pollution with erosion and sediment control in
waterways and on construction sites and with regular street sweeping on City streets.
Policy b.3. Minimize development or removal of vegetation on areas particularly susceptible to
erosion, such as steep slopes, and require programs to minimize erosion when development
occurs in these areas.
Policy b.4. Retain and restore wetlands, riparian areas, and other habitats, which provide
remediation for degraded water quality.
c.      Air Quality
The air quality in Monterey is generally excellent, and it is the goal of this General Plan to keep it
that way.
Pollutants enter the air from either mobile sources such as automobiles, trucks, buses and planes,
or from fixed sources such as industrial uses. Auto related transportation, including cars, trucks
and buses, constitutes the highest percentage of all pollutants emitted.
Air quality is monitored under the Federal Clean Air Act and California Clean Air Act. The
Monterey Bay Unified Air Pollution Control District is one of 35 statewide districts established
to meet California Clean Air Act Standards in 2001. In 2000-2001, the Monterey Bay Region
met all Federal Standards but it has been in moderate noncompliance with State Ozone and PM10
                                                  66

(smog precursor and inhaleable particle) standards with less than 3 days per year of
noncompliance for each pollutant.
The District Air Quality Management Plan was adopted in 1991 and updated in 2000. The Plan
has standards for fixed source generators, which would maintain compliance with State Air
Quality Standards. The Plan is based on AMBAG population projections and assumes that air
quality standards will be met if population remains within the AMBAG projections.
The Air Quality District can only adopt standards for fixed base generators, but it is mobile
sources that create most of the air pollution. The General Plan has many policies to reduce the
number of vehicle trips in the Energy Conservation Section of this Element and in the
Circulation Element and Land Use Element.
Goal c. Reduce fixed source and transportation-based air pollution.
Policy c.1. Reduce air pollution generated by motor vehicles by encouraging the use of public
transit, car-pooling, bicycles, and walking as alternatives. Policies to achieve these goals are
found in the Circulation Element.
Policy c.2. Consider air quality impacts resulting from proximity of residential, commercial and
industrial development in the City's development review process, primarily the California
Environmental Quality Act.
Policy c.3. Promote cooperation with local and State agencies to develop programs to reduce
sources of air pollution.
d.       Flora and Fauna and Marine Resources
The City of Monterey is an urban community, which has developed over a 200-year period with a
diverse natural environment. The interface between the natural and manmade environment is
part of what makes Monterey a special place.
The Pacific Ocean forms the northern boundary of the City and is both a natural resource and an
important community asset. The City's entire coastline is adjacent to the National Marine
Sanctuary.
The land environment includes several vegetative communities/habitats, such as grasslands,
central dune scrub, coastal foredune, coastal prairie, coastal scrub, maritime chaparral, mixed
Monterey pine forest, Monterey pine forest, mixed chaparral, oak savanna, oak woodland, and
riparian/wetland. A wide variety of plants and animals are located within this environment.
Goal d.         Protect the character and composition of existing native vegetative communities.
Conserve, manage, and restore habitats for endangered species, and protect biological diversity
represented by special-status plant and wildlife species.
Policy d.1. Protect existing native plants and promote the use of locally occurring, native
vegetation for public and private landscaping and revegetation efforts.
Program d.1.1.           Develop a public education program promoting the use of native plants
                                                  67
and addressing major plant diseases. The materials shall include a list of recommended species
for planting and the California Exotic Pest Plant list, and shall address prevention and
management strategies for vegetation pathogens such as pitch canker and sudden oak disease.
Policy d.2.       Discourage the use of plant species on the California Exotic Pest Plant Council
lists.
Program d.2.1.          Discourage the use of invasive plant species (those listed on Exotic Pest
Plant List A and B within publicly owned and within moderate- and high-value habitats (see
map); and those listed on List A in any location) by public and private entities in landscape
planting plans submitted for review.
Policy d.3      Protect existing sensitive habitats by careful planning to avoid and/or mitigate
significant impacts to habitat areas identified as having high and moderate biological values.
Policy d.4. Protect and manage habitats that support special-status species, are of high biological
diversity, or are unusual or regionally restricted. Prepare biotic reports or habitat management
plans as needed to ensure protection of habitat values.
Policy d.5. Reduce biotic impacts to a less-than-significant level on project sites by ensuring that
mitigation measures identified in biotic reports are incorporated as conditions of approval for
development projects. Compliance with the City Tree Ordinance is the mechanism that will be
used to address impacts of tree removals. As mitigation for significant impacts, avoidance,
replacement, restoration of habitats on- or off-site, or other measures may be required.
Policy d.6.       Within identified habitat areas with high biological value, the City will provide
for a focused evaluation of areas identified as appropriate habitat for special-status species during
the project review and approval process.
Program d.6.1. Prepare a Monterey Pine Management Plan for the Monterey pine forest
existing in the City. The goal of this plan is to prevent further genetic contamination and
preserve the health and viability of the forest.
Program d.6.2. Prepare a Dune and Beach Restoration and Management Plan. This plan will
provide a long-term strategy to retain or improve the condition of this resource within the dunes
and beaches.
Program d.6.3. Prepare a Riparian and Stream Corridor Restoration and Management Plan.
The plan should coordinate efforts between the various government agencies and property
owners.
Program d.6.4. Consider developing a habitat impact mitigation fee to restore high-value
biological areas.
Program d.6.5. Provide information to the public about special-status species and the habitats
that support them.
Program d.6.6. Proceed with Master Plan for Ed Ricketts Underwater Park.
                                                  68
e. Energy
The intent of this plan is to encourage an effective and efficient use of energy in all its critical
forms by public and private users alike. The two primary sources of energy use are heating and
air conditioning for buildings and vehicle transportation.
Building energy conservation has been improved significantly by State Building Code
requirements over the past 20 years. Vehicular energy conservation has been significantly
improved by Federal and State fuel economy standards. The Circulation and Land Use Elements
have the primary roles of further addressing vehicle energy conservation by identifying
alternatives to automobile trip generation and by establishing concentrated development where
residents, employees, and visitors can reach many destinations without an automobile trip.
Goal e. Encourage the effective and efficient use of energy in all its critical forms by public and
private users alike.
Policy e.1. Encourage energy sources, which provide part or all of the energy needed for
buildings.
Program e.1.1. Consider aesthetically compatible independent energy sources in new public and
private buildings.
Program e.1.2. Encourage energy retrofitting in existing residential and commercial structures.
Policy e.2. Educate the public about energy conservation.
Program e.2.1. Support public education activities that dramatize cost-saving benefits of energy
conservation to local consumers.
Program e.2.2. Encourage the hotel, motel, and restaurant associations to maintain an energy
conservation program on a continual basis.
Policy e.3. Work with other local, state and federal agencies, public utilities and community
organizations to implement energy conservation and longer-range renewable energy development
programs.
                                                  69
Figure 8, Showing Special Status Species Occurrences
                                           70
Figure 9, Showing Habitat Management Areas
                                        71
Open Space Element
Introduction
The Open Space Element is a required General Plan Element. It guides the preservation and
conservation of open space land. State law defines open space land as any land or water that is
essentially unimproved and devoted to open-space use.
The City has an extensive open space network extending from the Monterey Bay to the ring of
hillsides surrounding the City. The City’s most important open space resources are the Monterey
Bay and surrounding wooded hillsides. The bay is the focal point of the community as well as
part of its economic foundation. It supports the commercial fishing industry and scientific
research. Visitors and residents also enjoy recreational activities such as sailing, kayaking,
diving, snorkeling, and recreational fishing on the bay, helping make Monterey a tourist
destination.
The shoreline and beaches provide access to the bay as well as opportunities for the public to
enjoy the ocean. The City is also pursuing restoration of the natural dune habitat along some
areas of the beach.
Two large lakes are located in the City—Lake El Estero and Del Monte Lake—and two lakes—
Roberts Lake and Laguna Grande—are located directly adjacent to the City's eastern border
within the City of Seaside. These lakes create a beautiful scenic entrance into the community.
They also provide habitat for plants and animals and are a natural flood protection mechanism.
The City stocks Lake El Estero with fish, which helps create this habitat. Residents and visitors
are able to use the lakes for fishing and some recreation such as the paddleboats on Lake El
Estero.
Greenbelts create a beautiful setting and preserve a number of natural resources including
Monterey Pine trees. These greenbelts are located both in the City as well as Monterey County.
The County's greenbelts are the hillsides and ridgelines that frame the City. The Urban Design
Element encourages preservation of these forested hillsides as an essential element of the City
setting. The City’s greenbelts provide open space directly adjacent to developed areas. The City
has an extensive active park system, which complements this open space network.
The open space resources of the City are also addressed in the Urban Design and Conservation
Elements. The Urban Design Element focuses on the visual attributes of open space. The
Conservation Element addresses habitat and wildlife issues related to open space. This Element
recognizes the visual importance of open space as well as its potential to preserve natural
resources, allow people to utilize natural resources (such as fishing), and provide opportunities
for outdoor recreation. A key new area of emphasis is linking the open spaces for both public use
and as habitat.
Goals and Policies
a.      Monterey Bay
The Monterey Bay is the City’s most significant natural resource. It is the visual focal point of
the City and home to a wide variety of marine life and birds. The bay is important to the City’s
                                                 72

fishing and research industries as well as for recreational use.
Goal a. Preserve the Monterey Bay as the City’s most significant natural resource.
Policy a.1. Support industries that contribute to the appreciation of the Monterey Bay’s
resources, including, but not limited to, the commercial fishing industry and research activities,
and tourism.
Policy a.2. Protect the marine habitats of Monterey Bay in cooperation with State and Federal
agencies.
Policy a.3. Protect the views into Monterey Bay.
b.       Shoreline and Beaches
The City’s shoreline invites both active and passive uses. Active use facilities include the
wharves, the marina, boat docks, various boat launch areas, and public use beach areas. The City
has several shoreline parks including San Carlos Beach Park, Fisherman’s Shoreline Park,
Monterey Bay Recreational Trail, Del Monte Beach, and Monterey Bay Park. In addition to
these active beaches, the Navy has an area reserved for dune restoration along the beach, east of
Sloat Avenue. This area is protected from pedestrians and is an effort to preserve the dune
habitat.
Goal b. Recognize the importance of the shoreline and beaches in providing access to the
Monterey Bay as well as preserving specific areas for habitat conservation.
Policy b.1. Maintain the City shoreline and beaches for recreation use and support facilities.
Policy b.2. Preserve the City’s active use areas adjacent to the Monterey Bay, including, but not
limited to, the wharves, boat access facilities, and piers.
Policy b.3. Support Navy and other efforts to restore the dunes adjacent to Del Monte Avenue for
habitat conservation purposes, including the Navy property east of Sloat Avenue.
Policy b.4. Protect views of the Monterey Bay from Monterey Bay and Shoreline Parks.
c.       Greenbelts
The City’s greenbelts form the backdrop of the City and extend from the Monterey Bay to the
hillsides. They provide a visual break from urban development as well as serve as wildlife
corridors.
Goal c. Preserve greenbelts to ensure an overall visual impression of open space on the hillsides
above Monterey, between neighborhoods and along major transportation corridors.
Policy c.1. Maintain greenbelts as open space.
Policy c.2. Coordinate with the County to preserve greenbelts, which form the backdrop of
Monterey.
Policy c.3. Work with the County and others to preserve Monterey Pines where possible.
                                                  73

Figure 10, Showing Parks, Recreation, and Open Spaces
                                           74
d.       Lakes
Lakes have multiple functions. They provide a pleasant visual entry into the city, habitat for
plants and animals, flood protection, and recreation opportunities.
Goal d. Preserve and improve lakes and waterways as important visual, habitat, flood protection,
and recreation resources.
Policy d.1. Continue to preserve Lake El Estero, Del Monte Lake, Roberts Lake, Laguna Grande,
Washerwoman’s Pond, and Lagunita Mirada as visual open space features.
Policy d.2. Recognize that Del Monte Lake is a key entrance feature into the City of Monterey
and work with U.S. Naval Postgraduate School to remove physical and visual barriers to the lake.
Policy d.3. Maintain the lakes and waterways as flood control features for the City.
Policy d.4. Protect native plants, animals, and native habitats in Lake El Estero, Del Monte Lake,
and Laguna Grande.
Policy d.5. Continue to support and enhance the public use of the City's lakes. Manage non-
native wildlife such as Canadian Geese.
Policy d.6. Continue to allow active recreational use of the lakes.
Policy d.7. Work with the City of Seaside to preserve and enhance Roberts Lake and Laguna
Grande.
e.       Streams
A number of intermittent streams are located in the City of Monterey.
Goal e. Ensure streams continue to function as natural flood control channels and habitat for
native plants and animals.
Policy e.1. Maintain the City's streams by controlling erosion.
Policy e.2. Restore vegetation adjacent to streams with native plants to ensure a balanced
ecosystem (which may include removal of non-native species).
Policy e.3. Encourage pedestrian access along streams where appropriate.
f.       Active Parks
The City of Monterey has provided its citizenry with a well-balanced and healthy park and
recreation system. In many ways, the City’s park system is the cornerstone of the community as it
provides places for residents to gather.
Goal f. Maintain and enhance the park system for City residents and visitors.
Policy f.1. Maintain the Parks and Recreation Master Plan to outline the City’s current and future
priorities.
                                                 75

Policy f.2. Acquire and retain land for current and future parks and recreation open space to serve
residents’ needs.
Policy f.3. Plan, acquire, design, develop, and maintain areas and facilities to meet the leisure
and aesthetic needs of the residents of the City.
Policy f.4. Provide a wide variety of quality leisure activity opportunities for all residents of the
City.
Policy f.5. Be flexible in providing for special needs as dictated by current trends and changing
interests of the citizens of Monterey.
Policy f.6. Provide ongoing efficient and effective design, development, renovation, and
management of visually aesthetic and functional park areas and facilities.
Policy f.7. Coordinate public and private agencies and community groups in the planning and
development of park and recreation programs and facilities.
Policy f.8. Maintain our parks in excellent condition.
g.      Linkages
The City has developed an extensive network of open spaces over the past years. A particular
emphasis is connecting those open spaces both for public access, connecting with pedestrian and
bicycle resources, and for habitat conservation.
Goal g. Connect existing and future open spaces.
Policy g.1. Create a trail plan to link existing open spaces and pedestrian areas with trails for
public use.
Policy g.2. Link open spaces to provide habitat protection.
                                                   76

Safety Element
Introduction
The purposes of the Safety Element are: (1) identify and describe the nature of potential hazards
within the planning area, and (2) streamline the environmental impact reporting process by using
this element as a guide to the level of detail and types of environmental data needed. The
pertinent areas examined in this element are: seismic, geologic, flood, fire, aircraft, criminal, and
emergency preparedness.
There is no such thing as a hazard-free environment. Natural and man-made hazards of some
kind and degree are always present. Efforts can be undertaken, however, to reduce the
consequences of known hazards and to minimize injury and damage to property. Appropriate
land use planning policies for potential environmental hazards will have a strong emphasis on
personal safety and judgments of how much risk or damage to property is acceptable. The first
step is recognizing the presence of potential hazards. The second step is evaluating the severity
and frequency, as well as the characteristics of the area involved. This evaluation may require
considerable effort and should also take into account the cost/benefit ratio of reducing or
minimizing the hazard.
Goals and Policies
a.       Seismic Hazards
Earthquake activity can be expected in the future from active or potentially active faults. The
State General Plan Guidelines recommend that the City review a number of data sources prior to
preparing the Safety Element. The 1972 Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act maps do not
identify any hazard area within the City.
The geology report for the 1983 General Plan identified portions of the potentially active Navy,
Berwick Canyon, and Chupines faults within the City’s planning area. Geologic reports for the
2000 Monterey County General Plan update show only the Chupines Fault. There is another
study underway sponsored by USGS investigating the San Gregorio fault partially located within
the Monterey Bay. 1994 maps prepared for the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
show a series of potential faults.
The State Geologist is currently preparing maps to identify hazards from potential ground
shaking, liquefaction, earthquake-triggered landslide and other identifiable earthquake related
hazards in compliance with the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act. These are expected to be the
definitive seismic maps, but they have not yet been published for Monterey. The General Plan
policies anticipate the final adoption of the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act maps and subsequent
mapping.
Unreinforced masonry buildings (generally brick, adobe, stone, and concrete buildings without
reinforcement) are a potential hazard in an earthquake. The City has adopted a seismic retrofit
ordinance requiring a report on all identified unreinforced masonry buildings. The City has
worked with owners to achieve seismic strengthening, and many unreinforced masonry buildings
have now been reinforced. Several historic buildings have been reinforced using the City’s
historic grants program. This ordinance does not absolutely require reinforcement because an
                                                  77

inflexible requirement has led to demolition of historic buildings in other cities.
The 1994 maps show a potential fault under the Highway 1/Holman Highway interchange,
raising the issue that an earthquake could damage one of the two access routes to the Community
Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula.
Goal a. Evaluate seismic safety when reviewing development applications and land uses.
Policy a.1. Potentially active faults should be treated the same as active faults until detailed
geotechnical data is submitted demonstrating to the City’s satisfaction that a fault is not active.
Policy a.2. Engineering and geologic investigations should be undertaken for proposed projects
within high and moderate seismic hazard zones before approval is given by the City. The entire
City is currently within seismic hazard zone IV and these studies are required for almost all new
construction except very minor additions.
Policy a.3. Lands within 660’ of identified faults should be treated as having high seismic hazard
until an acceptable geotechnical investigation indicates they should be treated otherwise.
Policy a.4. Structures for human occupancy and critical facilities should be set back a safe
distance (as determined by geotechnical analysis) from precisely located active and potentially
active faults.
Policy a.5. Consider combining hazard areas with other areas not suitable for development and
incorporating them into an open space system for public enjoyment.
Policy a.6. Continue seismic retrofit of unreinforced masonry buildings.
Policy a.7. Investigate, provide, and improve alternative routes for access to the Community
Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula.
b.      Geological Hazards
Landslides are the major geologic hazard in the planning area. This type of hazard occurs mostly
in steep hillside areas. Damage to structures from landslides can range from slight to total
destruction. Damage can be reduced by such alternatives as avoidance, removal, or permanent
stabilization of slide masses. Landslide damage can be avoided by simply leaving hazardous
areas undeveloped. Small landslides may also be totally removed with the soil used elsewhere as
compacted fill.
Goal b. Minimize landslide hazards by locating development away from steep slopes and by
requiring excellent grading practices.
Policy b.1.
    A) Prohibit development on slopes over 25% on new lots that are created to provide new
        building sites.
    B) Prohibit new development on slopes over 25% grade on existing lots of record and only
        allow minimal encroachment into 25% or greater slope as determined by the Planning
        Commission. Discourage and only consider such development when it is designed and
                                                  78

        located to minimize impacts to adjoining property and public right-of-way that could
        occur due to inadequate grading and drainage control, visual appearance and removal of
        trees and vegetation. The Planning Commission shall determine that the amount and
        location of 25% slope area so severely restricts the development potential of the lot that
        prohibiting development on 25% slope deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by
        other similar property that an exception to this prohibition is warranted.
    C) Development is prohibited within active landslide areas unless proven safe or desirable to
        the City’s satisfaction.
Policy b.2. Minimize grading in hillside areas.
Program b.2.1. Limit permits for major grading operations until development plans have been
approved by the City and improvement bonds have been posted.
Program b.2.2. Permit grading operations only in areas scheduled for immediate construction or
paving.
Policy b.3. Minimize cutting and removal of vegetation during grading operations.
Policy b.4. Require developers to submit slope stabilization plans along with any required
grading plans. These slope stabilization plans shall include a complete description of the existing
vegetation, the vegetation to be removed and the method of its disposal, the vegetation to be
planted, and slope stabilization measures.
Policy b.5. Plant and protect all manufactured slopes, other than those constructed in rock, from
the effects of storm runoff erosion within 30 days of the completion of final grading.
Policy b.6. Provide drainage and soil protection for all exposed soil and partially completed
roads between October 15 and April 15.
c.      Flood Hazards
Storms in the planning area have brought flooding, landslides, gale winds, high seas, falling trees
and limbs, and power blackouts. These occurrences are not annual and are usually no more than a
nuisance.
Goal c. Protect against flood hazards from the bay, lakes, and streams.
Policy c.1. Consider and mitigate the potential hazards from storm waves, tsunami, high tidal
conditions and flooding for projects along the bay shoreline.
Program c.1.a. Review all development proposals planned for areas within a 100-year flood
hazard zone consistent with FEMA National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) standards.
Development proposed within these areas must be mitigated as needed to ensure conformance
with NFIP standards.
Policy c.2. Design storm drainage systems to accommodate projected uses before those uses are
developed.
                                                 79

Policy c.3. Protect and maintain drainage channels to keep them clear of silt and debris while
protecting habitat as much as possible.
Policy c.4. Design projects to: (1) maximize the amount of natural drainage that can be
percolated into the soil, and (2) minimize direct overland runoff onto adjoining properties, water
courses, and streets. This approach to handling stormwater reduces the need for costly storm
drainage improvements, which are often miles downstream. Building coverage and paved
surfaces must be minimized and incorporated within a system of porous pavements, ponding
areas, and siltation basins.
d.      Fire
Fire, regardless of size or location, presents a threat to life and property until it is confined or
extinguished. Confinement of the fire is most effectively achieved by using built-in fire
protection (i.e., automatic sprinklers, limitation of structural areas, use of fire retardant materials,
and limitation of fire fuel quantity). In addition, it is necessary to provide clear and safe access
for emergency vehicles.
Goal d. Minimize the loss of life and property from fire.
Policy d.1. Achieve the greatest practical level of built-in fire protection to confine fires.
Policy d.2. Achieve effective emergency access to all developments, installations, and fire
protection equipment for emergency apparatus and for evacuation.
Program d.2.1. Discourage all dead end roads and cul-de-sacs longer than 700 feet.
Program d.2.2. Encourage alternative second access roads as emergency access for roads greater
than 700 feet in length.
Program d.2.3. Locate all installations or processes considered hazardous in the safest possible
areas or on individual parcels.
Program d.2.4. In hazardous fire areas, require fire retardant roofing and access to steep lots,
and consider brush clearance and planting of non-flammable vegetation.
Policy d.3. Maintain a cost-effective, high level of fire protection service.
Policy d.4. Continue to work with fire protection agencies that provide fire service to
unincorporated areas through mutual aid. Encourage those areas that desire fire protection
services which are beyond “outside legitimate mutual aid” to annex to the City of Monterey for
fire protection services instead of using contractual or automatic aid agreements.
Policy d.5. Cooperate with fire protection agencies to obtain and maintain mutual aid agreements
that will augment the City’s fire protection services. Continue mutual aid with the California
Department of Forestry that obtain adequate aid for larger, open-range type fires involving brush,
trees and grass that require specialized tactics and equipment.
Policy d.6. Work with Cal-Am to ensure adequate water pressure for fire fighting.
                                                   80

e.      Airport
The risk of aircraft accidents is an important consideration in planning around the Monterey
Peninsula Airport. The areas of greatest concern are the areas under the approaches to the
runways.
Goal e. Maximize aviation safety on and adjacent to the Monterey Airport.
Policy e.1. Support safety improvements to the Monterey Peninsula Airport and adjacent areas.
Program e.1.1. Review proposed buildings to ensure compliance with Federal Aviation
Regulations, Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace.
Policy e.2. Continue to work with the airport district through a fire mutual aid agreement.
Policy e.3. Require clean up of groundwater contamination from Airport properties.
Policy e.4. In collaboration with the Monterey Peninsula Airport District, review projects that
may pose risks to the safe operation of the Monterey Peninsula Airport and mitigate such impacts
through the development review process.
Policy e.5. Develop airport compatibility policies.
Policy e.6. Promote compatible land uses around the airport consistent with the airport safety
zones.
f.      Crime
Areas of high crime potential, such as parking lots, outdoor recreation spaces, elevator lobbies,
and stairways should be identified and designed for maximum visual exposure when not
conflicting with urban design policies on the screening of areas such as parking lots.
Goal f. Maintain a high level of police protection in keeping with the City’s needs.
Policy f.1. Encourage project designers to provide adequate sight lines into residential areas often
susceptible to criminal activity while maintaining a high aesthetic quality and neighborhood
compatibility.
Policy f.2. Encourage occupants in residential areas to organize Neighborhood Watches to
prevent crimes against neighbors, and to institute rapid reporting procedures.
Policy f.3. Continue to cooperate and coordinate with county and state agencies in providing
police services within the community.
g.      Hazardous Materials
Goal g. Review all applications for discretionary projects to evaluate proposed uses of hazardous
materials. Require that projects which propose the use, handling, storage, transportation, and/or
disposal of hazardous material incorporate actions to minimize hazards to public health and
                                                 81

safety from such use and conform to the County of Monterey Environmental Health Department
requirements for reporting and management of such materials.
h.      Emergency Preparedness
The City has developed a broad-based program to respond to potential emergencies, including
training for City staff and residents so that each neighborhood may have trained emergency
response personnel.
Goal h. Ensure prompt and effective services to cope with local emergencies.
Policy h.1. Continue to provide high quality fire, police, and emergency medical services.
Policy h.2. Continue to develop emergency plans to respond to large-scale natural or man-made
disasters, such as fires, earthquakes, floods, nuclear attack, terrorist attack, or releases of
hazardous materials.
Policy h.3. Continue emergency planning and preparation in cooperation with Monterey County,
neighboring cities, and other agencies.
Policy h.4. Work with the Presidio of Monterey to allow emergency access through the Presidio.
This access should include both emergency vehicles and resident evacuation.
Policy h.5. Continue to work with Monterey citizens in the Community Emergency Response
Team (CERT) program to maintain citizen readiness in an emergency.
Policy h.6. Maintain community evacuation shelter and emergency plans.
                                                  82
Figure 11, Showing Seismic Hazards
                                   83
Figure 12, Showing Steep Slopes
                                84
Figure 13, Showing Flood Zones
                               85
Figure 14, Showing Fire Hazards
                                86
Figure 15, Showing Evacuation Routes
                                     87
Noise Element
Introduction
The State of California's General Plan Guidelines (November 1998) indicate the Noise Element
provides a basis for local governments to control and abate noise exposure. The fundamental
goals of the Noise Element are:
       To provide sufficient information concerning the City so that noise may be effectively
        considered in the land use planning process.
       To develop strategies for abating excessive noise exposure through cost-effective
        mitigating measures in combination with zoning, as appropriate, to avoid incompatible
        land uses.
       To protect those existing areas where the noise environment is deemed acceptable and
        also those locations throughout the community deemed "noise sensitive".
       To utilize the definition of the community noise environment in the form of CNEL or Ldn
        noise contours to help determine local compliance with the State Noise Insulation
        Standards.
       To protect the quality of life in neighborhoods by limiting intrusive noise.
The 1983 City of Monterey General Plan identified the major noise sources affecting the
community as motor vehicles (autos, trucks, buses, motorcycles) and aircraft. Motor vehicles
and aircraft continue to be the primary noise sources in 2003. Some events at the Fairgrounds
have also generated noise complaints. No stationary source, such as an industrial plant, is known
to create noise at an unacceptable level.
Goals and Policies
a. Motor Vehicle Noise
Residential areas impacted by high noise levels are along Highway One, David Avenue, and
Pacific Street. Del Monte School, Bayview School, and San Carlos School are also impacted by
motor vehicle noise. Commercial areas were impacted by traffic noise along Lighthouse Avenue,
Del Monte Avenue, and Franklin Street.
Goal a. Minimize traffic noise in predominantly residential areas and ensure noise in commercial
areas is at an acceptable level.
Policy a.1. Limit truck traffic to local delivery. Pacific Grove truck traffic should be assigned to
Holman Highway (Highway 68).
Policy a.2. Route trucks and through traffic onto truck routes, even where such routing is not the
shortest distance between points.
Program a.2.1 Implement traffic calming measures in neighborhoods.
Policy a.3. Re-evaluate City traffic flow systems periodically to determine whether traffic flows
can be adjusted through synchronized signalization or other means to minimize traffic stops.
                                                   88

Policy a.4. Cooperate with the California Highway Patrol in the active enforcement of state
motor vehicle noise standards. Active enforcement of state motor vehicle noise standards
(especially altered or illegal mufflers) can keep these contributors to the noise problem under
control. The City enforces state motor vehicle noise standards on City streets and the Highway
Patrol enforces these standards on state highways.
Policy a.5. Protect areas adjacent to roadways and freeways with landscaped noise buffers or
other means; sound walls should not be allowed.
Policy a.6. Develop and encourage the use of non-automobile travel modes such as bicycle,
pedestrian and transit alternatives.
Program a.6.1. Give implementation of the citywide bikeway system a high priority in the
City’s capital funding.
Program a.6.2. Design separated bikeway and pedestrian systems into all new roadways and
major improvements of existing roadways where feasible and in conformance with the City
General Plan, area plans, Parks Master Plan, and Bicycle Master Plan.
b. Aircraft Noise
The Monterey Peninsula Airport is owned and operated by the Monterey Peninsula Airport
District. The airport is located directly adjacent to the City's border and encompasses
approximately 600 acres. The airport has two runways. Flight paths pass over various
neighborhoods of the City.
The airport is surrounded by development, including the City of Monterey's Casanova Oak Knoll
residential neighborhood, Ryan Ranch office/industrial park, Garden Road office park, U.S.
Navy Golf Course, and Monterey County Fairgrounds.
The Monterey Peninsula Airport District has completed two studies: Monterey Peninsula
Airport Master Plan Update (September 1992) and FAR Part 150 Airport Noise Exposure Map
Report (November 1997). These studies estimate passenger growth and forecast operations. The
actual passenger count has been substantially less than projected by the plans. In 2002, the actual
passenger count was 380,000. Over the past several years, passenger growth has not met
expectations so noise levels have been less than originally forecast. However, noise from general
aviation and aircraft deviating from established flight paths and flying over neighborhoods are
still a concern to the City.
The FAR Part 150 Airport Noise Exposure Map Report states that the issue of aircraft noise and
its impact on the adjacent neighborhoods has been an issue for several years. Estimates suggest
there are approximately 55 acres that are affected by aircraft noise. The number of dwelling units
affected is estimated at 302 single-family homes and 53 multi-family units. The total population
affected is 795 persons. There are also two schools affected: the Naval Postgraduate School and
Santa Catalina School.
Policy b.1. Support improvements and operational changes at the airport that promote safety
and noise reduction.
Policy b.2. Work with the Airport District, Airport Land Use Commission, and surrounding
                                                  89

cities in planning for appropriate land uses around the airport and developing solutions to
existing noise problems.
Policy b.3. Continue to encourage the airport to limit aircraft noise between the hours of 11 p.m.
and 7 a.m.
Policy b.4. Support limiting the number of fixed-base general aviation aircraft at the airport to
the existing number.
Policy b.5. Implement the following land use standards for properties that are exposed to noise
levels in excess of 60 CNEL (Table 8).
c. Neighborhoods
Goal c. Encourage quiet neighborhoods.
d. New Development
Goal d. Allow new construction only where existing or projected noise levels are acceptable or
can mitigated.
Policy d.1 The City can require noise mitigations to reduce interior noise levels to an acceptable
level. Table 8 establishes the land use compatibility standards for new development..
Policy d.2. Limit hours of noise generating construction activities. Include this requirement as a
condition of project approval.
Table 8: Noise Exposure Standards
Noise Exposure        Land Use Standard
Above 75 CNEL         All land in this category should be under airport ownership and
                      control.
CNEL 65-74            Soundproof (insulate) existing residences, schools, and other noise
                      sensitive development to achieve interior noise levels of CNEL 45 or
                      below.
                      Require adequate sound insulation for all new residential and other
                      noise sensitive development in areas exposed to noise levels from
                      CNEL 65-69.
                      Avoid areas exposed to noise levels above CNEL 70 for new
                      residential or noise sensitive development unless abated.
CNEL 60-64            Require acoustical studies of proposed new residential and other
                      noise sensitive development. Require sound insulation as necessary
                      to achieve interior noise levels of CNEL 45 or below.
                                                   90
Table 9 Land Use and Noise Compatibility Standards
Land Use               Noise Exposure Ldn, CNEL or       Interpretation
Categories             dB
                          55 60 65 70 75 80
Residential Low                                                    Normally acceptable:
Density                                                  Specified land use is satisfactory
                                                         based upon the assumption that any
Single Family,
                                                         buildings involved are of normal
Duplex, Mobile                                           conventional construction, without
Homes                                                    any special noise insulation
Residential Multi-                                       requirements.
Family
                                                         Conditionally unacceptable: New
                                                         construction or development should
                                                         be undertaken only after a detailed
Transient Lodging --                                     analysis of the noise reduction
Motels, Hotels                                           requirements is made and needed
                                                         noise insulation features included in
                                                         the design. Conventional
                                                         construction, but with closed windows
Schools, Libraries,                                      and fresh air supply systems or air
Churches, Hospitals,                                     conditioning will normally suffice.
Nursing Homes                                            Normally unacceptable: New
                                                         construction or development should
                                                         generally be discouraged. If new
Auditoriums,                                             construction or development does
Concert Halls,                                           proceed, a detailed analysis of the
Amphitheaters                                            noise reduction requirements must be
                                                         made and needed noise insulation
                                                         features included in the design.
                                                         Clearly unacceptable: New
                                                         construction or development should
                                                         generally not be undertaken.
Source: State of California General Plan Guidelines, November 1998, Appendix A Noise
Element Guidelines, Figure 2
                                              91
Table 9 Continued: Land Use and Noise Compatibility Standards
Land Use               Noise Exposure Ldn, CNEL or
Categories             dB
                          55 60 65 70 75 80
Sports Arena,
Outdoor Spectator
Sports
Playgrounds,
Neighborhood Parks
Golf Courses, Riding
Stables, Water
Recreation,
Cemeteries
Office Buildings,
Business
Commercial and
Professional
Industrial,
Manufacturing,
Utilities, Agriculture
Source: State of California General Plan Guidelines, November 1998, Appendix A Noise
Element Guidelines, Figure 2
                                              92
Figure 16, Showing Noise Contours
                                  93
Figure 17, Showing Airport Noise Contours
                                          94
Economic Element
Introduction
The Economic Element consists of the City of Monterey's economic goals and policies. It is
typically updated more frequently than the normal 20-year General Plan cycle. Historically,
Monterey’s economy has been based on the rich history and natural resources of the City. The
current economy has a strong base in tourism, education, military establishments, retail use,
health care, and clean light industry. Tourism and education (including the military) are the two
main economic supports for the Monterey economy. The visitor economy provides more than
half of the City budget.
Since the original 1939 Master Plan, the City’s goals have been to balance economic growth with
the historic, scenic, and natural resources, and this has supported the primary elements of the
economy. While tourism has always been a major component, it has become the dominant
element over the past 30 years. A primary direction of the Economic Element will be to enhance
existing economic assets, adding value to the components that now support the City rather than
making major changes in direction.
When the 1939 Master Plan was adopted, Monterey was an industrial city, with fishing and fish
processing as the major industry, and 38% of City income came from property taxes. No other
source contributed more than 10%. When the City’s second General Plan was adopted in 1959,
36% of City income came from property taxes and 25% came from sales taxes. No other sources
contributed more than 8%. Tourism, retail sales, automobile sales, and the military were a
primary source of economic activity, and industry was almost non-existent. When the third
General Plan was adopted in 1983, 23% of City revenues came from sales tax, 23% from
transient occupancy tax, and 13% from property tax. By 1983, most of the economic activities
which are currently supporting the City were in place, including the Conference Center,
Monterey Bay Aquarium, Del Monte Center, a strong hotel base, the start of the Garden
Road/Ryan Ranch industrial area, the Defense Language Institute and Naval Postgraduate
School, and a strong education component, which includes the two military bases.
In 2001-02, City General Fund revenues were 29% from the Transient Occupancy Tax, 18%
from sales tax, 17% from fees, and 9% from property taxes. Using those funds Monterey
provides an exceptional set of municipal services to its residents. Service to the visitor economy
supports many small businesses throughout the City and the visitor economy is one of the
primary sources of jobs for Monterey residents. This economic segment provides approximately
one-third of Monterey jobs. The largest individual employers in Monterey are military,
education, health care, research, publishing, and government organizations – Defense Language
Institute, Naval Postgraduate School, Community Hospital of the Monterey Peninsula, Monterey
Peninsula Unified School District, City of Monterey, Monterey Bay Aquarium, CTB McGraw
Hill, and Monterey Peninsula College. In 2001, these major employers provided nearly one-third
of the 37,000 jobs in Monterey.
Goals, Policies, and Programs
a.      Maintain Fiscal Responsibility
                                                  95

A primary goal of the General Plan is to maintain a strong economy, which will provide needed
services to residents. The overriding goal of all General Plans since the 1939 Master Plan has
been to conserve historic, natural, and scenic values and to provide a generous public open space
system. The economy has remained strong because Monterey is a beautiful and unique place to
live and to visit. The key to a strong economy is to support economic enterprises which are
based on Monterey’s existing strengths while retaining those elements as a basis for the
economy.
Goal a. Maintain and encourage a strong economic base which will provide tax income for City
services, jobs for Monterey residents, and services for residents and visitors. Encourage civic
and business decisions which provide taxes to support City services to residents and which
provide employment opportunities to residents.
Policy a.1. Provide a balance between the economy, preservation of natural and historic
resources, and preservation of residential areas and services.
Policy a.2. Encourage visitor uses which are based on Monterey’s natural setting and history,
rather than generic visitor uses without a strong tie to Monterey’s unique features.
Policy a.3. Explore ways to diversify the Monterey economy to provide higher paying jobs and a
balance to cyclical elements of the visitor economy.
Policy a.4. Encourage small businesses and unique locally owned businesses.
b.      Build on Existing Economic Base
Monterey has significant strengths and assets, including a magnificent coastline, numerous
historic buildings, and an established reputation as a desirable place to live and visit. Monterey
has a balanced economy with significant tourism, military, retail, office, finance, education, and
government sectors. One of Monterey's greatest assets is its reputation for excellence in
environmental protection, development quality, and economic stability. Monterey’s stewardship
of the historic and natural resources has enhanced a visitor industry that provides the primary
economic base for the community. Monterey’s cooperation and support for military institutions
in the City has helped retain the second-largest component of the City economy. The Economic
Element recommends support for all levels of educational institutions. Education provides stable
employment, and many employers choose to locate in a community based on the quality of public
education provided.
A key feature in the Economic Element is to evaluate all City activities, particularly those
developed for visitors, to assure that they are available and attractive to residents.
Goal b. Expand the economy of Monterey by building on existing strengths and emphasizing the
natural and historic features of the City.
Policy b.1 Preserve and enhance Monterey’s historic character and rich cultural traditions as
unique resources that cannot be duplicated to differentiate Monterey from other visitor
destinations (see also the Historic Preservation Element).
Program b.1.1. Complete the implementation of the Historic Monterey Program between the
                                                  96

City of Monterey, Monterey History and Art Association, and the State Historic Park to improve
historic promotion, education, and preservation.
Program b.1.2. Encourage cultural tourism to attract visitors who typically stay longer and
contribute more to the economy with each visit.
Policy b.2. Emphasize the natural setting as the basis for an economy which serves both residents
and visitors.
Program b.2.1. Promote waterfront-related retail uses and recreational activities in Local Coastal
Programs and Specific plans appropriate to the natural resources of each segment of the
waterfront as identified in the Urban Design Element.
Policy b.3. Support those institutions and events which have gained statewide, national, and
international recognition.
Program b.3.1. Support major institutions located within Monterey, such as the Monterey Bay
Aquarium, the Monterey Conference Center, the Naval Postgraduate School, Defense Language
Institute, and Monterey Institute of International Studies.
Program b.3.2. Support and encourage annual events which are located within the City of
Monterey and encourage a Monterey component to extraordinary events which are located in
Monterey County.
Policy b.4. Support and promote educational and research institutions.
Program b.4.1. Investigate ways to support the Naval Postgraduate School and Defense
Language Institute so that they remain in the City of Monterey, including provision of services to
support the operation of the facilities.
Program b.4.2. Coordinate with educational institutions so that City services support those
institutions and so that the institutions are aware of potential neighborhood impacts from their
operations.
Program b.4.3. Encourage educational institutions and research facilities to locate in Monterey.
Program b.4.4. Encourage institutions and facilities promoting environmental- and language-
based education.
Policy b.5. Provide for orderly growth of the visitor sector of the Monterey economy.
Program b.5.1. Encourage visitor uses to include goods, services, and experiences that are also
attractive to residents, even if the destination is primarily oriented to visitors. Visitors enjoy
destinations that are valued by local residents.
Program b.5.2. Encourage added hotel rooms within the limits of VAF zoning in order to
increase Transient Occupancy Tax revenues.
                                                    97
Program b.5.3. Encourage hotel owners to upgrade their facilities.
Program b.5.4. Modernize and expand the Monterey Conference Center to increase year round
group business.
Policy b.6. The public transportation system should be an added attraction to visitors and should
provide excellent connections among activity areas for residents and visitors (see also Circulation
Element).
c.      Maintain Monterey as the business center of the Peninsula.
Monterey has always served as the core of the Monterey Peninsula, providing the Peninsula’s
downtown and the financial center for a much broader area. As such, it has revenues based on its
business strength and provides many services for Peninsula cities as if they were a part of the
City of Monterey.
Goal c. Continue Monterey’s role as the business and employment center of the Monterey
Peninsula.
Policy c.1. Support the downtown as the “Monterey Peninsula’s Downtown” and the core of the
City. Coordinate planning for land use, traffic, pedestrian access, and parking facilities for the
harbor, wharf, Catellus Site, Custom House Plaza, Conference Center, downtown, and east
downtown areas so that they contribute to an economically sound and livable core for the City
and Monterey Peninsula.
Policy c.2. Provide for the orderly growth of the retail sector.
Program c.2.1. Support and retain existing retail businesses with Business Improvement
Districts and Main Street programs where locally established and with design standards,
improvement programs, and façade programs where appropriate.
Policy c.3. Support the visitor industry as the primary economic base of the community.
Policy c.4. Support the military uses in the community with essential public services.
Policy c.5. Encourage and support the preservation of the Monterey fishing industry.
Policy c.6. Encourage measured and orderly growth of Monterey industrial/business park areas.
Policy c.7. Encourage small businesses and locally owned business.
Policy c.8. Support existing and future educational and research institutions.
Policy c.9. Encourage expansion of cultural and performing arts, including possible use of the
State Theatre as a performing arts facility and other venues for the arts.
Policy c.10. Promote festivals as a support for commercial areas.
Policy c.11. Provide support for the health care providers, including hospitals and private
                                                 98

practice offices.
Policy c.12. Encourage activities for children such as Dennis the Menace Park and MY
Children’s Museum.
Policy c.13. Support language uses and Monterey as the Language Capitol of the World.
Policy c.14. Support environmental and scientific research such as marine, meteorological and
oceanographic research.
Policy c.15. Support major employers. Encourage growth of these employers within the City
and actively work to retain them within the City.
Policy c.16. Support the unique role of each business area within the City.
Policy c.17. Support public schools as a community resource and as a primary factor which
attracts employers to the community.
d.      Improve Jobs and Housing Mix
The lack of affordable housing has become an impediment to the local economy. Businesses
have had a difficult time recruiting employees, and the lack of population growth relative to
economic growth has required businesses to focus more on visitors as an economic base and less
on service to residents. Even though Monterey is essentially built out, there are opportunities for
mixed use housing which can take advantage of the extraordinary views and amenities that attract
visitors to Monterey.
Goal d. Encourage housing, including mixed use housing to meet the needs of business (see
Housing Element).
e. Maintain Public Safety
A clean and safe environment is the key to maintaining a visitor-based economy. The City must
continue its excellent record of public safety and the perception that Monterey is a safe place to
visit and to live.
Goal e. Continue to provide exceptional public safety to assure that visitors and residents are not
discouraged from visiting or shopping in Monterey (see Safety Element).
                                                 99

Social Element
Introduction
Setting
A Social Element is an optional General Plan Element. The City of Monterey General Plan has
contained a Social Element since 1983, recognizing the importance of social factors and services
in the planning process.
How does social planning fit into overall city planning? Many aspects of what is generally
considered physical planning have social implications. For example, city policies affect where
various uses and businesses can locate. These businesses may provide social support services.
Social services include services related to: health, education, libraries, cultural arts, recreation,
leisure, transportation, housing, and employment. Social services are provided to all segments of
the community.
Social service programs are funded and administered at a number of levels, both public and
private. The role of cities in providing or planning for social services has been traditionally
limited to libraries, police, fire and emergency services, and recreation programs. The City’s role
has changed dramatically in the last twenty years. In addition to delivering services, the City has
also functioned as a catalyst to identify service needs and to strategize with the local service
groups on the best way to meet this need. One of the best recent examples is the Monterey Center
for Children and Families where the City leased the land and building from the Army and has
turned it over to a day care provider to create a day care/preschool.
Goals and Policies
a. Families
The City of Monterey has a strong tradition of welcoming families and children. The
predominant concerns confronting families in Monterey are affordable housing, before and after
school care, and schools. The City has exceptionally strong recreation and library programs and
has expanded them in recent years to include additional support services such as day-care, teen
programs and after school programs.
The Housing Element Background Report identifies the need for family housing. Recognizing
that there is limited land available for new single-family housing, the Housing Element includes
policies that encourage apartment, condominium, townhouse, and mixed use development, as
well as innovative housing types with the necessary room and facilities for families.
Goal a. Provide a comprehensive network of services to meet the needs of families.
Policy a.1. Preserve existing and encourage development of new family housing in Monterey as
outlined in the Housing Element.
Policy a.2. Maintain affordable supportive services such as family counseling and day care.
Program a.2.1. Encourage development of private day-care homes.
                                                  100

Program a.2.2. Encourage and facilitate the creation of high-quality state-licensed day-care
facilities.
Program a.2.3. Encourage day-care programs that can accommodate children with health care
needs.
Program a.2.4. Continue to support counseling and other youth services.
Policy a.3. Encourage public and private agencies to provide community service and recreational
opportunities that enable young people to make constructive use of their leisure time.
Policy a.4. Identify and support efforts to create a transportation network that can support
children.
b. Seniors
The City’s senior population has been growing. The City is generally shifting toward a more
mature population when comparing 1990 and 2000 Census data. These shifts can be attributed to
many factors but there are two factors most likely to cause this change. (1) The large post-World
War II baby boom generation is aging. Many of these households have the income to locate in a
desirable area like Monterey. (2) Increased longevity.
There will be a greater demand for City services to meet the unique needs of seniors, such as
transportation, housing, medical care, and recreation.
Goal b. Continue existing programs and encourage development of new programs that meet the
basic needs of elderly residents, including those on fixed income (e.g., food, transportation,
recreation, and housing).
Policy b.1. Encourage development of various types of housing for seniors, including retirement
housing and care facilities.
Policy b.2. Support the development of medical programs and facilities to meet the growing
needs for medical care as the City’s population ages.
Policy b.3. Support and expand services for seniors, including volunteer and recreational
opportunities, library, cultural, and educational services.
Policy b.4. Support and expand transportation services for seniors such as taxi vouchers and
MST Rides.
Policy b.5. Encourage services to help seniors stay in their own homes and independent, such as
adult day care, public transportation, and Mr. Fixit home improvement funds.
Policy b.6. Encourage reduced City fees and the development of private sector discounts for
lower income seniors.
c. Special Needs Groups
                                                 101

Certain segments of a population typically require additional public services. These groups might
include homeless and/or disabled. These goals and policies strive to address some of these needs.
Goal c. Continue to provide programs for special need households.
Policy c.1. Help meet the recreational needs of the disabled.
Policy c.2. Support transportation services for persons with special needs.
Program c.2.1. Continue to support the specialized transportation program for the disabled such
as taxi vouchers and the MST Rides program.
Policy c.3. Encourage the coordination of services of all public and private transportation
providers.
Policy c.4. Support public and nonprofit agencies that assist homeless persons to find long-term
shelter and employment.
d. Health and Mental Health
Health services are a vital part of any community. They are becoming especially critical in the
United States as the “baby boom” population ages and will be requiring additional health
services. Monterey is no exception and expects increased requests for health care services and
facilities. Public agencies often respond to mental health related issues, and should have training
to deal sensitively with them.
Goal d. Encourage planning and coordination of the health care system to ensure efficient and
effective delivery.
Policy d.1. Encourage the Monterey County Health Department to provide adequate preventative
health care and mental health education within the City for all residents.
Policy d.2. Encourage the availability of counseling services for all that need them, regardless of
ability to pay.
Policy d.3. Encourage the county health department and local hospitals to provide low-cost
counseling services to all residents.
Policy d.4. Encourage coordination efforts in the health care field to provide a continuum of
care.
Policy d.5. Encourage programs for public agency personnel to train them to work with people
who have mental health issues.
e. Education
Education continues to be a high priority in the City of Monterey. Many of Monterey’s
recreation, library, and public safety programs work in concert with school programs. One
direction of this Element is to evaluate City social programs in light of school needs. In addition
to preschool and K-12 education, the City values its colleges and postgraduate schools.
                                                 102

Goal e. Support programs that provide strong educational opportunities at all levels, from pre-
school to postgraduate programs.
Policy e.1. Review opportunities for resource sharing to strengthen K-12 educational programs
within the City.
Policy e.2. Explore opportunities for business/school partnerships to assist in education programs
and support for students.
Policy e.3. Continue homework assistance programs.
Policy e.4. Develop cooperative relationships with colleges and postgraduate schools to
strengthen educational opportunities in the City.
Policy e.5. Encourage sharing of facilities between educational institutions and the City to
maximize use of limited resources.
f. Public Safety
One of the primary functions of city governments is to provide public safety services for its
residents. Monterey has both City police and fire departments.
The City has a Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) to help train city residents
regarding public safety issues. It also creates a network of citizens to help in emergency
situations.
Goal f. Ensure prompt and effective services to cope with local emergencies.
Policy f.1. Encourage the development of community services, with an emphasis on crime
prevention and supportive services for the victims of crime.
Program f.1.1. Continue and expand the city’s crime prevention program.
Program f.1.2. Cooperate with service clubs and other community groups in crime prevention
efforts.
Program f.1.3. Continue in-school law enforcement programs and lectures to community groups
on topics such as drug abuse, crime prevention, and the rights of minors.
Program f.1.4. Encourage programs that inform residents of their legal rights and
responsibilities.
Policy f.2. Support nonprofit agencies that provide assistance, such as food and shelter, during
family emergencies.
Policy f.3. Continue to work with service providers to promote programs, which encourage good
citizenship in children and teenagers.
Policy f.4. Support counseling services for youth and early intervention to lessen alienation and
                                                  103

potential delinquent behavior.
Policy f.5. Provide service to military installations and neighboring jurisdictions through
contractual agreements without diminishing service levels to city residents.
g. Library Services
Library services are critical to the well-being of the community. The Library connects people
with the knowledge and cultures of the world. Through the Library, people have abundant
opportunities for self-improvement, such as developing job skills or learning English and other
languages. The Library informs people about current and pending issues at the local, regional,
national and international levels. Children who use libraries will generally become better readers,
better students, and more successful citizens. The Library is also a cultural center, bringing
diverse groups and interests together and building a stronger community.
Goal g. Provide Library services, programs, and resources to meet changing community needs
and interests.
Policy g.1. Acquire and maintain collections of books and other resources to meet current and
projected community needs and interests and provide a balanced representation of ideas and
information. Continue special emphasis on the increasingly complex needs of children and young
people, as well as the growing number of senior citizens in our society.
Policy g.2. Provide effective, accessible, safe and attractive Library facilities. Planning efforts
will address the need for more space in order to continue to fulfill the Library’s mission.
Policy g.3. Provide access to information and resources for remote users from their homes,
workplaces, and schools.
Policy g.4. Share resources and coordinate activities with other city departments, libraries,
agencies, and organizations in order to maximize service to the community.
h. Cultural Arts
For the past thirty years, the City has supported cultural arts programs designed to delight all age
groups. The cultural arts programs include Arts in Public Places, the performing arts, historical
preservation and the presentation and maintenance of California’s First State House, Colton Hall.
Goal h. Continue and expand cultural arts programs for the enrichment of the daily life of the
City’s residents and visitors.
Policy h.1. Develop sustained funding for a variety of art elements in public places through
private-public collaboration.
Policy h.2. Continue the program of underwriting cultural arts agencies that offer arts activities
for the benefit of the residents and visitors.
Policy h.3. Restore Colton Hall for use as a museum.
Policy h.4. Maintain the annual plan for the cultural arts.
                                                  104

i. Recreation and Community Services
The City’s Recreation and Community Services Department has a broad range of programs it
provides for the City’s residents. These programs include the traditional recreation opportunities
and have expanded to include many community service programs. A few examples include: adult
daycare for individuals with Alzheimer’s and dementia, discounted meals for senior citizens,
afterschool programs for children, and SHARP program (afterschool program for
developmentally delayed teenagers). The Recreation and Community Services Department has
forged new alliances with service providers to strategize how to meet the City’s social service
needs.
Goal i. Continue to evaluate and strategize on how to meet the City’s social service needs.
Policy i.1. Coordinate with various service providers to determine how needs can be met.
Recognize that the City may not be able to provide all the services needed but can serve as the
catalyst to encourage additional services and partnerships.
Policy i.2. Continue to provide high quality programs that meet the changing needs of
Monterey’s population.
j. Public Participation in Government
Democracy depends on two-way communication between public officials and the population.
The City of Monterey is committed to the concept of open government and encourages public
access to officials and records.
The City depends on volunteers to maintain its high level of service to residents.
Goal j. Maintain a high level of communication between residents and the City.
Policy j.1. Encourage two-way communication between the City and residents and businesses.
Program j.1.1. Continue government outreach through programs like the City Focus newsletter,
broadcast of public meetings, public access television, City web sites, and meetings with
neighborhood leaders and business associations.
Program j.1.2. Encourage residents to communicate with the City through programs like the
City telephone hotline, surveys, email, etc.
Program j.1.3. Continue programs that encourage volunteer participation.
Program j.1.4. Encourage residents to participate in City Boards and Commissions.
Program j.1.5. Assure that public records are accessible to citizens.
k. Information and Coordination
A social service network depends on getting information to the people who need it. The
coordination between agencies is vital to prevent duplication and ensure the most efficient
utilization of resources. This is where the City can be effective by helping to identify service
needs and to work with local providers to meet these needs.
                                                 105

Goal k. Provide accurate information on available social services in a manner which is easily
accessible to all residents and service providers.
Policy k.1. Develop and provide information about social services in appropriate locations in the
City, including the Library, Police Department, Housing Division, and Neighborhood Centers.
Continue to provide referral services.
Policy k.2. Evaluate coordination efforts of service providers who request city funds.
Policy k.3. Advocate social services coordination efforts at the county level.
Policy k.4. Participate in ongoing assessment of community social needs and resources.
Policy k.5. Continue to gather data on social needs and target groups; update the needs
assessment on a periodic basis.
Policy k.6. Provide information and assistance to service providers and community groups to
enable them to develop needed services.
                                                 106
Historic Preservation Element
Introduction
The City of Monterey is one of the most historic cities in the United States, and preservation of
historic resources has long been a concern of Monterey citizens. As early as the 1880’s, the
Native Sons of the Golden West first attempted to have the Monterey Custom House designated
as an historic landmark. In June 1932, it became California’s first State Historic Landmark. The
City’s first Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance, adopted in 1939 and 1940, emphasized historic
preservation and included historic overlay zoning for 40 buildings.
Most of Monterey’s economic activity takes place in historic areas or areas with a significant
number of historic buildings, including downtown, Cannery Row, Wharf I, the Presidio of
Monterey, Naval Postgraduate School, and Custom House Plaza. Much of the City’s economic
activity is based on an active re-use of these historic resources and areas.
The City of Monterey owns and maintains 12 historic buildings1 built between the 1840s and
1937. In addition, Monterey has leased the Lower Presidio of Monterey as an historic park and
has developed a museum and master plan for that park.
The City has historic resources with international, national, and statewide significance. The
Monterey State Historic Park preserves several unique adobe buildings in downtown Monterey.
The downtown is a National Historic Landmark District and the Royal Presidio Chapel is a
National Historic Landmark – the highest level of National recognition. At the Presidio of
Monterey, there is a National Register Historic District and a National Register eligible Historic
District. On the campus of the Naval Postgraduate School, there is a National Register eligible
Historic District and Historic Landscaped Grounds.
The City has developed a comprehensive Historic Preservation Program for the protection of its
historic resources. The program consists of:
         Historic Preservation Element
         Historic Master Plan
         Citywide historic survey program
         CEQA historic review
         Historic Preservation Ordinance
         Incentives for historic property owners
         City ownership and maintenance of historic buildings
         Coordination with other historic property owners
         Maintenance of historic records in the Monterey Public Library.
A major part of this program was adopted by the City Council in March 2000, with an Historic
Master Plan, revised Historic Preservation Ordinance, and Cannery Row Survey.
The Historic Master Plan is an implementation plan with detailed programs to implement
1
  Vasquez Adobe, Brown-Underwood Adobe, First French Consulate, Colton Hall, Osio-Rodriguez Adobe, Old Monterey Jail, Gordon House,
Cannery Row Worker’s Shacks, Vasquez Adobe Cookhouse, Few Memorial Hall of Records, Aeneas Bridge overcrossing, Ed Rickett’s Lab.
                                                              107

Historic Preservation element goals. The March 2000 Historic Master Plan identified eleven
historic contexts2 as a basis for evaluating historic resources and identified two primary goals for
preservation in Monterey: (a) preservation of historic resources and (b) coordination of
preservation efforts among historic property owners.
Goals, Policies, and Programs
a. Protection of Historic and Cultural Resources
Goal a. Preserve historic and cultural resources in Monterey, including buildings, sites,
landscapes, artifacts, and memories.
Policy a.1. Maintain a balanced preservation program with plans, surveys, ordinances to
preserve historic resources, and incentives, including permit streamlining, to balance the added
costs of maintaining historic resources.
Program a.1.1. Maintain the Historic Master Plan with review and updates at five-year
intervals.
Program a.1.2. Encourage historic zoning and Historic Districts in areas that are eligible.
Consider City-initiated historic zoning and Districts for resources with state, national, and
international significance.
Program a.1.3. Complete the City-wide historic survey program and maintain up-to-date surveys
of potentially historic resources.
Program a.1.4. Develop a Master Plan for the lower Presidio of Monterey Historic Park.
Program a.1.5. Develop a Master Plan for the Royal Presidio Site in conjunction with the
Diocese of Monterey.
Program a.1.6. Encourage the identification and preservation of historic landscapes, including
incentives for preservation.
Program a.1.7. Maintain and update the City’s historic incentive programs to support historic
property owners, including grant programs, land use incentives, flexible zoning and parking
standards, property tax relief, Historic Building Code, and expedited processing for historic
resources.
Policy a.2. Encourage the collection and preservation of artifacts, print materials, oral histories,
and ephemera.
Program a.2.1. Maintain and expand the historic collection at the Library California Room.
Program a.2.2. Support cultural museums, learning and interpretive centers, and libraries that
2
  Monterey Bay and the City Setting, population and cultural groups, government, economy, tourism and recreation,
transportation, technology and science, military, religion, education, cultural arts.
                                                                108

preserve, store, protect, and make artifacts available for public display and study.
Policy a.3. Maintain City-owned historic buildings in accordance with the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Resources.
Policy a.4. Utilize the CEQA process for projects located in archaeologically sensitive areas to
identify and mitigate potential impacts on archaeological resources.
b. Coordination of Historic Activities
Goal b. Coordinate the preservation, interpretation, and presentation of historic Monterey by the
various agencies that interpret and maintain Monterey historic resources.
Policy b.1. Continue to support the Historic Monterey program, which coordinates with
government, nonprofit, and other historic organizations to preserve and present Monterey
history.
Program b.1.1. Coordinate historic programming so that residents and visitors can experience
and understand the entire range of Monterey history in a seamless manner.
Program b.1.2. Establish a single passport or ticket mechanism that provides access to all
historic destinations.
Program b.1.3. Coordinate hours of operations and tours so that they do not overlap. Develop
sample itineraries for residents or visitors based on length of time they have to visit historic
sites.
Program b.1.4. Coordinate historic programming with other non-historic destinations and
activities in Monterey.
Program b.1.5. Integrate marketing efforts of the various agencies that interpret Monterey
history.
Program b.1.6. Consolidate specialized staffing and functions among organizations with historic
resources by sharing maintenance, training, archival, craftspeople, and other resources
necessary for the preservation of historic buildings, sites, or artifacts.
Program b.1.7. Promote the development of skills programs such as apprentices and internships
in preservation or archival techniques.
Program b.1.8. Coordinate collections management among libraries and museums.
Program b.1.9. Include military bases and military history in the Historic Monterey program by
reaching out to the Defense Language Institute and Naval Postgraduate School for coordinated
historic programming.
Program b.1.10. Encourage publication and interpretation of Monterey history, particularly a
comprehensive history that includes the period from signing of the State Constitution in 1850 to
                                                 109
the present.
Program b.1.11. Develop an historic entrances and vistas programs, to identify and enhance
recognition of the various historic influences in Monterey, such as Spanish and Mexican
government, American conquest and statehood, Gilded age, fishing era, etc.
Program b.1.12. Work with the partners in the Historic Monterey Program so that levels of
service are not diminished if funding is diminished.
                                                 110
Public Facilities Element
Introduction
The purpose of this element is to describe the general location, levels of service, and adequacy of
existing and proposed public facilities which comprise about 46% of the City’s land area. It will
help provide a bridge between long-range planning for public facilities and the short- and
intermediate-range area plans and capital improvement programs that allocate resources for their
construction, operation, maintenance, and eventual expansion or replacement.
It is important to emphasize that the General Plan is a long range planning document and funding
availability and priorities will change overtime. Therefore, the City’s capability to meet some or
all of the goals and policies may vary.
It is also vital that planning for public facilities be coordinated with private development plans so
that needed facilities such as schools, parks and streets are available at the time and location
needed. The City’s General Plan should provide the long-range framework for both public and
private development. The City’s Capital Improvement Program translates the long-range policies
and programs of the General Plan into one and five-year public facility plans which ideally are
coordinated with the expectations of private developers.
The public facilities described in this element are the physical features, buildings, land and
equipment of governmental and other institutions operated for the general public. The major
public facilities are: police and fire, park and recreation facilities, schools, military, cultural,
conference center, health care, civic center, cemeteries, harbor, sewage treatment, storm drain
system, water supply, and reduction and recycling of waste. Transportation and parking facilities
are discussed separately in the Circulation Element. Park and recreation facilities are discussed in
this element as well as the Open Space and Social Elements.
Goals and Policies
a. Growth Management
New development within the existing city limits and in areas that may be annexed will have to be
monitored closely to insure that it does not overload limited public facilities and resources. The
City should establish a fee structure to recover the costs generated by new development.
Goal a. Phase future development in accordance with the City’s ability to service it.
Policy a.1. Use the City’s capital improvement program for determining short-range priorities for
the allocation of public facilities funds consistent with the General Plan.
Policy a.2. Encourage review of proposed public facilities of all agencies by the City Planning
Commission.
Policy a.3. Encourage infill development within the City where it can efficiently be provided
with public facilities and utilities.
Program a.3.1. Monitor limited public services (e.g., water, sewer, streets) and develop a system
                                                    111

to determine the impacts of proposed developments on these resources.
Program a.3.2. Mitigate the impacts of proposed developments through means such as increased
use of transit and water conservation.
Policy a.4. Major new developments, such as annexed areas, should generate enough revenues to
pay for the public services they demand.
Policy a.5. Reserve adequate space in new development for schools, parks, playgrounds,
bikeways, community centers, libraries, fire stations and other public facilities.
Policy a.6. Control the rate of development if all projects being proposed cannot adequately be
served with public facilities, or could cause a rate of growth higher than the community feels is
acceptable.
b. Police
The Police Department currently occupies a downtown station that was built in 1959. This
facility no longer supports operational efficiency and should be replaced.
Goal b. Maintain a high level of police protection consistent with the City’s needs and financial
resources.
Policy b.1. Provide for adequate police facilities through the Capital Improvement Program.
Policy b.2. Continue to cooperate and coordinate with county and state agencies in providing
police services within the community.
Policy b.3. Develop a plan to upgrade or replace the main police station.
c. Fire
The City of Monterey provides fire protection to all areas within the City’s jurisdictional
boundaries except the Naval Postgraduate School facilities and housing areas. Fire protection by
contract is also provided to the Presidio of Monterey (Defense Language Institute), and to the
cities of Del Rey Oaks and Sand City.
The City’s fire department operates three fire stations. Fire station 1 is located at Pacific and
Madison streets; Station 2, at 582 Hawthorne Street; and Station 3, at Montecito and Dela Vina
Avenues.
The unincorporated areas within the City’s sphere of influence obtain fire protection service from
County Service Area 39 (provided by the California Department of Forestry) to areas south of
Highway 1, and from Salinas Rural Fire District to areas off Monterey-Salinas Highway (68).
The City’s fire protection system is designed to resolve fire occurrences in structures less than
5,000 square feet in area, as well as small open-range fires of brush, trees and grass. To achieve
additional fire protection for those small percentages of emergencies that require greater
resources, the City has entered into reciprocal mutual aid agreements.
                                                 112

Goal c. Maintain facilities to provide a cost-effective, high level of fire protection service.
Policy c.1. Require built-in fire protection for new and existing structures to minimize the need
for additional fire facilities.
Policy c.2. Identify cost-effective fire station locations. using contractual or automatic aid
agreements.
Policy c.3. Continue to monitor and evaluate the need for a new fire station to serve the
Monterey-Salinas Highway (68) and Ryan Ranch areas. Explore opportunities to co-locate at the
airport’s fire station to provide this additional service.
Policy c.4. Provide for adequate fire facilities through capital funding.
Policy c.5. Develop a plan to upgrade or replace the fire administration building.
d. Schools
Primary and Secondary Schools: The Monterey Peninsula Unified School District provides
public education for students in kindergarten through the twelfth grade in the communities of
Monterey, Seaside, Del Rey Oaks, Sand City, Fort Ord, Marina, and some unincorporated areas.
In addition to the regular school program, early childhood education programs, regional
occupation, and work experience programs are offered. In addition to these public schools, there
are currently several private schools in Monterey.
Post Secondary Schools: Several post-secondary schools are located in the City of Monterey
including Monterey Peninsula College, Monterey Institute of International Studies, Monterey
College of Law, Naval Postgraduate School, and Defense Language Institute.
Monterey Peninsula College is a large site in the geographic center of the City and provides a
wide range of courses to full and part-time students of all ages. The Monterey Institute of
International Studies offers bachelor and postgraduate degree programs in languages and
international studies. The Monterey College of Law provides classes leading to a law degree.
The military has two important schools in the City. The Defense Language Institute is located at
the Presidio of Monterey. It is the primary language instruction facility for all branches of the
military. The Naval Postgraduate School provides postgraduate degrees for military personnel
and is a significant military research center.
Goal d. Continue to work with various agencies to provide exemplary educational facilities in
the City of Monterey.
Policy d.1. Work with Monterey Peninsula Unified School District in school site planning.
Policy d.2. Work with the District on the reuse of school sites that are no longer needed.
Policy d.3. Continue to encourage coordination between the City, military, Monterey Peninsula
Unified School District, Monterey Peninsula College, and private schools in the planning of
future school facilities.
                                                   113

Policy d.4. Due to limited land and resources, continue to encourage shared facilities and
resources among the City, military, and schools.
Policy d.5. Continue to support joint use agreements to enable investment in school district
facilities.
Policy d.6. Encourage the retention of Monterey High School in the downtown core.
e. The Military
The military plays an important role in the Monterey community. The armed forces comprise
18% of the City’s labor force according to the 2000 Census. There are three military installations
in Monterey: the Coast Guard Station, the Naval Postgraduate School, and the Defense Language
Institute at the Presidio of Monterey.
During the late 1990s, the City of Monterey and military explored various opportunities to share
public facilities and manpower resources. For example, the City provides extensive contractual
maintenance services to the Defense Language Institute.
Elementary and high school facilities for the military are provided by the Monterey Peninsula
Unified School District. Most hospital health care is provided by Community Hospital of the
Monterey Peninsula with the closure of the Fort Ord hospital facilities in the mid 1990s.
Goal e. Support the establishment of a standing committee made up of representatives of the
Peninsula cities, the county, and the three military facilities on the Peninsula. The committee
should work on solutions to public facility issues such as housing, infrastructure, recreation, and
public works issues.
f. Cultural
There are a wide variety of cultural facilities within the City. The two largest City-owned and
operated facilities are the Library and the Monterey Conference Center.
The City library is essential to a healthy Monterey. The site of the existing library building is
excellent, being close to the downtown, the civic center complex, and some of the more densely
populated neighborhoods. However, the existing building has become too small to meet growing
community needs for such services as new technologies, more collections, meeting rooms, and
space for collaborative learning. The children’s section is inadequate in terms of size. There is
also a need for more customer self-service options as well as revenue-generating opportunities.
The library needs to be fully accessible to the elderly and disabled persons. It needs to be
outfitted with a flexible, expandable technology and telecommunications infrastructure to
support current and future applications. Some existing pedestrian and vehicular access and routes
are problematic. More safe and accessible parking is essential.
The public library also delivers services beyond the walls of the facility on Pacific Street. A
robust telecommunications network throughout the City of Monterey will allow the library to
provide many services to homes, schools and businesses on a continuous basis. A commitment to
mobile library service is also strong in Monterey. The library facility needs adequate space from
                                                 114

which to stage and operate a Bookmobile or other mobile library vehicle.
The City’s Conference Center needs to expand to meet the growing needs of its customers. There
is no practical way to expand the current building. The City should seek other nearby
opportunities to provide additional services and facilities. Another long-term goal of the City is
to create a Performing Arts Center. Restoring the historic State Theater could meet both
objectives, although there may be other buildings or vacant sites which would be appropriate to
consider.
Goal f. Maintain and support the present high level of cultural facilities and activities in the City.
Policy f.1. Provide adequate library facilities through the Capital Improvement Program.
Policy f.2. Continue to support cooperation between the City Library and other libraries in the
region.
Policy f.3. Seek opportunities to provide additional offsite services and facilities for the
Monterey Conference Center.
Policy f.4. Continue to explore opportunities to create a performing arts center in the City.
Policy f.5. Work cooperatively with public and private entities to provide community meeting
space.
Policy f.6. Work with State Parks Foundation to get the historic park facilities open to the public
and maintained operational.
Policy f.7. Continue to work with various agencies to acquire and restore the State Theater.
g. Health Care
The Community Hospital of Monterey Peninsula (CHOMP) is the only hospital on the Monterey
Peninsula. CHOMP anticipates substantial growth to accommodate the area’s aging population
and has submitted a 2002 master plan to the City to explore its expansion needs for the next
several years. Additional public facilities may be needed as the City’s population continues to
age.
Goal g. Continue to support the expansion of health care facilities that provide more efficient and
cost-effective services to local residents.
h. Civic Center
Monterey Civic Center facilities are inadequate in office and work space. Short-range plans to
temporarily relieve the most acute problem areas have been undertaken. Part of the problem is
that many of the City’s offices are located in historic buildings. The additions and modifications
that would normally take place cannot be made to these historic structures. Long-range capital
improvement plans propose that a new City Hall may be built within the present Civic Center
area. When these new facilities are built, many of the historic City Hall buildings, such as Colton
Hall, can be opened up to allow more public use appropriate to their historic status.
                                                  115

Goal h. Comprehensively plan buildings and parking for the entire Civic Center Campus.
Continue to support improvements to the Civic Center facilities in keeping with the City’s needs
and financial resources to improve public access and services.
i. Harbor
The main public facilities in the Monterey Harbor are Wharves No. 1 and 2, the marina, the
Coast Guard pier, and boat launch ramps. Wharf No. 1 caters to both visitors and residents.
Wharf No. 2 is oriented primarily to the commercial fishing fleet and recreational pier fishing.
The City marina has 413 berths for both pleasure boats and commercial fishing boats. There are
approximately 175 commercial fishing boats in the harbor. In addition to the marina, there are
180 moorings. Adjacent to the Coast Guard pier is a City boat launch ramp and parking area.
There are no current plans for expanding the marina and breakwater.
Goal i. Promote the improvement of facilities in the harbor area that will provide services needed
by both Monterey’s fishing industry and pleasure craft owners.
Policy i.1. Continue to provide adequate berthing in the Monterey harbor for fishing vessels and
pleasure craft at prices competitive with other areas.
Policy i.2. Maintain and enhance adequate facilities in the harbor area for unloading and
transportation of fish.
Policy i.3. Support recreational fishing on Wharf 2.
j. Park and Recreation Facilities
The City of Monterey Recreation and Community Services Department manages a wide range of
park and recreation facilities. The Open Space Element provides background information and
goals and policies regarding the City’s open space and park resources implemented by the Parks
Master Plan. This section focuses on facilities.
Significant recreation facilities include the recently expanded Monterey Sports Center,
community centers, neighborhood park facilities, and beach parks. The City operates five
community centers. Neighborhood parks also include various athletic fields, tennis courts and
other park facilities.
Goal j. Continue to provide excellent park and recreation opportunities to the community.
Policy j.1. Continue to evaluate how and where to provide services as community needs evolve
over time.
Policy j.2. Consider the needs of special populations when planning park and recreation
opportunities and facilities.
Policy j.3. Continue to coordinate with outside agencies, such as school districts and the military,
to provide a comprehensive recreation program.
Policy j.4. Provide adequate maintenance of existing park and recreation facilities.
                                                  116

Policy j.5. Provide for new park and recreation facilities through capital funding.
Policy j.6. Continue to require new developments to pay their fair share for park and recreation
facilities and maintenance.
k. Sewer
The maintenance of the City’s sewerage system is being shared between the City and a regional
sewer treatment agency. The sewer collection system operated by the City consists of
approximately 102 miles of sewer lines maintained by City personnel and 5 sewer lift stations
with maintenance contracted out. Most of the costs for the maintenance and the replacement of
sewer pipes are recovered through a sewer surcharge fee, based on the monthly sewer utility
costs. The treatment of the sewage is the responsibility of the regional sewer treatment agency of
Monterey Regional Water Pollution Control Agency (MRWPCA). MRWPCA owns and operates
a treatment facility near the City of Marina.
In 1998 and 1999 the City evaluated the sewer system of the City. Based on the findings of the
sewer assessment, the City has started a multi-million dollar capital replacement program. City
personnel conduct annual inspections of the sewer pipe system to adjust the maintenance and
capital replacement programs.
New technologies in areas of sewer pipe replacement and sewer maintenance should be
investigated on a continuous basis.
The protection of the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary has become an integral element
of the City’s policies and standards with respect to the maintenance and capital replacement of
the sewer and storm drain systems.
Goal k. Continue cooperation with the Monterey Regional Water Pollution Control Agency to
maintain an environmentally compliant closed system (system that complies with environmental
regulations) that ultimately allows partial reuse of the wastewater.
Policy k.1. Encourage measures to promote proper disposal of pollutants into the sanitary sewer
or hazardous waste facilities rather than into the storm drainage system.
Policy k.2. Continue inspections of the City’s sewer pipe system to prioritize maintenance needs.
Policy k.3. Set sewer fees at a rate sufficient to maintain and, when necessary, replace the
system.
l. Storm Drain
The City’s storm drain system is a separate system that collects surface runoff and conveys it to
the ocean. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has identified urban runoff as a
significant cause of water pollution in the United States. Surface runoff water may contain a
variety of pollutants picked up as water flows across the surface of the land. Common pollutants
include oil and other automotive fluids, refuse, pesticides, fertilizers, waste products (including
pet bio waste), litter, and heavy metals such as copper, chromium, lead, cadmium, and other
toxics produced by vehicle wear and weathered paint. Storm drain management and maintenance
                                                  117

is mandatory to preserve the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary and other water bodies as
required by the Federal Clean Water Act.
The City’s storm drainage system currently consists of 10 miles of pipelines and drainage
channels which discharge urban runoff into the Monterey Bay. City personnel maintain the lines
by cleaning catch basins and storm inlets. A portion of the cost for the maintenance and capital
replacement of the storm drain system is recovered through a storm water utility fee. The City
will comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
found in the Clean Water Act by complying with its Phase II Storm Water Permit.
Water quality is impacted by human activities in many ways. Land use planning should be done
in a way that minimizes impacts to water bodies by minimizing erosion, maintaining stream
buffer zones, and integrating construction and post-construction controls. Water quality
protection measures are intended to protect the health and safety of humans as well as the
environment.
Goal l. Continue to improve drainage and urban runoff quality throughout the City and maintain
Monterey’s status as a regional lead agency for storm water management programs.
Policy 1.1. Set storm drain fees at a rate sufficient to maintain and, when necessary, replace and
upgrade the system.
Policy l.2. The City of Monterey will comply with requirements from State regulatory agencies
related to urban runoff quality. This includes required implementation of the National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II six minimum measures. These include:
1.      Public Education and Outreach
2.      Public Participation/Involvement
3.      Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination
4.      Construction Site Runoff Control
5.      Post-Construction Runoff Control
6.      Pollution Prevention/Good Housekeeping
Water
Background information is provided in the Conservation Element and the goals and policies are
provided below. The City’s strategy to obtain additional water resources is described below.
Goal m. Develop long-term water supplies and conservation methods so that there is sufficient
water to implement General Plan goals.
Policy m.1. Develop alternatives for long-term water supply both within and outside the
framework of the Water Management District and the California American Water Company.
Program m.1.1. Establish an independent task force of Peninsula cities to develop new and
creative sources for long-term water supplies and conservation methods for the region.
Program m.1.2. The task force should meet with appropriate public and private agencies to
provide water supply necessary to meet long-term needs within the framework of their particular
rules and constraints.
                                                  118

Program m.1.3. The task force should evaluate all water supply options.
Program m.1.4. The City and Task Force should evaluate the potential for City water utilities for
each city or a combination of cities.
Program m.1.5. Develop and continue conservation programs to reduce water consumption,
including but not limited to retrofit, stormwater reuse, water reclamation programs for golf
course and other uses, greywater reclamation programs for both new and existing developments.
Encourage conservation and reclamation of water at military and educational institutions.
Program m.1.6. Encourage property owners to achieve full or partial independence from the
existing water system (e.g. wells, cisterns). The City should work with other government
agencies to eliminate rules that would impede these solutions.
Program m.1.7. Encourage landscaping with drought-resistant native plants in both existing and
proposed public and private development projects.
Program m.1.8. Any water saved or reclaimed should be under City control for City re-
allocation.
Goal m.2. Encourage Cal-Am to maintain the City’s water supply system in a good state of
repair to prevent leakage and other water loss.
Policy m.2. Encourage continued development of the City’s water supply system to meet
established fire flow standards (including reservoirs, mains, and hydrants).
Program m.2.1. Encourage the Water Management District to work with the City to provide and
improve emergency measures to insure adequate water, storage and distribution during disaster
circumstances.
Goal m.3. Establish goals, standards and priorities for water allocation.
Policy m.3.1. Identify the current unmet community needs that require water, and establish
priorities so that the most essential land uses are provided for.
n. Reduction and Recycling of Waste
The regional waste collection facility is located in the City of Marina and is operated by the
Monterey Regional Waste Management District. Locally, there is a transfer facility in Ryan
Ranch operated by Monterey Disposal Service. The preservation and protection of the
environment are intertwined throughout the planning and development of programs throughout
the City. In 1989 the State of California mandated that all cities divert as much as 50% of its
waste by 2000 or pay fines of up to $10,000 a day. As a result, in 2002 the City of Monterey is
diverting as much as 65% of its waste.
As little as a decade ago, waste included many items that today are removed from the waste
stream, recycled and made into other usable products. Free recycling services act as an incentive
                                                  119

for the reduction of waste. Waste audits and assistance is offered to businesses, which clearly
shows the value of reducing and recycling waste. Those that live in our community have changed
their habits as well. In the past, residents were allowed to dispose of 120 gallons of waste per
week. In 1994, they began disposing of only 40 gallons of waste and the recycling of yard
trimmings, used motor oil, construction and demolition debris and other recyclables began in
earnest.
As visitors arrive in our City, the population will continue to grow to approximately 100,000
people or more in a day. A by-product of this is the increase of waste, including heavy restaurant
waste. Leaking wet waste in dumpsters and in trucks in route to landfills contributes to storm
water pollution. A commercial composting program will be developed, which will divert a large
percentage of weight from the landfill, improve storm drain runoff issues, and create a viable
product - rich soil. Appropriate education to restaurant owners and staff will be provided
requiring them to eliminate as much liquid from their waste as possible.
As new developments and remodels for existing structures appear for staff approval, it will be
imperative to include adequate waste and recycling enclosures in the planning process. Currently,
much of the food waste and everyday liquid residue from waste containers land on the ground
and eventually are washed down the storm drains. Future plans will provide connections to the
City sewer and other design changes to sufficiently eliminate odors and waste runoff to storm
drains.
Goal n. Continue to provide facilities to implement cost-effective and incentive-based recycling
programs and education for items such as yard waste, vehicle oil, food containers, cardboard, and
mixed paper to divert waste generated by residential and commercial customers.
Policy n.1. Continue to provide specific waste reduction and recycling programs for users, such
as manufacturing, restaurant, business, military, and residential customers.
Policy n.2. Encourage the development of commercial composting and educational programs.
Policy n.3. Implement waste and recycling enclosure standards for all new developments and
remodels.
o. Maintenance of Public Facilities
The City owns and operates more than 160 public facilities. The age of the structures range from
historic single wall adobe architecture to state-of-the-art facilities with complex HVAC system
components. The maintenance of the buildings will continue to require investments.
Restoration as well as new construction of existing and future City facilities will focus on the
utilization of building materials and building concepts that comply with environmental standards,
preserve the beauty of the Monterey Peninsula and complement the architectural variety of the
City.
Goal o. Maintain the existing City buildings by applying building maintenance standards that are
appropriate based on the age, type and purpose of the structure.
Policy o.1. Continue to implement concepts that promote green buildings and construction.
                                                  120
Policy o.2. Provide ongoing and preventative maintenance in a timely manner.
p. Cemeteries
The City’s Cemetery Plan outlines proposed improvements to the City cemetery. The Cemetery
is projected to have adequate space for the next twenty years.
Goal p. Ensure that adequate space continues to be available at the City Cemetery or new
facilities.
Policy p.1. Review the City’s Cemetery Plan periodically and construct facilities as needed.
Policy p.2. Support development of a Veterans Cemetery in the area.
                                               121

Glossary
Consolidated Plan (Housing Assistance) – A plan required by the Department of Housing and
Urban Development that prioritizes funding over a five-year period for allocation of local, state
and federal funds. The plan also identifies community development needs (youth needs,
economic development, etc.)
High Value Habitats – Areas that have high habitat value as natural ecosystems and provide the
highest quality of wildlife habitat.
Housing Assistance Plan – The Housing Assistance Plan is part of the City’s Redevelopment
Plan and defines how housing funds are to be utilized in the City.
Larger Developable Sites- Sites that are more than two acres in size.
Moderate Value Habitats – Areas where moderate levels of human disturbance and activities,
such as mowing, wood gathering, and recreational use, have degraded its original value.
Parking Adjustment Districts – Districts where applications can be filed to provide less than
the required parking onsite.
Special Status Species – Animal or plant species that are listed on a federal or state list of
concern.
Townhouse – A residential unit that may have common walls with another housing unit.
Workforce Housing - Workforce housing in the City of Monterey is defined as affordable and
attainable housing for the employment base of the City. There are broad categories of workforce
housing, which are noted in Table 10 below.
Government-subsidized housing assists those below 120% of median income. These funds come
from local, State and Federal housing funds.
Housing at above-moderate levels, commonly called “Below-Market-Rate-Housing” (BMR),
must be from other non-governmental sources, or non-housing funds.
Mixed-income housing projects are those projects that address the needs of many different
employee income groups, from subsidized level to the market-rate level. This type of housing
project is usually funded or financed through the collaboration of a variety of sources, including
major employers seeking to address the housing needs of their employees.
While the workforce is composed of a broad spectrum of salaries, there is a much greater need,
and thus a higher priority, for assistance at the lower-income levels.
                                                  122

Table 10: Levels of Workforce Housing
Income level          Level Amount            Current               Current               Current Maximum
                                              Maximum               Maximum               Monthly Rent
                                              Income                Purchase Price
Very Low              50% Median              $30,400               $100,751              $633
Income
Low Income            80% of Median           $48,650               $161,235              $1,014
Median Income         100% of Median          $60,800               $201,502              $1,267
Moderate              120% of Median          $72,950               $241,769              $1,520
Income
Below                 150% Median             $91,200               $302,253              $1,900
Market Rate 1
Below                 170% Median             $103,360              $342,553              $2,153
Market Rate 2
Assumptions:
Median Income Monterey County-$60,800 for a Household of 4 individuals
3 bedroom-1.5 bath home
Maximum Purchase Price, based on spending no more than 32% and Maximum Monthly Rent based on spending no
more than 25% of their income on housing costs
“Maximum Income” based on percentage of median incomes
Current Maximum Purchase Price includes principal and interest payments of +/-32% of gross income and assumes
9% interest, 30-year amortization
6.       The numbers listed in this chart may change over time due to changes in median income and State
estimates.
                                                       123

