                                                                               10
                                                                                3
                                                                               HOUSING
The purpose of Chapter 10 is to direct the reader to the Housing
Element, which stands on its own as an independent document.
The State Government Code establishes unique requirements for the
Housing Element, which results in a different format and considerably
more detail on existing conditions and implementation programs than
the other elements of the Plan. Moreover, the schedule for updating the
Housing Element is set by the State legislature. The Element is also the
only part of the General Plan subject to review and certification by a state
agency, in this case the State Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD).
San Leandro adopted its Housing Element on January 20, 2015. The
Element includes the following components:
       Introduction
       Review of the 2007-2014 Housing Element
       Needs Assessment
       Analysis of Housing Sites
       Potential Constraints to Housing Production
       Housing Goals, Objectives, Policies, and Actions
       Implementation Program
To view the document, please visit:
http://www.sanleandro.org/depts/cd/housing/he/default.asp
                                                                                         10-1

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H O U S I N G
10-2
                                                                             11
                                                                             IMPLEMENTATION
A.      OVERVIEW
The Implementation Chapter describes the programs to be carried out
after the General Plan is adopted. The Plan includes more than 400
action items. Some are already underway and represent the on-going
activities of City departments. Others will take many years to achieve
and may require considerable public and private investment. A
coordinated effort by the City, its elected and appointed officials, other
agencies, residents, businesses, and organizations will be needed to
move the General Plan from vision to reality.
This chapter does not assign timelines or costs to individual actions. The
General Plan is intended to be a policy document, and such detail is
beyond its scope. Other documents such as the City’s annual budget,
strategic plans, specific plans, and capital improvement program will be
used to set priorities. The purpose of the Implementation Chapter is to
review the broad categories of actions that are identified in the General
Plan and highlight some of the anticipated activities in each category. As
appropriate, General Plan actions are referenced by number (in
parentheses).
The following categories are used to summarize General Plan
implementation measures:
    Zoning Code Changes and Map Revisions
    Capital Improvements
    CEQA and Development Review
    Design Review and Guidelines
                                                                                              11-1

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                             Business Development Programs
                                             City Operating Procedures
                                             New Initiatives
                                             Emergency Preparedness and Hazard Mitigation Program
                                             Follow up Plans and Studies
                                             Historic Preservation Program
                                             Climate and Energy Measures
                                             Intergovernmental Coordination
                                             Ordinances and Ordinance Revisions
                                             Public Education and Outreach
                                             Funding Measures
                                          B.       IMPLEMENTATION TOOLS
                                          Zoning Code Changes and Map Revisions
                                          The San Leandro Zoning Code establishes the allowable uses,
                                          development standards, and permitting requirements for each parcel in
                                          the city. It also sets forth development review and design review
                                          procedures, parking requirements, and performance standards for
                                          specific uses. Whereas the General Plan is a policy document, zoning is
                                          regulatory and prescriptive. The Code was last comprehensively
                                          updated in 2001, with major revisions made in 2014. San Leandro
                                          periodically makes minor Code amendments to address specific issues,
                                          accommodate (or limit) new uses, resolve conflicts, reflect emerging
                                          conditions, comply with state laws, or incorporate the recommendations
                                          of City plans and policy directives. Zoning amendments may be text
                                          based, map-based, or both.
                                          A number of Zoning Code changes are specifically recommended in the
                                          General Plan. Some of these are short-term actions, such as text changes
                                          for zones west of the San Leandro BART station to facilitate office
                                          development (LU-6.1.C, LU-6.4.A). Others may be longer-term or
                                          ongoing, such as periodic review of the Code to accommodate emerging
                                          industrial uses (LU-7.3.A) and the conversion of former factories to
                                          “maker” spaces and tech uses (LU-10.3.C). Still others provide guidance
11-2

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
for particular uses, such as adoption of live-work regulations (LU-3.9.A)
and allowing restaurants and tasting rooms at breweries in the industrial
district (LU-7.9.B).
Some of the zoning-related actions relate to potential changes to be
“studied” rather than changes that “must” be made for General Plan
consistency. For example, the Land Use Element suggests future studies
of the potential for additional dwelling units on large single family lots
(LU-3.9.A), and potential incentives for second units (LU-1.11.B). The
decision to actually amend the Code to make such changes will be based
on further study and community input.
Other actions indicate the ways that zoning can be used to implement
Plan policies, rather than changes to be made. For example, the Land
Use Element suggests using zoning to avoid land use conflicts around
industrial uses (LU-10.3.A) and to require taller buildings to “step
down” in height as they approach lower density zones (CD-6.3.A).
Other actions recognize the use of zoning to avoid over-concentrations of
particular uses (LU-8.1.A), encourage housing near BART (LU-6.13.A),
and facilitate entertainment activities in
Downtown San Leandro (LU-6.3.A). These
actions do not require changes to the Code
but rather a continuation of existing Code
provisions.
Zoning map changes are also used to
implement the General Plan. As noted in the
Plan, most of San Leandro is not expected to
change in the next 20 years. In most areas,
the General Plan and zoning maps are
already consistent, and the existing zoning
may remain in place. In a few areas, the
General Plan may show levels of
development intensity and uses that cannot
be achieved under current zoning. Zoning
map changes will be needed in those areas
during the time horizon of the General Plan.
As noted in the General Plan Environmental
Impact Report, a number of zoning map
changes are being made concurrently with
Plan adoption.
                                                                                                                      11-3

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                          Since the Plan has a 20-year horizon and zoning is immediate, it is not
                                          necessary to rezone all land in the city when the Plan is adopted. Where
                                          the existing zoning has been deemed conditionally compatible with the
                                          General Plan Map designation (see Table 3-2), it may remain in place for
                                          the time being. The expectation is that such land will be rezoned
                                          gradually, in response to future specific plans and area plans,
                                          community input, and development proposals that are consistent with
                                          the General Plan Map and its policies.
                                          Capital Improvements
                                          The Capital Improvement Program (CIP) itemizes the projects to be
                                          funded by the City during future budget cycles. The CIP must be
                                          consistent with the General Plan and is an important tool for carrying
                                          out some of the changes identified in the Plan. CIP projects may include
                                          infrastructure, new public buildings, open space acquisition, park
                                          improvements, transportation facilities, and civic beautification projects,
                                          among others. A variety of funding sources are available for these
                                          projects, including general fund revenues, impact fees, bond measures,
                                          and grants or stipends from the State and federal governments.
                                          The General Plan either directly or indirectly identifies about 30 potential
                                          capital improvement projects. Some of these projects would be funded
                                          through the capital improvement programs of other agencies, such as the
                                          school districts, the East Bay Regional Park District, and East Bay
                                          Municipal Utility District. Because the City only has jurisdiction over its
                                          own projects, the actions relating to those of other agencies primarily
                                          address coordination and permitting. Examples include the proposed
                                          East Bay Greenway and the planned Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) system.
                                          Some capital projects, such as the development of new buildings or new
                                          utility lines, may be subject to supplemental environmental review and
                                          site-specific studies to address traffic, noise, and other potential impacts.
                                          Capital improvements listed in the General Plan include specific projects
                                          (such as paving Eden Road) and more generic references to project
                                          categories (such as street tree planting and sewer repair). The CIP
                                          typically includes lump sum amounts for both types. When budgeting
                                          for future capital improvements, it is important to balance proposals for
                                          new facilities with the on-going costs of maintaining existing facilities
                                          and infrastructure (e.g., sewer repair, road repaving, etc.).
11-4
                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                             I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
City capital improvement actions referenced in the General Plan are
listed below. Funding for these projects should be considered during
future budget cycles:
    BART Area streetscape improvements (LU-6.7.A)
    Wayfinding signage (LU-6.7.D, T-3.7.A, CD-5.2.A)
    San Leandro Creek Linear Park/Root Park extension (LU-6.14.B)
    Marina      Boulevard    and     Shoreline    Gateway   Streetscape
     Improvements (LU-7.6.B and C)
    East 14th Street Utility Undergrounding             and Streetscape
     Improvements (LU-8.10.B, T-2.2.A, CD-7.5.D)
    Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan Improvements (LU-7.6.A, T-
     3.1.B, T-3.7B)
    Pedestrian and Bicycle crossing improvements (T-3.7.C)
    Marina Boulevard East improvements (T-5.2.E)
    Shoreline Park improvements (OSC-2.4.A)
    Bay Fair Area park (OSC-2.4.C)
    San Leandro Creek trail (OSC-5.4.A, 5.4.B)
    Environmental Education Center (OSC-5.8.A)
    Extension of reclaimed water system (OSC-7.2.B)
    Street tree planting (OSC-7.10.A)
    Storm drain trash capture devices (EH-4.1.A)
    Hesperian / 150th Triangle improvements (CD-5.1.B)
    Neighborhood Gateway signs (CD-5.1.C)
    Renovation of Fire Stations 9, 12, and 13 (CSF-1.1.A)
    Lit San Leandro extension (CSF-2.4.A)
    Replacement of South Branch and Mulford Branch Library (CSF-
     3.2.A)
    Technology improvements and modernization of libraries (CSF-
     3.1.A, 3.3.A, 3.3.B)
    Wastewater collection improvements (CSF-6.4.A)
                                                                                                                    11-5

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                          CEQA and Development Review
                                          The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) is an important tool
                                          for General Plan implementation. CEQA provides the vehicle for
                                          carrying out many of the policies in Chapters 6 and 7 regarding natural
                                          resource protection and environmental hazards. It also helps ensure that
                                          development “pays its way” by evaluating potential impacts on traffic,
                                          schools, parks, and other services. The General Plan should be a
                                          benchmark throughout the CEQA process. For example, Action LU-
                                          4.1.A requires future impacts on public services to be evaluated as part
                                          of development review, and Action T-1.3.B requires traffic studies for
                                          projects likely to generate a substantial number of trips or impact local
                                          streets.
                                          Some of the action items in the General Plan reference procedures to be
                                          followed during development review to mitigate CEQA-related impacts.
                                          For example, Action CD-1.12.A establishes conditions of approval for
                                          projects that may affect archaeological resources. Action OSC-6.4.A
                                          requires biological assessments for projects that may affect sensitive
                                          plant and animal communities. Similar actions related to future
                                          development proposals are present in the Environmental Hazards
                                          Element. For instance, there are actions requiring soil and geologic
                                          reports (EH-1.1.A), air quality studies (EH-3.4.A), and Health Risk
                                          Assessments for projects near freeways and high-volume roadways (EH-
11-6

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
3.4.B). The General Plan also establishes conditions of approval for
projects likely to have noise impacts (EH-7.5.A) and vibration impacts
(EH-7.5.B).
Design Review and Guidelines
San Leandro conducts design review on a range of projects, including
new commercial and industrial buildings, and projects requiring
conditional use permits, site plan review, or subdivision approval.
Applications for infill housing, additions, remodels, and smaller
structures undergo a more informal design review process during plan
checking and permitting. Design guidelines have been developed for
specific areas of the city, including Downtown, the Transit Oriented
Development Area, and East 14th Street.
The General Plan proposes that design review practices and procedures
be periodically reviewed to ensure an appropriate level of scrutiny is
provided for development and alterations. Higher levels of review may
be appropriate in some parts of the city, given the age and character of
construction. Design review requirements also may vary depending on
the size, scale, and type of construction. There is particular interest in
developing residential design guidelines for the city’s older, traditional
neighborhoods (CD-1.5.A). The City will also continue to administer
guidelines for Downtown and East 14th Street, and may develop
supplemental guidelines to protect historic resources (CD-2.3.B). The
General Plan indicates the need for greater design guidance for fences
(LU-1.8.A), second units (LU-1.11.A), wind turbines (OSC-8.4.B), infill
housing (CD-5.4.A), parking lots (CD-6.9.A), and the commercial and
industrial districts in general (LU-10.3.B).
It is expected that area plans and specific plans for subareas of the city
will be prepared following General Plan adoption. Such plans should
include guidance for new construction, rehabilitation, and alteration.
Such plans should also provide guidance for the design of public space,
streets, and open space areas, including landscaping and lighting. The
Community Development Department has the primary responsibility for
implementing the City’s design review programs and requirements.
                                                                                                                      11-7

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                          Business Development Programs
                                          The General Plan includes an Economic Development Element with
                                          actions related to business retention, attraction, marketing, and
                                          workforce development. Some of the actions represent new initiatives or
                                          programs to be launched in the years following General Plan adoption.
                                          Others are ongoing and are being implemented by the Community
                                          Development Department, in coordination with the City Manager’s
                                          Office and other City departments. Still others are expressions of the
                                          City’s support for the work being led by other agencies or organizations,
                                          such as the San Leandro and San Lorenzo Unified School Districts and
                                          the Chamber of Commerce. The City is a partner or ally in many such
                                          initiatives.
                                          Some of the major business development actions listed in the Plan
                                          include:
                                              Pursuing grants through the Smart Cities program (ED-3.2.A)
                                              Updating the 2013 Economic Development Strategy (ED-1.11.A)
                                              Preparing a Retail Action Strategy (ED-4.1.A) and developing a
                                               Retail Real Estate Prospectus (ED-4.1.B)
11-8

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                              I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
   Tracking development opportunities and maintaining a database of
    available sites (ED-1.2.A)
   Continuing “Made in San Leandro” branding (ED-1.9.A) and
    launching a “Shop San Leandro” campaign (ED-4.3.B) and a “Work
    Local/Live Local” campaign (ED-5.1.A)
   Exploring the feasibility of a small business development center (ED-
    2.7.A)
   Developing a marketing strategy for Lit San Leandro (ED-3.4.B) and
    expanding the fiber optic network (ED-3.4.A)
   Exploring a solar energy micro-grid program for the industrial area
    (ED-3.6.C)
   Developing a green business certification program (ED-3.5.A)
   Promoting San Leandro as a center for construction and home
    improvement supplies (ED-4.3.C)
Business development measures also include existing programs like the
Façade Improvement Program (ED-4.4.A), one-stop permitting for
business (ED-2.4.A), social media campaigns (ED-1.9.B), downtown
streetscape improvements (ED-4.5.B), and the Design Assistance
Program (ED-4.4.B).       These measures also include more general
directives such as promoting international business relations (ED-1.7.A),
supporting job fairs (ED-6.7.A), providing outreach to businesses (ED-
2.1.A), improving parking management (ED-4.5.C), and recruiting new
retailers (ED-4.6.A, 4.6.B). These programs should ensure that the City’s
resources are strategically leveraged to maximize citywide benefits.
City Operating Procedures
This is the largest category of implementation measures in the General
Plan.      About one-quarter of the action items listed in the Plan
correspond to operating procedures and practices already being
implemented by City government. These include:
   Community standards programs such as code enforcement, weed
    abatement, and enforcement of dumping regulations
   Compliance with ADA and other state and federal programs
   Staff education and training programs
                                                                                                                     11-9

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                           Community noticing requirements such as posting of development
                                            applications, advertising for public meetings, and consultation with
                                            neighborhood groups
                                           Using the planning process (conditional use permits, public
                                            hearings, etc.) to address the potential impacts of new activities
                                           Tracking local development and construction activity
                                           Street maintenance and repair, traffic calming, traffic safety
                                            measures, and enforcement of truck route designations
                                           Collection of data on traffic volumes, traffic accidents, and
                                            pedestrians and bicycle movement
                                           Implementation of various plans, such as the Bicycle and Pedestrian
                                            Master Plan and the Downtown Transit-Oriented Development Plan
                                           Promotion of good design through awards programs, design
                                            assistance, and public art programs
                                           Support for LINKS, transit vouchers, and other measures that
                                            provide alternatives to driving
                                           Maintenance of parks and delivery of recreational services,
                                            implementation of operating procedures and rules for park use
                                           Creek restoration and          marshland     management,      including
                                            monitoring programs
                                           Recycling and waste reduction programs
                                           Green building, energy conservation, Title 24 (Building Code energy
                                            standards), and water conservation initiatives
                                           Hazard reduction programs such as brush clearance and earthquake
                                            retrofit classes
                                           Stormwater control and water quality programs, such as street
                                            sweeping and stenciling of storm drains
                                           Hazardous waste management programs
                                           Enforcement of Vehicle Code and Municipal Code provisions
                                            relating to noise and truck parking
                                           Implementing the Airport Settlement Agreement
                                           Streetscape improvements,        utility  undergrounding,    and    tree
                                            planting initiatives
11-10

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
    Provision of human services, such as child care, senior care, and
     youth engagement
The inclusion of these programs in the General Plan means that they
should regularly be considered for funding as part of the City budgeting
process. The programs cover an array of basic services provided by the
City to maintain and improve the quality of life for San Leandro
residents. The budgeting process provides a means of allocating staff to
these actions, and a means of supporting the day-to-day activities of City
departments.
Each City department will participate in the implementation of the
General Plan in this manner. For instance, the Recreation and Human
Services Department will continue to provide recreational programs that
reflect the needs identified in the General Plan. The San Leandro Library
will continue to address the needs described in Chapter 9. The Public
Works Department will continue to carry out repair and maintenance
activities, water quality programs, and other measures to sustain City
facilities, environmental quality, and infrastructure.
Other City departments and divisions will carry out other actions and
programs identified in the General Plan. Under the direction of the City
Manager, the duties of each department should be defined in a manner
that is consistent with the General Plan.
                                                                                                                    11-11

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                          New Initiatives and Programs
                                          The General Plan proposes roughly 30 new initiatives to be studied or
                                          implemented during the years following adoption. Some of these
                                          initiatives are already in the planning stages, and others have yet to be
                                          studied. Future feasibility studies may determine that some of the
                                          initiatives are infeasible. Others may be carried out in the next 20 years,
                                          once funding sources have been identified and further vetting has taken
                                          place.
                                          Some of the key initiatives described in the General Plan include:
                                              A program to upgrade small mobile home parks (LU-1.2.C)
                                              A program to improve fencing along the rear property lines of
                                               double-frontage lots (LU-1.8.B)
                                              Safe Routes to Transit (LU-6.7.C) and additional Safe Routes to
                                               School initiatives (T-7.5.A)
                                              Creation of new tech incubator and maker spaces in the industrial
                                               area (LU-7.2.A)
                                              New public art initiatives in the industrial area (LU-7.7.A)
                                              Food cart pods and “temporary urbanism” projects (LU-7.9.C)
11-12

                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                          I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
 Implementation of a new Downtown Parking Management Strategy
  (T-1.7.B)
 A new transportation coordination initiative with Oakland focused
  on the area between E. 14th and MacArthur (T-2.2.B)
 Formalizing stakeholder engagement in transportation decisions (T-
  2.3.B)
 A bike-sharing program at the two BART stations (T-4.9.A)
 A shift to a transportation evaluation metric based on VMT (vehicle
  miles traveled) rather than LOS (level of service) (T-5.2.A)
 Implementation of “smart highway” technology (T-5.4.A)
 Updating truck signs (T-6.6.C)
 New wayfinding and directional signage (T-7.6.A)
 A “parklet” program for Downtown and neighborhood commercial
  districts (OSC-2.5.A)
 Conversion of surplus rail spurs to parks or gardens (OSC-2.5.B)
 A Priority Conservation Area designation for San Leandro Creek
  (OSC-5.1.C)
 Hazardous tree removal along San Leandro Creek (OSC-5.7.A)
 A long-term plan for the Dredge Materials Management Site (OSC-
  6.5.C)
 Community Choice Aggregation initiative (OSC-8.4.A)
 Soft-story building retrofit program (EH-1.2.C)
 Trash capture device installation in storm drains (EH-4.1.A)
 Relocation of the aviation water rescue point (EH-9.9.A)
 Preparation of neighborhood profiles (CD-5.4.B)
                                                                                                               11-13

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                          Emergency Preparedness and Hazard Mitigation
                                          Programs
                                          Emergency preparedness is a high priority in San Leandro. The City
                                          implements preparedness measures both through hazard mitigation---
                                          avoiding the potential for hazards before they happen---and through
                                          drills, training, and recovery actions that are focused on what happens
                                          after a disaster strikes. Some of these programs require a commitment of
                                          local funds; others rely on state and federal grants. Chapter 7 identifies
                                          the major initiatives that are proposed.              Updating the City’s
                                          Management Operations Plan (EH-6.2.A) is an important first step and
                                          would provide more detail on how some of these initiatives will be
                                          carried out and funded.
                                          Major recommendations related to hazard mitigation include earthquake
                                          retrofit programs (EH-1.2.A, 1.2.B, 1.2.C, and 6.10.A); flood control
                                          projects such as channel improvements and maintenance (EH-1.7.A and
                                          1.7.B), vegetation management and “defensible space” programs to
                                          reduce wildfire hazards (EH-2.1.A and 2.2.A), and pipeline safety (EH-
                                          5.1.C) and rail transport safety programs (EH-5.8.B). The General Plan
                                          also calls for “resilience” planning along the shoreline in anticipation of
                                          future sea level rise (EH-6.1.A).
                                          Recommendations specifically related to emergency preparedness
                                          include educational materials on hazards (EH-1.5.A), community
                                          outreach (EH-6.3.A), emergency radio frequencies and sirens (EH-6.4.A
                                          and 6.4.B), and investment in communication equipment (EH-6.6.A).
                                          The General Plan also places a priority on Community Emergency
                                          Response Teams and other neighborhood-level programs focused on
                                          disaster preparedness, first aid, response, shelter, and recovery.
                                          Follow-Up Plans and Studies
                                          The broad and comprehensive nature of the General Plan precludes a
                                          detailed analysis of each issue addressed. Where appropriate, the Plan
                                          identifies follow-up plans and studies to be undertaken after adoption.
                                          These studies include updates of existing plans, area plans (more precise
                                          plans for specific areas), and feasibility analyses. In most cases, the
                                          Community Development Department will be responsible for
                                          undertaking such plans and studies.
11-14

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
The General Plan calls for completion of a number of plans or studies
that were underway at the time of Plan adoption, including the Bay Fair
TOD Specific Plan (LU-8.10.A), the Downtown Parking Study (LU-
6.10.A), the Creek Trail Master Plan (OSC-5.1.A), and the Local Hazard
Mitigation Plan (EH-6.2.B). It also calls for updates of existing land use
and urban design plans, some of which are more than 20 years old. This
includes updates of the:
   2007 Downtown TOD Strategy (LU-6.1.B)
   1997 West San Leandro (Industrial Area) Strategic Plan (LU-7.1.A)
   Corridor plans for East 14th Street (LU-8.9.A) and plans for the
    MacArthur and Bancroft corridors (LU-8.11.A)
   2011 Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan
    (T-3.1.A)
   2009 Climate Action Plan (OSC-7.7.B)
The Plan also identifies future feasibility
studies for the Aladdin Avenue Extension (T-
5.2.C) and grade separated rail crossings along
Washington       Avenue      and      Hesperian
Boulevard (T-5.6.A and 5.6.B). It also calls for
a number of new master plans, including a:
   Parks Master Plan (OSC-1.1.A)
   Green Infrastructure Plan (EH-4.11.A)
   Library Master Plan (CSF-3.1.B)
   Street Tree Master Plan (CD-7.1.A).
The Parks Master Plan was identified as a
particularly high priority during the General
Plan Update process. A related action—a
Joint Use Facilities Master Plan (OSC-4.1.A)
that addresses the joint use of City and School
District recreational and sports facilities –
could be a component of that process.
                                                                                                                    11-15

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                          Historic Preservation Program
                                          Chapter 8 outlines several initiatives to expand historic preservation in
                                          San Leandro. The first step is to prepare a Historic Preservation Action
                                          Plan (CD-2.1.A). Such a Plan would lay the groundwork for the other
                                          actions listed in the General Plan.
                                          Actions listed in the General Plan include:
                                             Creating an Old San Leandro Historic District around the Casa
                                              Peralta and Daniel Best House (CD-1.4.A)
                                             Expanding the local register of historic buildings (CD-1.6.A)
                                             Applying for Certified Local Government status (CD-2.1.B)
                                             Maintaining sufficient staffing levels to implement preservation
                                              programs (CD-2.2.A)
                                             Staff training on historic preservation (CD-2.2.B)
                                             Review and update of the Preservation Ordinance (CD-2.3.A)
                                             Expanding the Downtown             Design    Guidelines   to  address
                                              preservation (CD-2.3.B)
                                             Updating A Garden Grows in Eden, a Historical Committee
                                              publication about the history of San Leandro (CD-3.1.A)
                                             Exploring a web-based or smartphone app with a historic walking
                                              tour (CD-3.2.C)
                                             Expanding the historic marker and plaque program (CD-3.3.A)
                                             Seeking opportunities to use Mills Act preservation tax credits (CD-
                                              4.2.A)
                                          In addition, the Plan indicate support for ongoing preservation actions,
                                          such as the referral of preservation matters to the Library-Historical
                                          Commission, application for grants supporting preservation,
                                          maintaining the History Museum and the Library History Room, and
                                          coordination with the Historical Society on outreach. The General Plan
                                          also expresses support for the work of non-profit preservation groups,
                                          including volunteer docent programs, and special events
                                          commemorating local history.
11-16

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                              I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
Climate and Energy Measures
Almost every element of the General Plan includes implementation
programs related to the City’s Climate Action Plan. These same
programs also support statewide greenhouse gas emission reduction
targets for 2020, 2030, and 2050. Some of the climate-related actions are
taken directly from the Climate Action Plan, while others are more
broadly related to land use and transportation strategies which reduce
dependence on gasoline-powered vehicles, or to air quality and energy
conservation measures.
Actions in the General Plan relating to transit-oriented development and
complete streets support the City’s climate initiatives. These include
actions to encourage high-density housing and offices near BART,
accommodate live-work development, and maintain minimum densities
near transit. Such actions also include programs to improve bicycle and
pedestrian facilities, sustain the LINKS shuttle to BART, encourage car
sharing and bike-sharing, and create more walkable streets in the
industrial area.
Recycling and solid waste reduction actions also support climate goals,
since they reduce consumption of non-renewable materials and
greenhouse gas emissions from landfill disposal (see Actions OSC-7.1.A
through 7.1.F). Similarly, actions to conserve water and use reclaimed
water (OSC-7.2.A, 7.2.B, 7.4.A) reduce the energy costs and greenhouse
gases associated with water transport.
                                                                                                                   11-17

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                          The General Plan also includes actions relating to green building and
                                          energy efficiency, particularly under Goal OSC-8. These include energy
                                          retrofits of public facilities and single family homes, Community Choice
                                          Aggregation, expanded use of electric vehicles (including vehicle
                                          charging stations) and a City energy efficiency grants program. The Plan
                                          supports initiatives such as industrial micro-grids (EH-3.6.C), wind
                                          turbines (OSC-8.4.B), and other renewable energy programs that reduce
                                          dependence on fossil fuels.
                                          Intergovernmental Coordination
                                          Many of the actions listed in the General Plan will require collaborative
                                          efforts with other public agencies and institutions. The Plan itself may
                                          be used by these agencies to guide decisions on the use of public
                                          property in San Leandro, the development of transportation facilities
                                          and infrastructure, and the delivery of services to San Leandro residents.
                                          Table 11-1 indicates the other agencies that will participate in the
                                          implementation of the General Plan. The City will strive to maintain a
                                          positive relationship with each of these agencies to carry out the
                                          initiatives listed.
                                          One of the most important aspects of intergovernmental coordination
                                          involves the review of land use and transportation decisions in San
                                          Leandro’s sphere of influence. The City will work closely with Alameda
                                          County as development is proposed in this area, evaluating possible
                                          impacts on City services and land uses. Private and non-profit sector
                                          decisions and investments are also a crucial part of implementing the
                                          General Plan. A number of the action items identify proactive roles for
                                          local business organizations and community advocacy groups. The City
                                          will solicit the active involvement of these groups in settling local policy
                                          and developing new programs.
11-18

                                                                                   S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                       I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
TABLE 11-1         SAN LEANDRO GENERAL PLAN ACTIONS REQUIRING COORDINATION WITH OTHER
                   AGENCIES (*)
Agency                    Action # Action Summary
ABAG/MTC                ED-7.9.A   Participate in ABAG corridor planning efforts
                        T-8.2.A    Seek representation on regional transportation planning task forces
                        OSC-5.1.C  Pursue a Priority Conservation Area designation for San Leandro Creek
AC Transit              T-4.1.A    Support AC Transit Service improvements throughout San Leandro
                        T-4.4.A    Coordinate LINKS shuttle and AC Transit schedules and routes
                        T-4.5.A    Promote East 14th Street as major bus transit route
                        T-4.5.B,   Complete Bus Rapid Transit improvements
                        LU-6.7.B
                        T-8.1.B    Coordinate emergency preparedness with transit
                        CSF-2.3.B  Coordinate with AC Transit on service to schools
Alameda Co.             OSC-2.10.B Coordinate with ACFCWCD on flood control trail opportunities
Flood Control/          EH-1.7.A   Coordinate with ACFCWCD on channel repair and maintenance
Water Conserv-
                        EH-1.7.B   Increase Line A channel capacity
ation District
Alameda Co.             EH-2.2.A   Engage Fire Department in review of proposed plans
Fire                    EH-2.3.A   Participate in task forces to reduce fire hazards
Department
                        EH-5.1.B   Implement County Hazardous Materials Plan
                        EH-5.1.C   Coordinate on pipeline safety
Alameda                 LU-8.10.B  Collaborative planning/ streetscape improvements on E. 14th Street and
County                             in the Bay Fair area
                        T-2.1.B    Coordinate street classification (ACTC)
                        EH-4.2.A   Implement Countywide Clean Water Program components
                        EH-5.1.B   Implement Countywide Hazardous Waste Management Plan
                        EH-5.6.A   Coordinate with County on Household Hazardous Waste Education
BART                    LU-6.7.C   Pursue Safe Routes to Transit programs
                        LU-6.7.D   Enhance wayfinding signage at BART
                        T-3.5.B    Provide bike lockers at BART stations
                        T-4.1.B    Coordinate with BART on station and system service improvements
                        T-4.9.A    Include bikesharing stations at BART stations
                        T-8.2.B    Participate in studies of future Trans-Bay crossings
                        EH-8.1.A   Advocate for quieter transit vehicles
(*) See P. 11-21 for acronyms
                                                                                                                            11-19
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L  P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                TABLE 11-1   SAN LEANDRO GENERAL PLAN ACTIONS REQUIRING COORDINATION WITH OTHER
                             AGENCIES, PAGE 2
                Agency            Action #    Action Summary
                Bay Area Air     EH-3.4.A     Engage BAAQMD in review and monitoring of air pollution sources
                Quality Mgmt     EH-3.5.A     Establish links from City website to BAAQMD website
                District         EH-3.7.A     Reduce aviation-related air pollution
                CalFire          EH-2.1.B     Refine State fire hazard severity maps
                Caltrans         T-2.2.A,     Undertake East 14th Street streetscape improvements
                                 CD-7.5.E
                                 T-8.5.A      Consider acquiring Caltrans Tier 2 highways
                City of          T-2.2.B      Pursue joint complete streets initiative with Oakland along city border
                Oakland          T-8.1.A      Consider transportation impacts of Oakland projects and coordinate
                                              transportation planning with Oakland
                                 ED-1.7.B     Coordinate Foreign Trade Zone designations with Oakland
                EBMUD            OSC-4.7.A    Work with EBMUD on trail easements
                                 OSC-5.9.A    Manage releases of water from Lake Chabot dam
                                 OSC-7.2.A    Implement EBMUD Urban Water Management Plan
                                 OSC-7.2.B    Expand reclaimed water use
                                 EH-4.10.A    Work with EBMUD on injection well monitoring
                                 CSF-1.1.B    Improve fire flow where water pressure is inadequate
                EBRPD            T-3.4.A,     Develop the East Bay Greenway
                                 OSC-2.10.A
                                 OSC-3.1.A    Implement Oyster Bay Park Plan
                                 OSC-3.2.A    Publicize/leverage East Bay Regional Parks and programs
                                 OSC-3.3.A    Complete missing links in Bay Trail
                                 OSC-3.3.B    Complete missing links in Ridge Trail
                FEMA             EH-1.6.A     Work with FEMA to amend flood plain maps
                PG&E             OSC-4.7.A    Consider trail opportunities on utility rights of way
                                 EH-5.1.C     Coordinate on pipeline safety
                                 CD-7.5.B     Underground overhead wires on East 14th
                Port of          EH-9.1.A     Participate in Airport Noise Forum
                Oakland          EH-9.2.A     Implement Airport Settlement Agreement
                                 EH-9.7.A     Lobby Port of Oakland for airport noise mitigation
                                 EH-9.7.B     Support efforts to move the airport noise contour boundary to 55 dB
                                 EH-9.9.A     Consider moving the location of airport water rescue operations
                Regional Water   EH-4.3.A     Implement revised Municipal Regional Permit
                Quality Control  EH-4.11.A    Implement a Green Infrastructure Plan
                Board
11-20
                                                                                        S A N  L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                             I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
TABLE 11-1        SAN LEANDRO GENERAL PLAN ACTIONS REQUIRING COORDINATION WITH OTHER
                  AGENCIES, PAGE 3
Agency                  Action #        Action Summary
San Leandro            LU-4.3.A         Work with School Districts to address growth-related needs
and                    ED-6.1.A         Support vocational training programs
San Lorenzo            ED-6.1.B         Support multi-lingual programs and classes
Unified School
                       OSC-4.1.A        Prepare joint use facilities master plan
Districts
                       OSC-4.1.B        Update Burrell Field agreements
                       OSC-4.4.A        Coordinate with San Leandro Unified on rehab of recreation facilities
                       OSC-4.4.B        Coordinate with San Lorenzo Unified on rehab of recreation facilities
                       OSC-4.5.A        Coordinate field reservation policies with school districts
                       CSF-2.1.A        Support for future school district bond measures
                       CSF-2.2.B        Support school district efforts to plan for new facilities
                       CSF-2.3.A        Pursue Safe Routes to School programs
Stopwaste.org          OSC-7.1.A        Implement source reduction and recycling programs
Acronyms: ABAG/MTC (Association of Bay Area Governments/Metropolitan Transportation Commission), ACFCWCD (Alameda
County Flood Control and Water Conservation District), ACTC (Alameda County Transportation Commission), BART (Bay Area
Rapid Transit), BAAQMD (Bay Area Air Quality Management District), EBMUD (East Bay Municipal Utility District), EBRPD
(East Bay Regional Park District), FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency),
Ordinances and Ordinance Revisions
Although the Zoning Code is the major ordinance used to implement the
General Plan, other sections of the Municipal Code are also important.
These include the noise ordinance, the historic preservation ordinance,
and various ordinances relating to natural resource protection. The
General Plan proposes revisions to some of these ordinances, and also
suggests that new ordinances be studied or adopted. These include:
    Ordinance language that addresses                    property    maintenance,
     particularly for rental units (LU-1.9.B)
    A Live-Work Ordinance (LU-3.9.A)
    A review of Code provisions related to “pop-up” (temporary) uses
     and food trucks (LU-7.9.C)
    A review of the Subdivision regulations to ensure that they reinforce
     pedestrian and bicycle goals (T-1.5.B), incorporation of multi-modal
     street standards (T-2.1.B), and allowances for narrower streets (T-
     2.1.C)
                                                                                                                                  11-21

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                             Allowances for parking reductions for developments using shared
                                              cars and alternatives to traditional parking arrangements (e.g.,
                                              stacked parking) (T-1.7.A)
                                             Additional Building Code revisions to incorporate “green” building
                                              principles (OSC-7.8.B)
                                             Continued study of Municipal Code options for tree protection (CD-
                                              7.3.A)
                                             Consideration of an ordinance to prohibit paving of planter strips
                                              (CD-7.5.A)
                                             Updates to the sign ordinance (CD-7.5.A)
                                          The primary department responsible for initiating these ordinances is the
                                          City Manager’s Office. In each case, assistance from the Community
                                          Development Department and the City Attorney will be necessary to
                                          draft the Ordinance and obtain public input.
                                          Public Education and Outreach
                                          Every element of the General Plan includes public education and
                                          outreach actions. These range from simple tasks such as updating
                                          websites to ambitious initiatives such as raising awareness about San
                                          Leandro history, expanding multi-lingual staff capacity, and improving
                                          disaster preparedness among residents and businesses. Each City
                                          Department must take responsibility to inform the public of the issues it
                                          addresses, the services it provides, and the opportunities for public
                                          input.
                                          Major outreach and education initiatives include:
                                             Increasing awareness of community standards requirements and
                                              code compliance (LU-1.4.A)
                                             Bicycle education and safety events and incentives supporting
                                              bicycle use (T-3.8.A, 3.8.C, 3.8.D)
                                             Staff training in emerging transportation technology (T-7.8.A)
                                             Neighborhood outreach on transportation (T-8.4.A)
                                             Expanded public education on recycling (OSC-7.1.E), green building
                                              (OSC-7.8.C), and energy conservation (OSC-8.5.C)
11-22

                                                                        S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                            I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
   Promoting community conservation          events  (OSC-7.5.A)   and
    shoreline clean-up events (EH-4.5.A)
   Clean water outreach (EH-4.2.A), clean air outreach (EH-3.5.A), and
    household hazardous waste disposal outreach (EH-5.6.A)
   Public education on earthquake hazards (EH-1.5.A) and emergency
    preparedness (EH-6.3.A)
   Awards programs for outstanding architecture (CD-6.12.A)
   Education on tree planting and care (CD-7.2.A)
   Community policing and public safety events (CSF-1.3.A), including
    National Night Out (CSF-1.2.B), gang reduction programs (CSF-
    1.4.A), and neighborhood watch (CSF-1.10.A)
   Recreational needs assessments and user surveys (CSF-5.1.A)
   Outreach on human service programs (CSF-5.12.A), including
    programs aimed at youth (CSF-5.7.A) and seniors (CSF-5.8.C)
   Outreach to specific constituencies such as the faith community
    (CSF-5.12.C) and local businesses (ED-2.1.A)
Continued investment in the City’s website is also recommended by the
Plan.    The use of technology to engage residents and improve
governance is particularly important and will remain a priority moving
forward.
                                                                                                                 11-23

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
I M P L E M E N T A T I O N
                                          Funding Measures
                                          The General Plan includes action items to pursue funding from various
                                          sources, including Smart Cities grants (ED-2.8A), park and open space
                                          grants (OSC-2.4.D) impact fees (LU-4.2.A, T-1.3.A, and OSC-2.3.A),
                                          Enhanced Infrastructure Financing Districts (LU-4.5.A), a park bond
                                          measure (OSC-1.1.B), user fees (OSC-1.2.C); and utility rates (CSF-6.2.A).
                                          It also calls for continuation of funding, or the exploration of new
                                          funding sources for initiatives related to civic beautification, affordable
                                          housing, recreation and human services, technology, park maintenance,
                                          climate action, and historic preservation.
                                          C.        GENERAL PLAN ANNUAL REPORT AND
                                                    PERIODIC EVALUATION
                                          An annual review of the General Plan is required by State law. The
                                          purpose of this review is to document the City’s progress toward
                                          implementing action programs and strategies. The review should also
                                          identify any issues that require attention, along with a discussion of
                                          possible Plan amendments. The annual review provides an opportunity
                                          to consider the need for amendments related to new and emerging
                                          technologies.
                                          A more comprehensive evaluation of the Plan should be prepared
                                          roughly every five to ten years. This evaluation should revisit the Focus
                                          Area narratives, policies, and actions in the Land Use Element, as well as
                                          other aspects of the Plan that are time-sensitive. Actions that have been
                                          implemented (or that are outdated) may be dropped. New actions may
                                          be added based on current conditions.
                                          As part of this process, policies should be evaluated to ensure that they
                                          are still relevant. If funding allows, the five to ten-year evaluation should
                                          also include an updating of baseline data. As needed such evaluations
                                          may be followed by General Plan Amendments intended to keep the
                                          plan relevant, current, and up to date. General Plan Amendments may
                                          be considered at other points during the 2016-2035 planning period as
                                          conditions change and new opportunities or issues arise. State law
                                          allows up to four amendments per year.
11-24

                                                                             3
The Land Use Element is the centerpiece of the General Plan. It contains
                                                                             LAND USE
the maps and strategies that will shape the physical form of San Leandro
over the next 20 years. The Chapter identifies those areas of the city
where change will be encouraged and those areas where the existing
land use pattern will be maintained and enhanced. More than any other
part of the General Plan, this Chapter reflects the input provided by San
Leandro residents and businesses during the General Plan Update
process.
This Element contains five sections:
   “Framework” describes the major themes of the General Plan and
    presents the Land Use Map.
   “Residential Neighborhoods” contains goals, policies and actions for
    the city’s residential areas.
   “Business and Industry” contains goals, policies, and actions for the
    city’s commercial and industrial areas.
   “Focus Areas” contains strategies for specific areas of the city where
    change is likely during the next 20 years.
   “Beyond the City Limits” provides general direction for San
    Leandro’s Planning Area and Sphere of Influence. These are
    unincorporated areas with issues that could affect San Leandro’s
    future.
                                                                                        3-1

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          FRAMEWORK
                                          A.       OVERVIEW
                                          Although San Leandro was “built out” by the early 1960s, the city
                                          continues to change and evolve. Obsolete uses are constantly being
                                          replaced by more productive uses. New businesses replace old
                                          businesses, and homes are expanded and remodeled every day. The city
                                          is dynamic—its look and feel are constantly being reshaped.
                                          The potential for change will increase in the future as the Bay Area
                                          rethinks its historic growth patterns. For most of the 20th Century, the
                                          Bay Area expanded outward, with agricultural lands converted to urban
                                          uses and freeways built to connect the region.
                                          As a consequence, suburban development extends as far as 70 miles out
                                          from the center of the region today. Residents face long commutes,
                                          while the region faces environmental challenges and imbalances between
                                          job and housing growth. Climate change, which is partially caused by
                                          emissions from motor vehicles and energy use, has created a compelling
                                          reason to rethink the way cities grow. At the same time, technology has
                                          changed the workplace and economy in a way that has created new
                                          growth possibilities and opportunities.            Generational changes,
                                          international immigration, the aging of the population, and other
                                          demographic shifts are also spurring new ideas for how and where cities
                                          grow. Autonomous vehicles, car-sharing, stacked parking, on-demand
                                          ride services, and other transportation innovations are changing land use
                                          and travel possibilities. These trends will have profound impacts on San
                                          Leandro’s future.
                                          As a mature community, it is critical that San Leandro thinks
                                          strategically about how and where reinvestment takes place. The
                                          overarching goal is to conserve those parts of the city that are successful
                                          and to direct redevelopment to areas where land may be underutilized.
                                          These areas are described in the General Plan as “Focus Areas”,
                                          recognizing that they may require more attention and direction than
                                          other parts of the city. The strategies in this Plan ensure that the future
                                          development of the Focus Areas addresses local concerns and reinforces
                                          the things that are best about San Leandro.
3-2

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
B.      MAJOR PLANNING CONCEPTS
Concepts Carried Forward
The 2035 General Plan carries forward several concepts that were also
included in the City’s previous (2015) General Plan. The previous Plan
introduced the concept of “smart growth”—the notion that the City
should use its land resources more efficiently and focus growth around
its BART stations, transit corridors, and underutilized commercial and
industrial sites. At the time the 2015 Plan was adopted (in 2002), “smart
growth” was being advocated at the regional level as a way to reduce
urban sprawl, mitigate freeway congestion, and improve air quality.
These remain valid reasons to grow more efficiently. More urgent and
compelling reasons have emerged in the last 15 years, including global
climate change, drought, and sea level rise.
The 2015 Plan also introduced the concepts of sustainability and
equitable growth. Again, these concepts remain more relevant than ever
as the City looks to the Year 2035. Another principle carried forward
from the 2015 Plan is the idea of creating a stronger sense of identity in
San Leandro. Like the 2015 Plan, the 2035 Plan seeks to make San
Leandro a more attractive city, with walkable neighborhoods and
shopping districts, vibrant workplaces, and greener streets and public
spaces.
                                                                                                                 3-3

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Growing Strategically
                                          The 2035 General Plan envisions an average of 275 new homes a year
                                          through 2035, a growth rate not seen in San Leandro since the 1980s. It
                                          also envisions 12,000 new jobs by 2035. Projected increases in housing
                                          and jobs during the next 20 years will be substantially higher than the
                                          increases seen in the last 20 years.
                                          San Leandro will also grow differently than it has in the past. The city’s
                                          neighborhoods are stable and mostly built out. Although some small-
                                          scale infill development may occur in these areas, one of the basic
                                          premises of this General Plan is that existing neighborhood character
                                          should be preserved.
                                          About 80 percent of the new housing envisioned in San Leandro during
                                          the next 20 years is expected to be built in three “transit-oriented
                                          development” (TOD) areas. These areas are Downtown (broadly
                                          defined to include land within about one-half mile of the San Leandro
                                          BART station), the Bay Fair BART station area (again, including land
                                          within one-half mile of the station), and the East 14th Street corridor
                                          between Oakland and 150th Avenue. These areas have also been
                                          identified by the city as “Priority Development Areas,” a term used by
                                          regional agencies to identify locations where growth can occur without
                                          relying solely on automobiles for daily trips (see Figure 3-1).
3-4

         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                      L A N D U S E
                           Figure 3-1
Priority Development Areas
                                               3-5
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Growth at the BART stations will be more urban in character than
                                          existing development in San Leandro, with most new development
                                          consisting of apartments, condominiums, and townhomes. Some of this
                                          development may occur in mixed use buildings, with retail stores or
                                          restaurants on the ground floor and housing above. New development
                                          will be designed to make walking, bicycling, and public transit the most
                                          convenient means of travel for most new residents. Options such as car-
                                          sharing and bike-sharing will be available, and households may find that
                                          owning two or three vehicles is no longer essential, and perhaps not
                                          even desirable.
                                          This General Plan seeks to ensure that the two BART station areas are
                                          developed in a way that boosts the local economy, provides housing
                                          opportunities, and brings jobs and services to the city. It also seeks to
                                          create a more distinctive image for these areas, many of which lack a
                                          strong identity today. The Plan includes policies to ensure that such
                                          development will occur without adversely affecting established
                                          neighborhoods, either directly (by blocking views, casting objectionable
                                          shadows, creating parking problems, etc.) or indirectly (by placing a
                                          burden on City services).
                                          The idea of transit-oriented development harkens back to San Leandro’s
                                          early development, which was oriented around streetcar lines and a
                                          traditional pattern of walkable neighborhoods like Broadmoor and
                                          Estudillo Estates. While future TOD development will be more urban in
                                          character than the San Leandro of the 1920s and 30s, the focus on
                                          walkability is the same. Like the San Leandro of a century ago, residents
3-6

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
in TOD areas should be able to walk from their homes to restaurants,
services, entertainment, shopping—and even workplaces.
Like the previous General Plan, this Plan envisions the continued
evolution of San Leandro’s industrial areas to meet the demands of the
Bay Area economy. For the past 50 years, the City has maintained a
policy of preserving its industrial land supply. As a result, San Leandro
is now well positioned to grow its employment base as it seeks ways to
use its industrial lands more efficiently. Housing will continue to be
prohibited or strictly limited in most industrial areas, enabling these
areas to continue to function as diverse workplaces with manufacturing,
production, and information-based activities.        New uses such as
restaurants, brew pubs, art studios, and attractive outdoor public spaces,
will bring new life to these areas and make them more attractive
locations for business investment—and for employees—in the future.
The General Plan also encourages the revitalization of San Leandro’s
commercial districts, and the continued attraction of businesses that
meet the needs of San Leandro residents. Presently, the city has a mix of
walkable shopping areas such as Downtown and more auto-oriented
centers developed after World War II. In the older shopping areas, the
focus is on revitalizing storefronts and maintaining a focus on active
ground floor uses. In the auto-oriented shopping centers, the focus is on
design improvements to better connect these centers to nearby
neighborhoods and make them more pedestrian-friendly. The City is
also placing a priority on improving the quality of retail and dining
choices for residents, and reducing commercial vacancies. Residents
should not feel compelled to drive to other communities for basic goods
and services.
                                                                                                                 3-7

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          The General Plan recognizes that local growth strategies will not succeed
                                          unless other quality of life factors are addressed at the same time.
                                          Reinvigorating neighborhoods and shopping centers cannot take place
                                          unless the City also offers quality schools and education, invests in parks
                                          and other community facilities, addresses concerns about crime and
                                          safety, and provides a healthful environment. This Plan places particular
                                          emphasis on collaboration with the San Leandro and San Lorenzo
                                          Unified School Districts to sustain and enhance public schools. It also
                                          seeks creative solutions to provide more parkland, address
                                          neighborhood crime, improve public health, and resolve noise and other
                                          environmental challenges.
                                          Building a Healthier City
                                          San Leandro’s land use and circulation patterns influence the health and
                                          wellness of its residents. Many of the city’s neighborhoods were
                                          planned and designed for cars, to the point where it is now difficult or
                                          even dangerous to walk from one neighborhood to another. Different
                                          land uses—such as residential areas and shopping districts—were
                                          intentionally separated for many years based on a belief that the uses
                                          were incompatible. This has reinforced dependence on cars and reduced
                                          opportunities for walking and bicycling. At the same time, lifestyle and
                                          workplace changes have created a society that is more sedentary than it
                                          used to be, contributing to higher obesity rates and weight-related
                                          conditions such as diabetes.
3-8

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                          L A N D U S E
The General Plan seeks to create a healthier city in the future, by creating
more walkable neighborhoods. Walking or riding a bike from one’s
home to the park, the store, school, or to BART between should be safe,
convenient, and enjoyable. Walking is the most basic form of exercise,
and can have immense physical and mental health benefits. This Plan
aspires to make walking the travel mode of choice for short trips in San
Leandro neighborhoods.
The health of San Leandro residents is also intrinsically linked to the
health of the natural environment. Through this General Plan, the City is
making a commitment to improve the quality of its air and water. The
wetlands, the shoreline, the hills, and San Leandro Creek are also to be
protected and cared for. Tree planting will be promoted, with the goal of
enhancing the urban forest and making San Leandro a greener, more
beautiful place. A continued effort will be made to reduce the negative
impacts of industrial uses, from cleaning up hazardous sites to limiting
truck traffic in residential neighborhoods.
Public health is a cross-cutting theme in many elements of the General
Plan. The Housing Element includes a “Healthy Homes” Initiative, to
avoid exposure to hazardous building materials and other domestic
hazards. The Environmental Hazards Element seeks to avoid exposure
to excessive noise through buffering, sound barriers, and site planning.
The Open Space, Parks, and Conservation Element calls for easy access
to parks and recreation for all residents, regardless of income or physical
ability. It also calls for new community gardens, where local produce
can be grown.
                                                                                                                   3-9

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Building A More Sustainable City
                                          The San Leandro General Plan also embraces the concept of
                                          sustainability. The basic idea is to accommodate current needs without
                                          jeopardizing the resources of future generations. Sustainable
                                          development also strives for equilibrium between economic goals and
                                          environmental goals. It seeks to make the most of existing resources,
                                          promote conservation in all forms, and encourage the participation of
                                          every citizen in shaping the future of the city.
                                          In San Leandro, several fundamental choices have been made within this
                                          context.
                                          First, the City is making a conscious decision to grow at a “human scale,”
                                          placing the needs of pedestrians above those of cars. Although the
                                          importance of a convenient roadway network is fully acknowledged, the
                                          General Plan favors transportation modes and development patterns
                                          that conserve energy. By decreasing the distance between the workplace
                                          and residential areas, mixed use development plays a major role in this
                                          philosophy. Many of the General Plan’s transportation policies, from the
                                          promotion of employee BART shuttles to the provision of bike lanes on
                                          area streets, are influenced by the principle that travel without a car
                                          should be more convenient and affordable.
3-10

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                          L A N D U S E
Second, the City is actively working to reduce the greenhouse gas
emissions that contribute to global climate change. The City adopted a
Climate Action Plan (CAP) in 2009, including a commitment to reduce
community-wide emissions to 25 percent below 2005 levels by 2020.
Most of the strategies to achieve this target involve transportation and
energy. From a land use perspective, the CAP encourages less auto-
dependent development, and a better match between jobs and housing
(to reduce commuting). The transit-oriented development vision in this
Land Use Element implements an essential CAP strategy by focusing
growth within walking distance of BART and along major bus corridors.
Third, economic development programs will emphasize clean, emerging
technologies. A greater emphasis will be placed on renewable and
reliable sources of energy. The City will strive to make the best use of
local resources and assets. This includes adaptively reusing older
buildings where feasible, instead of demolishing them, and recycling
construction debris instead of trucking it to landfills. New industrial
development should provide the city with the capacity to be more self-
sufficient and should help San Leandro restore its infrastructure and
sustain or improve local services. Economic growth should capitalize on
San Leandro’s strengths, while providing a unique, marketable local
identity.
A final choice associated with a more sustainable future is to bring the
concept of social equity into land use planning. Preparation of the
General Plan itself embraced this principle, with hundreds of voices
heard in the identification of the city’s needs and issues. The concept also
suggests that the City plan for a variety of housing types, matching the
needs of diverse groups, and for social services which respond to
changing demographics. If all San Leandro residents are to benefit from
this Plan, then access to cultural, community, and recreational facilities
must be improved. All cultures must be respected, and all must be
encouraged to participate fully in community life.
The policies in this Plan are guided by the social, economic, and
environmental challenges associated with modern-day life in the Bay
Area. Although these challenges go well beyond urban planning, they
define our responsibilities as we think about how the city will grow.
                                                                                                                  3-11

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Transforming the Workplace
                                          The strong Bay Area economy, coupled with construction of the Lit San
                                          Leandro fiber optic loop, is transforming San Leandro’s industrial areas.
                                          A former automobile plant has been reinvented as a 230,000 square foot
                                          center for “makers” and tech start-ups, a former cereal plant has been
                                          repurposed as a craft brewery, and the long vacant site of a former
                                          cannery is now being developed as a 500,000 square foot transit-oriented
                                          tech campus. At the same time, developments like the NetZero Energy
                                          Center and Kaiser Permanente Medical Center, have generated national
                                          attention and changed the way the city is perceived by the Bay Area
                                          business community.
                                          The character of the industrial workplace is also evolving—not only in
                                          San Leandro, but across America. This is particularly true in high-value
                                          markets with strong innovation economies like the San Francisco Bay
                                          Area. Amenities such as restaurants, fitness centers, office support
                                          services, and easy access to transit are sought after by employees.
                                          Factors such as walkability, bicycle access, aesthetics, and open space are
                                          influencing industrial location decisions. This has implications for San
                                          Leandro’s building stock and business mix, and for the streets and public
                                          spaces that define the area’s visual image.
                                          This General Plan envisions substantial increases in employment density
                                          in San Leandro during the next 20 years.               Buildings used for
                                          warehousing or storage today may become production space or
                                          technology space in the future. New uses such as entertainment, artisan
                                          studios, tech incubators, and co-working space will be welcomed into
                                          these areas. Zoning regulations will ensure that these uses are
3-12

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
compatible with long-time industrial uses and will foster the continued
operation of heavier industries as well.
Meanwhile, investments in the public realm will change the area’s visual
character. Some of San Leandro’s industrial areas appear blighted or
neglected today, with no landscaping, few street trees, poor lighting, and
streets that are not welcoming for pedestrians or cyclists. There will be a
greater focus on workplace livability in the future, with tactical
improvements that humanize these areas. This will not only include
physical changes such as public art, it will also include new activities
such as food trucks and parklets.
Becoming a “Smarter” City
The integration of “smart cities” technology into municipal operations is
an overarching theme of the General Plan, and will be a major
consideration in planning for San Leandro’s future. Smart Cities refers
to a broad suite of applications in which technology is used to improve
the efficiency of service delivery and access to information. These
applications can be used in the design and construction of buildings,
vehicles, roads and transit; the operation of stormwater, sanitation, and
energy systems; health care, education, and security; and public
participation in government.
San Leandro’s fiber optic network makes the City uniquely positioned to
undertake Smart City initiatives. In this regard, fiber is much more than
an economic development tool—it is a tool to improve the quality of life
for residents.
Most Smart Cities applications focus on assets and systems that are
managed by public agencies. Gigabit internet technology can be used to
improve the way these systems operate. This occurs through real-time
data collection and monitoring, integrated reporting and analytics, and
instantaneous adjustments to maximize efficiency.            For example,
pavement sensors can be used to provide real-time information on the
location of available parking spaces near BART.             Residents and
businesses benefit by finding a space quickly and conveniently, while the
City benefits by using street space efficiently and avoiding excessive
areas dedicated to parking. Mobile payment for parking and mobile
enforcement of parking regulations can also be achieved through
sensors.
                                                                                                                 3-13

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Similarly, data sensing, sharing, and analytics can help reduce energy
                                          consumption and maximize the potential for a distributed energy grid
                                          which draws power from solar installations on the rooftops of industrial
                                          buildings. Rapid collection and processing of data can also enable street
                                          lights to operate more efficiently, and can improve security and
                                          emergency response.        Ultimately, information and communication
                                          technologies can help San Leandro address issues such as climate change
                                          and traffic congestion, and can fundamentally transform the way the
                                          City operates.
                                          The potential for fiber, software, sensors, and electronics to be linked in
                                          order to collect and exchange data is constantly expanding. This
                                          interconnected network is sometimes referred to as the “Internet of
                                          Things” (IOT). Objects such as vehicles, buildings, and infrastructure
                                          can be sensed and controlled remotely, creating opportunities to more
                                          directly integrate the physical world with computer-based systems.
                                          With Lit San Leandro in place—and expanding in the next two
                                          decades—the City will continue to pursue embedded computing
                                          systems that enable improved convenience and efficiency.
                                          Creating A “There”
                                          San Leandro is a city of high-quality neighborhoods and diverse
                                          business districts. Yet, there is a sense that the sum of these areas is less
                                          than it might be— that if gaps were filled, edges improved, and stronger
                                          linkages made between different parts of the community, the city could
                                          be more vital than it is today. For too many years, San Leandro has been
                                          perceived as a “pass through” city for travelers on their way to
                                          somewhere else. This General Plan endeavors to create a more distinct
                                          and positive image of San Leandro as a destination—to create a “there”
                                          there.
                                          The projected addition of 5,500 new homes and 12,000 new jobs during
                                          the next 20 years provides San Leandro with an opportunity to reinforce
                                          and strengthen its civic identity. By strategically directing new
                                          development, the City has an opportunity to create attractive new
                                          gathering places and focal points. Although the most obvious
                                          opportunities for such development are at places like Bayfair Center, the
                                          Shoreline, and the Downtown BART Station, there are many places in
                                          the city where a reinvigorated San Leandro can flourish.
3-14

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
Neighborhood beautification and commercial revitalization programs
can create a stronger and more positive identity for areas that are already
well established. General Plan policies call for gateway improvements
along major thoroughfares, undergrounding of utilities, planting of
street trees and landscaping, and an overall “greening” of the city. The
idea is to strengthen the identity of the city as a whole by weaving
together neighborhoods, creating more distinct activity centers,
establishing more easily-recognized gateways, and addressing physical
barriers within the city such as freeways and railroads. The architectural
qualities that define and distinguish San Leandro’s neighborhoods
should be maintained and celebrated. Within each neighborhood,
schools, parks, and shopping areas should engender a strong sense of
pride and identity.
Some of the most important opportunities to create a stronger sense of
place within the city are on East 14th Street. The Plan envisions
reshaping this thoroughfare from a three-mile commercial strip into a
series of “districts” each with a unique form and function. The focal
elements are already there—City Hall, the Downtown Plaza, the Bal
Theatre, Bayfair, and so on—but they have yet to be clearly defined or
differentiated from one another. Over the next 20 years, a combination
of streetscape improvements, rehabilitation, and infill development
should change the face of this corridor. East 14th Street should be the
gateway to the neighborhoods it adjoins instead of their back door.
C.       CITY STRUCTURE
With the preceding principles in mind, Figure 3-2 illustrates the “City
Structure” for San Leandro. The City Structure Map augments the Land
Use Diagram (which is described later in this chapter) by providing a
broader overview of San Leandro’s physical form. The Map offers a
citywide perspective on how the various parts of San Leandro fit
together to create a cohesive community. The basic elements shown on
the Diagram are described below.
                                                                                                                 3-15

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Downtown
                                          Downtown is San Leandro’s central business district and civic heart. The
                                          General Plan envisions a pedestrian-oriented district with office, retail,
                                          and housing development, public gathering places, a blending of historic
                                          buildings and compatible new buildings, and easy access to public
                                          transit. The Downtown Core and the Downtown BART Station areas
                                          have both been identified as Focus Areas and are addressed later in the
                                          Land Use Element.
                                          Residential Neighborhoods
                                          San Leandro’s residential neighborhoods are large and diverse. An entire
                                          section of this Element is dedicated to their conservation and
                                          enhancement. Neighborhoods contain housing, parks, schools, local
                                          shopping areas, and other features which give them definition and
                                          character.
                                          Residential neighborhoods form a crescent around Downtown San
                                          Leandro and extend east into the hills, south to Ashland and San
                                          Lorenzo, and west to the San Leandro Shoreline. The neighborhoods to
                                          the north and east of Downtown contain most of San Leandro’s pre-
                                          1940s housing stock and are built on a traditional grid pattern. To the
                                          south and west of Downtown, most of the neighborhoods date from the
                                          1940s and 50s. On the western edge of the city, the Marina-Mulford
                                          Gardens area contains a mix of older country-style homes and more
                                          conventional subdivisions, townhomes and apartments. On the eastern
                                          edge, the Bay-O-Vista area is characterized by view-oriented single
                                          family homes on large lots.
                                          The existing land use pattern in San Leandro’s residential neighborhoods
                                          is well established. The General Plan policy emphasis is to enhance the
                                          quality of these areas. This will be done by upholding community
                                          aesthetic standards, protecting neighborhood character, beautifying city
                                          streets, and enhancing local parks, schools, and shopping areas. For
                                          those neighborhoods with distinct or historic architectural character,
                                          special care will be taken to preserve their scale and form. In all
                                          neighborhoods, an effort will be made to improve neighborhood edges,
                                          especially where they abut commercial and industrial areas.
3-16

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                             L A N D U S E
               Figure 3-2
     City Structure
                                     3-17
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Preserving neighborhood character does not mean that San Leandro’s
                                          neighborhoods will stay exactly as they are today.                Change is
                                          encouraged and necessary, but it must respect the scale and context of
                                          what exists today. The City is particularly supportive of reinvestment in
                                          its housing stock, and residential improvements that lead to the creation
                                          of additional housing units or new housing types in the city. Updating
                                          of neighborhood centers and shopping areas will also be strongly
                                          encouraged.
                                          Business Districts and Corridors
                                          San Leandro has a diverse array of business districts, ranging from
                                          heavy industrial areas to office parks and regional malls. Some of the
                                          business districts are expansive and far removed from the residential
                                          areas; others are very much a part of the fabric of surrounding
                                          neighborhoods.
                                          The guiding objectives in the city’s large business districts are to promote
                                          business retention and diversification, maintain mobility and ease of
                                          circulation, and implement aesthetic improvements that enhance the
                                          city’s image and appearance. The General Plan aspires to locate the most
                                          intensive industrial uses in the areas that are furthest away from
                                          residential neighborhoods. Where industrial and residential areas meet,
                                          buffer uses such as low-rise offices, live-work units, and open space are
                                          envisioned to minimize the potential for conflicts.
3-18

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
Transportation corridors are another key part of the
development framework. Commercial corridors link San
Leandro neighborhoods and business districts, and connect
the north, south, east, and west sides of town. These
corridors present significant opportunities for new transit-
oriented housing and shopping, as well as potential focal
points for nearby neighborhoods.
Parks and Open Space
The Structure Diagram indicates that San Leandro will
continue to be framed by open space on the east and west.
On the east, East Bay Regional Park District and East Bay
Municipal Utility District landholdings provide a permanent
greenbelt, with thousands of acres dedicated for
conservation. On the west, the San Leandro shoreline
provides four miles of almost continuous parkland,
including a world class golf course, a shoreline trail, and one
of the East Bay’s largest wetland preserves.
The General Plan supports the San Leandro Shoreline’s
continued role as a community showcase, with additional
public improvements and new water-oriented commercial development
(see Focus Area Discussion). The Plan promotes recreational
improvements to the Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline and continued
management of the Shoreline Marshlands as a unique natural area.
Elsewhere in San Leandro, smaller parks provide pockets of greenery
and areas for recreation. These parks are generally integrated into the
fabric of residential neighborhoods, often in association with schools and
school athletic fields.
San Leandro Creek provides an east-west ribbon of greenery through the
city, connecting the hills to the bay and defining neighborhood edges
along the way. The planned regional East Bay Greenway provides a
north-south axis of green through the city, facilitating bicycle and
pedestrian travel while providing an amenity for nearby neighborhoods
and employment districts.
                                                                                                                3-19

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          D.       LAND USE DIAGRAM AND DEFINITION
                                                   OF CATEGORIES
                                          Land Use Diagram
                                          State law requires that every General Plan include a map of the
                                          community identifying the location and extent of land used for housing,
                                          business, industry, open space, public buildings, waste facilities, and
                                          other public and private uses. This map is usually referred to as a
                                          General Plan Map or Land Use Diagram. Whereas the City Structure
                                          Map (Figure 3-2) is intended to be illustrative, the Land Use Diagram
                                          (Figure 3-3) is a policy and regulatory tool. Future land use decisions
                                          must be consistent with the designations on the Diagram, as well as the
                                          definitions and standards in this section.
                                          The City’s Zoning Map must also be consistent with the Diagram.
                                          However, the Zoning Map is more detailed than the Land Use Diagram,
                                          interpreting land use designations at a parcel-specific level and including
                                          more precise development standards corresponding to each General
                                          Plan category. Moreover, the General Plan is a 20-year Plan while
                                          zoning governs immediate land use decisions. The land use changes
                                          described by the General Plan are envisioned as taking place over two
                                          decades. Thus, rezoning to facilitate these changes need not happen
                                          immediately upon adoption of the Plan. Policies in the General Plan
                                          provide guidance as to which zoning changes are anticipated right away,
                                          and which are longer-term.
                                          State law also requires that the categories used on the Land Use Diagram
                                          be accompanied by definitions. These definitions must establish the
                                          density or intensity of development permitted within each category. In
                                          residential areas, density is usually expressed as the maximum number
                                          of dwelling units allowed per acre of land. In commercial and industrial
                                          areas, intensity is usually expressed using floor area ratios (the ratio of
                                          building area to lot area).
                                          Floor area ratio is also often used to regulate development in mixed use
                                          areas, including buildings with residential uses above commercial uses.
                                          This recognizes variations in housing unit sizes, and may provide an
                                          incentive for smaller and more affordable units. The text box on the next
                                          page provides additional direction on how to calculate density and floor
                                          area ratio.
3-20

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                          L A N D U S E
A reduced version of the Land Use Diagram for San Leandro is shown
on Figure 3-3. A larger version, displaying individual parcels, may be
viewed on the City’s website here.
A total of 18 land use categories appear on the Diagram, including six
residential categories, three mixed use categories, three predominantly
commercial categories, three industrial categories, and three public/ open
space categories. Table 3-1 indicates the land area in each category.
There may be multiple zoning districts within each General Plan
category, particularly in the commercial and mixed use areas. This will
allow finer distinctions to be made between the specific land uses to be
allowed and the development standards to be applied within each area
of the city. The General Plan categories are correlated with the City’s
zoning districts in Table 3-2. The Table indicates which zones are
compatible and conditionally compatible with each General Plan
category. The use of a zone noted as “conditionally compatible” would
only be acceptable if the types of development allowed by that zone are
consistent with General Plan goals and policies.
Land Use Categories
Residential Categories
The following six categories appear on the General Plan Diagram. Each
definition includes a reference to a gross density, which includes the area
taken up by streets, easements, and common open space, and net
density, which is based on developable parcel area only. Gross density
is intended to communicate the general character of the areas within
each category and is used to describe entire neighborhoods or large
subdivisions. It is intended to be descriptive and not regulatory. Net
density is used to establish the maximum number of units that may be
built on a single parcel in a given category. It is regulatory, and provides
the basis for the applicable zoning districts in each category. Since a few
of the designations contain multiple zoning districts, the maximum net
density is not necessarily permitted on all parcels. In each case, the
maximum net density may be exceeded by up to 35 percent under state
density bonus provisions for senior and/or affordable housing.
                                                                                                                  3-21

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                           TABLE 3-1        ACREAGE IN EACH LAND USE TYPE
                                                                                                   Acres
                                                                                                (Approx.)*          Percent
                                           Residential                                             4,209              50.8
                                            Garden Residential                                     160                1.9
                                            Low Density Residential                               3,098              37.4
                                            Low-Medium Density Residential                         206                2.5
                                            Medium Density Residential                             410                4.9
                                            Medium-High Density Residential                        217                2.6
                                            High Density Residential                               118                1.4
                                           Commercial                                               398                4.8
                                            Neighborhood Commercial                                 55                0.7
                                            General Commercial                                     343                4.1
                                           Mixed Use                                                561                6.8
                                            Downtown Mixed Use                                      98                1.2
                                            Transit-Oriented Mixed Use                             158                1.9
                                            Corridor Mixed Use                                     184                2.2
                                            Bayfair TOD Mixed Use                                  121                1.5
                                           Industrial                                              1,693              20.4
                                            Light Industrial                                       518                6.3
                                            General Industrial                                    1,003              12.1
                                            Industrial Transition                                  172                2.1
                                           Public/Open Space                                       1,424              17.2
                                            Public/Institutional                                   354                4.3
                                            Parks and Recreation                                   548                6.6
                                            Resource Conservation                                  522                6.3
                                           TOTAL                                                   8,285             100.0
                                          Source: City of San Leandro, 2016
                                          Notes: (*) Excludes 224 acres of Freeway ROW and 1,384 acres of surface water in San
                                          Francisco Bay
3-22

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                             L A N D U S E
                 Figure 3-3
Land Use Diagram
                                     3-23
S A N L E A N D R O  G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                Calculating Density and Intensity
               A maximum development density or intensity has been identified for each of the categories shown
               on the Land Use Diagram, as required by State law. Residential densities are usually expressed in
               terms of the number of units allowed per gross acre (called “gross density”) or net acre (called “net
               density”). Gross density includes the area given over to streets, easements, utilities, flood control
               ditches and other areas which are publicly owned or owned in common. It is most often used to
               describe density in a subdivision or in a residential neighborhood. Net density excludes public or
               commonly-owned areas and is typically used to calculate the number of units per acre on an
               individual parcel of land. In single family areas, net density limits may provide the basis for the
               minimum lot size or square footage of land per unit standards established by the zoning ordinance.
               Residential density also may be expressed in terms of the number of people per acre. To calculate
               persons per acre, the number of units should be multiplied by 2.76, which is the average number of
               persons per household in San Leandro projected for the Year 2035.
               Floor area ratio (FAR) is a measurement of the amount of floor space that can be developed on a
               particular parcel of land. If a 10,000 square foot parcel has an FAR limit of 0.5, then the floor area on
               the parcel may not exceed 5,000 square feet. As defined here, floor area excludes unfinished
               basements, carports, structured parking, mechanical rooms, and other non-habitable spaces. FAR
               does not dictate the height or shape of a building, or its location on a site. These characteristics are
               usually defined through the zoning ordinance. FAR also does not address architectural features or
               materials; these aspects are usually covered by design guidelines. Where FAR is used in mixed use
               areas, it creates a maximum building envelope on each site that may also include residential uses. In
               such cases, the residential uses may be governed by an FAR limit, a density limit, or both.
               Examples of 1.0 FAR
                                                       1 story             2 stories              4 stories
                                                   100% lot coverage   50% lot coverage       25% lot coverage
               The description of land use categories on the following pages indicate the net density or FAR
               associated with each land use category. Development which exceeds these levels may only be
               allowed where certain conditions (specified in the San Leandro Zoning Code) exist. For example, the
               City is required by State law to offer a “density bonus” for projects with affordable housing or senior
               housing.
3-24

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
Garden Residential. This designation permits detached single family
homes in a country or semi-rural environment. Small-scale commercial
gardens and animal husbandry, consistent with the residential character
of the area, also are permitted. Existing lots in areas with this
designation typically exceed 8,000 square feet. New lots may not be
smaller than 8,000 square feet. Multiple single family homes may be
permitted on a single parcel as long as an overall ratio of one unit per
8,000 square feet of floor area is maintained. Gross densities generally
range from 1-4 units per acre, including streets and easements.
Maximum allowable net density in this category is 5.4 units per acre.
Low Density Residential. This designation permits detached single
family homes and is characterized by lots of 5,000 to 10,000 square feet.
Lots smaller than 5,000 square feet are not permitted. This is the
predominant residential development type in San Leandro and includes
most of the neighborhoods developed between 1925 and 1990. Gross
densities generally range from 3-6 units per acre, including streets and
easements. Maximum allowable net density in this category is 8.7 units
per acre, although this maximum is not allowed in all Low Density
Residential zoning districts.
Low-Medium Density Residential. This designation permits attached
and detached single family houses on small lots. Lots smaller than 5,000
square feet are permitted. Gross densities generally range from 7 to 11
units per acre, including streets and easements. Maximum allowable net
density in this category is 12.4 units per net acre. Although more dense
than the “Low Density Residential” category, these areas should retain
the basic amenities and qualities of a single family neighborhood,
including front and rear yards, driveways, and garages. Most areas with
this General Plan designation have been developed using Planned
Development (PD) zoning, allowing flexible lot standards.
Medium Density Residential. This designation permits attached
housing types, such as townhomes and duplexes. Single family detached
homes on standard lots (5,000 square feet or more), smaller lots (less than
5,000 SF), and clustered or planned unit developments are also permitted
in areas with this designation. These areas may include common open
space and private recreational facilities. Mobile home parks are also
permitted within this category. Gross densities range from 12-18 units
per acre, including streets, easements, and common open space.
Maximum allowable net density is 21.7 units per acre, although this
maximum is not allowed in all corresponding Medium Density
Residential zoning districts.
                                                                                                                 3-25

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Medium-High Density Residential. This designation permits multi-
                                          family residential development, such as garden apartments, townhomes,
                                          and two-story condominiums. Single family homes are also permitted.
                                          On larger parcels with this designation, common open space areas,
                                          landscaping, and other site amenities may be required. Gross densities
                                          range from 19-25 units per acre, including streets, easements, and
                                          common open space. Maximum allowable net density is 29 units per
                                          acre.
                                          High Density Residential. This designation permits multi-family
                                          residential development. It is intended to identify and conserve existing
                                          concentrations of such development in the city where existing net
                                          densities exceed 29 units per acre. These areas are characterized by
                                          multi-story apartments and condominiums, often in larger complexes
                                          with amenities such as swimming pools, patios, and recreation rooms.
                                          Maximum allowable net density is 50 units per acre. However, this
                                          maximum is not permitted on all parcels. Smaller parcels are subject to a
                                          maximum of 24.2 units per net acre.
                                          Commercial Categories
                                          There are two commercial categories, defined below. The commercial
                                          categories are distinguished from the “Mixed Use” categories by their
                                          focus on commercial uses rather than a mix of commercial and higher
                                          density residential uses. Although housing is permitted on most
                                          commercially zoned properties, the allowable densities and conditional
                                          use permit requirements for the commercial categories reflect the City’s
                                          desire to retain most of these areas for retail, service, office, and similar
                                          employment-generating land uses.
3-26

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                       L A N D U S E
Neighborhood Commercial. This designation corresponds to small
shopping centers or clusters of streetfront buildings with local-serving
businesses and services. Allowable uses include groceries, local-serving
offices, pharmacies, laundromats, dry cleaners, restaurants, and other
businesses that serve the daily needs of nearby residential areas. The
maximum allowable Floor Area Ratio (FAR) is 0.5. Residential uses and
mixed use development may be considered within Neighborhood
Commercial areas, subject to a maximum net density of 24.2 units per
acre and an FAR limit of 0.5.
General Commercial. This designation corresponds to larger shopping
centers, shopping districts, and commercial uses providing a broader
range of goods and services and serving a broader market than the
neighborhood commercial areas. Allowable uses include but are not
limited to supermarkets, department stores, apparel stores, theaters, and
non-retail services such as offices and banks. These areas also contain
primarily auto-oriented uses such as hotels and motels, car dealerships,
auto service and repair businesses, and construction suppliers. The uses
are generally designed for the convenience of
persons arriving by car. The maximum
allowable Floor Area Ratio (FAR) is 1.0.
However, there are multiple zoning districts in
this category, including several that are subject
to lower maximum limits. Some of the zoning
districts in this designation permit residential
uses, subject to conditional use permit
requirements and a maximum net density of
24.2 units per acre. In such cases, maximum
FARs also apply. Residential uses are not
permitted in all districts due to the potential for
conflicts with heavier commercial activities and
the need to retain land for local services and
revenue generation.
                                                                                                               3-27
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Mixed Use Categories
                                          There are four mixed use categories on the General Plan Diagram,
                                          corresponding to the areas of greatest development density and intensity
                                          in the city. Multi-family residential and commercial uses are encouraged
                                          in all four categories. Mixed use development (projects combining
                                          commercial and residential uses on a single parcel) is strongly
                                          encouraged in all four categories but is not mandatory unless specifically
                                          called out by a Specific Plan or Area Plan covering areas with these
                                          designations. Within each area, zoning may be used to identify areas
                                          where residential uses are preferred (or required) and areas where
                                          commercial uses are preferred (or required).                 The intensity of
                                          development in mixed use areas is typically regulated by floor area
                                          ration rather than units per acre, although some mixed use zoning
                                          districts may incorporate both metrics.
                                          Downtown Mixed Use. This designation corresponds to the area that
                                          has historically been the central business district of San Leandro. It
                                          allows a range of uses which together create a pedestrian-oriented street
                                          environment. These uses include retail shops, services, offices, cultural
                                          activities, public and civic buildings, and similar and compatible uses,
                                          including upper story residential uses. These activities may be located
                                          within the same building or within separate buildings on the same site or
                                          nearby sites. More specific guidance on the mix and design of uses is
                                          specified in General Plan policies for the Downtown area and in the 2007
                                          Downtown TOD Strategy. A maximum FAR of 3.5 applies, although this
                                          maximum is not permitted in all zoning districts within this area.
                                          Mixed use development with housing is encouraged in this area, with
                                          allowable residential densities ranging from 24 to 100 units per net acre,
                                          depending on the zoning district. The City also offers density bonuses of
                                          up to 20 percent above the General Plan maximums stated above (e.g.,
                                          28.8 to 120 units per net acre) where the average unit size is smaller than
                                          750 square feet.1 Regardless of unit size, a maximum FAR of 3.5 also
                                          applies to mixed use development. This maximum is not permitted in
                                          all zoning districts within the Downtown Mixed Use area.                  Several
                                                    1 These bonuses may not be added to the state-required density bonus for
                                          affordable housing. Only one density bonus program may be applied to any given
                                          development.
3-28
                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
Downtown zoning districts have been established to respond to existing
land uses and development opportunities, and to facilitate Downtown
revitalization goals.
Transit-Oriented Mixed Use. The purpose of this designation is to
provide for a mix of high-intensity land uses that capitalize on proximity
to the San Leandro BART station. This designation maximizes the
potential for transit-oriented infill development and achieves compatible
transitions to adjacent residential districts through design standards and
zoning.
Several zoning districts have been established for the Transit-Oriented
Mixed Use areas. These districts emphasize the vertical mixing of
different uses, with housing being the predominant use in some areas
and office/retail the major use in others. The maximum floor area ratio
in areas with this designation is 4.0, although intensities of 5.0 may be
considered on sites adjacent to the BART station. Some of the transit-
oriented zoning districts specify minimum densities (generally 60 to 80
units per acre) and minimum floor area ratios (generally 1.0) on larger
parcels to ensure that land is used as efficiently as possible. The
maximum number of residential units on any given property is dictated
by floor area ratio limits in some zoning districts and maximum density
limits in others.
                                                                                                                3-29
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Corridor Mixed Use. This designation allows a mix of commercial and
                                          residential uses oriented in a linear development pattern along major
                                          transit-served arterials such as East 14th Street. A range of commercial
                                          and office uses is permitted, primarily serving neighborhood and
                                          community needs. Residential uses may be either free-standing or
                                          integrated into the upper floors of mixed use projects. Development
                                          should be designed to encourage walking and bicycle use, and should be
                                          sufficiently dense to support increased transit services along the
                                          corridors. A maximum allowable FAR of 1.0 applies in areas with this
                                          designation, although FARs of up to 1.5 may be permitted for projects
                                          incorporating housing. Where a Specific Plan or Area Plan has been
                                          prepared for an area with this designation, an FAR of 1.5 may also be
                                          permitted, subject to the conditions of that Plan. Maximum residential
                                          density in this category is dictated by the above floor area ratio limits
                                          rather than limits on housing units per acre.
                                          Bay Fair Transit-Oriented Development. This designation includes
                                          approximately 120 acres within the San Leandro city limits around the
                                          Bay Fair BART Station, including Bayfair Center, Fairmont Square and
                                          Fashion Faire Place, and other commercial properties along Hesperian
                                          Boulevard, Fairmont Drive, and East 14th Street in the Bayfair Center
                                          vicinity. The BART parking lot is also included. As of 2016, a TOD
                                          Specific Plan for this area was underway. The intent is to create a new
                                          vision for this area, including retail, office, higher density housing, open
                                          space, and public land uses. A more urban development form is
                                          envisioned, with pedestrian-scaled streets and an orientation toward
                                          BART access and transit use. A maximum FAR of 3.0 applies, although
                                          multiple zoning districts are envisioned and lower maximums may
                                          apply in some of these districts. Maximum residential density in this
                                          category is dictated by floor area ratio limits rather than limits on
                                          housing units per acre.
                                          Industrial Categories
                                          Three industrial categories have been identified, as described below.
                                          Light Industrial. Light Industrial areas may contain wholesale activities,
                                          distribution facilities, research and development or e-commerce uses,
                                          business services, technology, and manufacturing operations which
                                          produce minimal off-site impacts. Campus-style industrial parks and
                                          professional offices also are permitted. A limited range of commercial
                                          uses also is permitted in these areas. Uses in areas with this designation
                                          must be capable of locating adjacent to residential areas without creating
3-30
                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
adverse effects. A maximum floor area ratio of 1.0 applies, although this
area contains multiple zoning districts and this maximum may not be
attainable in all districts.
General Industrial. General Industrial areas may contain a wide range
of manufacturing, transportation, food and beverage processing,
technology, warehousing, vehicle storage, office-flex, and distribution
uses. Such uses are subject to performance standards to avoid adverse
off-site effects. A limited range of commercial uses also is permitted in
these areas. A maximum floor area ratio of 1.0 applies, although this
area contains multiple zoning districts and this maximum may not be
attainable in all districts.
Industrial-Transition. The Industrial Transition designation corresponds
to areas that have historically been industrial but have transitioned or
may transition in the future to a more diverse mix of uses, including
general commercial activities. Industrial uses will continue to be
permitted in these areas in the future, but a broader mix of commercial
uses such as offices, medical facilities, retail, services, home furnishing
stores, construction showrooms, and restaurants is also encouraged.
These areas include large floor-plate industrial buildings that can be
adaptively re-used to serve new technology, advanced manufacturing,
and “maker” industries. Residential uses in Industrial-Transition areas
are only permitted for properties within 0.5 miles of a BART station, or
where live-work development is proposed. The maximum FAR in the
Industrial Transition areas is 1.0. No density limit applies, but
residential development is likewise subject to a 1.0 FAR maximum where
it is permitted.
                                                                                                                 3-31

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Public and Open Space Categories
                                          Three public and open space categories appear on the General Plan
                                          Diagram. These are:
                                          Public/Institutional. This designation denotes public schools, libraries,
                                          post offices, churches, public hospitals, and other public or institutional
                                          buildings. It also denotes major utility properties or facilities. Floor area
                                          ratios of up to 1.0 are permitted.
                                          Parks and Recreation. This designation denotes land which is used for
                                          active recreational purposes, including neighborhood, community, and
                                          regional parks, golf courses, and the recreational amenities at Oyster Bay
                                          Regional Shoreline. Permitted uses include athletic fields and sports
                                          facilities, civic buildings with a primarily recreational or social function,
                                          and leisure-oriented uses such as picnic areas, boat slips, and tot lots.
                                          Coverage by structures should generally not exceed 10 percent of the
                                          area within any given park.
                                          Resource Conservation. This designation denotes land which is to
                                          remain undeveloped due to high environmental sensitivity, or land to be
                                          used primarily for passive recreation (such as walking trails). It also
                                          includes land within and immediately along the banks of San Leandro
                                          Creek. Development is generally not permitted in Resource
                                          Conservation areas so there is no building intensity standard; the land is
                                          to be managed to enhance and restore its natural features.
3-32
                                                                                       S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                                    L A N D U S E
TABLE 3-2       CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN LAND USE DIAGRAM AND ZONING DESIGNATIONS
                                                    Corresponding Zoning            Conditionally Compatible
Land Use Category                                        Designations                  Zoning Designations
Garden Residential                                RO                               RS, PS
Low Density Residential                           RS, RS-40, RS (VP)               RS (PD), RD, PS, CN
Low-Medium Density Residential                    RS (PD)                          RD, RS, PS
                                                  RD, RM-3000, RM-2500,
Medium Density Residential                                                         RS (PD), RD, PS
                                                  RM-2000
                                                                                   RM-2000,     RM-2500,    RM-
Medium-High Density Residential                   RM-1800
                                                                                   3000, PS
High Density Residential                          RM-875 (see Note 1)              RM-1800
Neighborhood Commercial                           CN, P                            CC, CR, PS
General Commercial                                CC, CS, CR, CR-M                 CN, PS, P
Downtown Mixed Use                                DA-1, DA-2, DA-3, P              RM-875, RM-1800, CN, PS
Transit-Oriented Mixed Use                        DA-2, DA-3, DA-4, DA-6           RM-875, RM-1800, PS
Bayfair TOD Mixed Use                             (See Note 2)
                                                  NA-1, NA-2, SA-1, SA-2,          RM-875, RM-1800, RM-2000,
Corridor Mixed Use                                                                 RM-2500, RM-3000, CN, CC,
                                                  SA-3, DA-2
                                                                                   P, PS, IL
Light Industrial                                  IL, IP                           IG, CC, CS, P, PS
General Industrial                                IG, IL, IP                       CC, CS, P, PS
Industrial Transition                             IT                               IG, CC, IL, IP
Public/Semi-Public                                PS                               Depends on type of use
Parks and Recreation                              OS                               PS, CR
Resource Conservation                             OS                               PS
Source: City of San Leandro, 2016
Notes: (1) RM-875 had not yet been created at time of General Plan adoption. RM-1800 is considered the
conforming zone until such time as the RM-875 District (1 unit per 875 square feet) is adopted. (2) Areas within
this boundary are subject to a Specific Plan in progress at the time of General Plan adoption. Conforming zones
will be determined through that process. Existing zones are considered conforming in the interim.
                                                                                                                            3-33
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Related Issues
                                          State law (Government Code Section 65302a) requires the Land Use
                                          Element of the General Plan to identify future solid and liquid waste
                                          disposal sites, the locations of educational facilities, areas subject to
                                          flooding, the locations of mineral resources, and impacts on military
                                          readiness. The existing Davis Street Resource Recovery Complex (2615
                                          Davis Street) and the San Leandro Wastewater Treatment Plant (3000
                                          Davis Street) are identified on the General Plan Diagram as
                                          Public/Institutional uses. No future sites for solid and liquid waste
                                          disposal are planned within the city. Solid waste disposal issues are
                                          addressed in Chapter 6 and liquid waste disposal issues are addressed in
                                          Chapters 6, 7, and 9. Educational facilities are shown as
                                          Public/Institutional uses on the General Plan Diagram. The location of
                                          future schools is addressed in Chapter 9. Areas prone to flooding are
                                          identified and mapped in Chapter 7. The location of mineral resources is
                                          addressed in Chapter 6. There are no military installations in or adjacent
                                          to San Leandro, and development accommodated by the General Plan
                                          would have no direct or indirect effects on military instillations.
3-34
RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS
Residential uses comprise about half of San Leandro’s land area. In 2016,
the city’s 3,270 acres of residential land contained over 32,000 dwelling
units, housing about 88,000 people. But living in San Leandro is much
more than simply occupying a dwelling unit—it is the experience of
being part of a neighborhood. It is getting to know the local shops and
hangouts, the neighborhood schools and parks, and the people who live
nearby. Neighborhoods are an important part of what creates a feeling of
“community” in San Leandro. In many parts of the city, dynamic
neighborhood associations have contributed to a strong sense of identity
and created an opportunity for residents to have a say in the city’s
future.
Although San Leandro’s neighborhoods are not likely to change
significantly in the next 15 to 20 years, they will not remain entirely static
either. Alterations and additions will be made to homes, renovations
will take place, and infill development will occur on vacant lots.
Reinvestment in streets and public facilities will take place, and
shopping areas will be updated. Neighborhoods may also be affected by
demographic shifts and changes in technology. Policies in the General
Plan, and ultimately regulations in the Zoning Code, strive to maintain a
quality environment as these changes take place.
The following section of the General Plan profiles San Leandro’s major
residential areas. The location of these areas is shown in Figure 3-4.
Each of the ten areas described consists of multiple neighborhoods. The
neighborhoods have been grouped for discussion purposes based on
their physical boundaries.

                   Figure 3-4
Residential Neighborhoods
  Northeast
  Northeast San Leandro At A Glance
  2000 Population: 9,950
  2015 Population: 10,240
  2035 Projected Population: 10,900
  Major Neighborhoods: Bancroft, Broadmoor, Hollywood, Creekside,
  Estudillo Estates
This area encompasses the
neighborhoods lying east and
northeast      of     Downtown,
extending between East 14th
Street to I-580 and from
Oakland on the north to Sybil
Avenue on the south. More than
anywhere else in San Leandro,
homes in this area provide a
living     reminder      of    the
architectural styles, building
materials, scale, and street
patterns that were typical in
California between 1910 and
1940. The neighborhoods follow
a     traditional    pattern    of
development with a grid of streets, abundant tree cover, curbside
parking, and generous front and back yards. The area contains
numerous Craftsman and Mediterranean style homes, many with
distinctive architectural features. Several commercial districts serve the
neighborhood, including the MacArthur corridor, and the
Bancroft/Dutton shopping district. The area also contains concentrations
of multi-family housing along Bancroft and close to East 14 th Street.
The land use pattern in this area is well established and there are few
opportunities for infill development. However, there is strong interest in
remodeling, updating, and expanding older homes, which creates the
potential for changes in neighborhood character. Given the area’s unique
ambiance, it is important that alterations and additions are sympathetic
to the prevailing scale and form of existing development. Demolition of
older homes to make way for larger, more modern homes is strongly
discouraged.

The General Plan envisions opportunities for new mixed use
development along East 14th Street and MacArthur Boulevard on the east
and west edges of this area. There may also be infill opportunities at
Bancroft/Dutton, including potential intensification of the Safeway site
and adjacent parking area.        Such development should consider
opportunities for additional neighborhood shopping and services, as
well as new multi-family housing. Future projects on these corridors
should be designed to respect the architectural styles of the nearby
neighborhoods, so that these areas enhance and complement one
another. An update to the North Area Plan, which covers this area, is a
priority General Plan implementation action.
 North /Cherrywood
 North San Leandro/Cherrywood At A Glance
 2000 Population: 4,380
 2015 Population: 4,460
 2035 Projected Population: 4,910
 Major Neighborhoods: Farrelly Pond, Best Manor, Cherrywood, East
 14th Street North Area
                                        This area encompasses the
                                        neighborhoods lying west of
                                        East 14th Street and east of the
                                        Union Pacific Railroad from
                                        Downtown       north    to   the
                                        Oakland border.        The area
                                        contains several distinct sub-
                                        areas. The neighborhoods of
                                        Best Manor and Farrelly Pond
                                        lie east of San Leandro
                                        Boulevard. These areas are
                                        characterized by single-story
                                        stucco bungalows dating from
                                        the 1920s and 1930s. The area
                                        also contains a number of small
                                        1930s-era apartment buildings
                                        and several blocks of duplexes.
The Cherrywood neighborhood lies west of San Leandro Boulevard and
the BART tracks. There are about 350 homes in Cherrywood, a
neighborhood built on former nursery lands in the 1990s. Many of the
homes are built on zero lot lines and feature California contemporary
architecture.
As in the Northeast area, the key objective is to maintain and enhance
neighborhood character. Care should be taken to ensure that additions
and alterations respect the scale of existing development. Particular
emphasis should be placed on revitalizing the commercial areas located
on East 14th Street and introducing new commercial and residential uses
to the Park Street “island” area along San Leandro Boulevard and
around Siempre Verde Park. An updated North Area Plan should
address land use and design compatibility issues along East 14 th Street,
where commercial properties directly abut single family homes in many
cases.
 Central
 Central San Leandro At A Glance
 2000 Population: 6,400
 2015 Population: 7,600
 2035 Projected Population: 14,600
 Major Neighborhoods: Downtown, Downtown East, TOD area,
 Peralta
The Central area includes the residential
uses within and around Downtown San
Leandro. Just a century ago, almost all of
San Leandro was contained within this
area. The area contains a diverse and
eclectic mix of housing, including the
city’s largest concentration of pre-1910
homes. Much of the development that
took place during the 1950s, 1960s, and
1970s was not sympathetic to the area’s
historic context.      Thus, Central San
Leandro is sometimes not identified as a
neighborhood per se but rather as an
extension of Downtown.
Almost half of the residential growth expected in San Leandro during
the next 20 years will take place in the Central area. Most of this growth
will occur near the BART station in multi-family developments designed

to maximize opportunities for walking, bicycling, bus, and BART use. A
large area of future residential development is located near the north end
of Alvarado Street northwest of the station. Other major opportunity
sites include the Town Hall Square site at Davis/East 14th, the former
CVS drug store at East 14th/Callan, several sites along Washington
Avenue, and sites to the immediate south of the BART station. Some of
this development may consist of mixed use projects with ground floor
retail or office uses and upper story housing, and some may be entirely
commercial or residential.
Public realm improvements will take place to make the area more
cohesive and distinct as development occurs. As San Leandro’s most
“urban” neighborhood, opportunities to enhance the streetscape,
encourage walking, and create a variety of housing types should be
pursued. At the same time, opportunities to enhance the area’s historic
ambiance and conserve its older housing stock should be encouraged.
Infill housing should create an urban living environment while
respecting and preserving historic resources.
 Davis Corridor
 Davis Corridor At A Glance
 2000 Population: 9,240
 2015 Population: 11,120
 2035 Projected Population: 11,330
 Major Neighborhoods: Davis West, Davis East, Eastshore, Preda,
 Westgate, Timothy Drive, Muir
                                              The Davis corridor includes
                                              the      large    residential
                                              subdivisions       extending
                                              along both sides of Davis
                                              Street from Downtown San
                                              Leandro west about a mile
                                              to the Westgate-Costco
                                              shopping area. Most of this
                                              area was subdivided and
                                              developed with ranch style
                                              tract homes in the 1940s and
                                              early 1950s.

There are notable exceptions, including the “Kanaka Row” cottages
along Orchard Avenue which date to the late 1800s, and subdivisions
from the late 1990s such as Magnolia Lane and Camelia Court. The area
also includes large apartment complexes such as the 238-unit Gateway
complex, as well as smaller 1960s era apartment blocks along Pacific
Avenue.
The Davis corridor has experienced substantial population growth in the
last two decades due to rising household sizes. While there has been
little new residential construction, average household sizes have
increased to over 3.5 persons in this area, exceeding 4.0 in some census
tract block groups. Approximately 40 percent of the population in these
neighborhoods is foreign-born.
There are limited opportunities for additional housing in the Davis
corridor. However, the neighborhood would benefit from community
improvement programs and public reinvestment, particularly gateway
improvements, better buffering from major transportation routes, and
tree planting. As most of the development is now more than 65 years
old, a continued effort should be made to maintain and improve the
housing stock. On the western edge of the area, in the Davis West and
Timothy Drive neighborhoods, continued efforts should be made to
reduce the environmental health concerns created by the proximity of
these areas to I-880, the railroad, shopping center traffic, and major truck
routes. Additional opportunities for community gardens, parks, and
other amenities should be pursued in this area.
  Halcyon-Foothill
  Halcyon-Foothill At A Glance
  2000 Population: 12,060
  2015 Population: 13,000
  2035 Projected Population: 15,370 (excludes Bay Fair TOD)
  Major Neighborhoods: Assumption Parish, Upper Bal, Lower Bal,
  Halcyon, Foothill, Portofino, Sandpiper-Dundee
Halcyon-Foothill is one of the largest and most diverse residential areas
in San Leandro, extending almost three miles south and southeast from
Downtown to the Bay Fair area. Most of the area is characterized by
residential subdivisions developed in the late 1940s and early 1950s;
however, the area includes older homes developed when the area was

                                        still unincorporated along with
                                        subdivisions from the 1970s and
                                        80s. The housing stock is also
                                        diverse. Although the area
                                        contains thousands of post-war
                                        ranch homes, it also contains
                                        Victorian-era cottages, art deco
                                        homes, trailer parks, and some of
                                        San Leandro’s largest apartment,
                                        townhome, and condominium
                                        complexes.
                                        The future emphasis in Halcyon-
                                        Foothill will be neighborhood
                                        beautification, conservation and
improvement. A continued effort should be made to buffer homes from
industrial and commercial uses on the west and the MacArthur Freeway
on the east, and to ensure compatible infill development. A substantial
increase in population is anticipated, almost entirely as a result of infill
development along East 14th Street between Sybil and 150th.
East 14th Street will be enhan ced as the neighborhood’s commercial
“main street.” During the next 20 years, many of the older car
dealerships and vacant or marginal commercial uses will be replaced by
new commercial and mixed use developments. New development will
be leveraged to create amenities along the corridor, including
streetscape, signage, lighting, and landscaping improvements. Safer
conditions for pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit users are also
envisioned, both on East 14th and on Bancroft Avenue. The East 14th
Street South Area Development Strategy provides policy guidance for
the corridor and describes “nodes” where future commercial activity will
be focused.
A stronger sense of neighborhood identity can also be created in this part
of San Leandro by capitalizing on the area’s schools as community open
spaces. The area includes San Leandro High School and Jefferson School,
Assumption Church and School, as well as Toyon Park and Halcyon
Park. The new East Bay Greenway will provide an amenity on the west
side of this area. Opportunities to enhance the PG&E transmission line
corridor as an open space amenity also should be explored.

  Floresta/Springlake
  Floresta/Springlake At A Glance
  2000 Population: 8,700
  2015 Population: 8,800
  2035 Projected Population: 9,080 ( excludes Bayfair TOD)
  Major Neighborhoods: Floresta, Floresta Gardens, Huntington Park,
  Lakeside Village, Washington Square
The     Floresta/    Springlake
neighborhood extends west
from I-880 to Hesperian
Boulevard in the southern part
of San Leandro. Like Halcyon-
Foothill, this is a large area
consisting mostly of 1950s-era
ranch style housing tracts but
also including multi-family
developments and newer
subdivisions.     The      area
includes San Leandro’s largest
apartment complex—the 840-
unit Lakeside Apartments —
as well as Floresta Gardens
Townhomes,          Washington
Commons Townhomes, Eden Lodge, and several smaller multifamily
complexes. Washington Avenue is the neighborhood’s major commercial
corridor, with a cluster of shopping centers at Washington and Floresta
Boulevard. The only sizeable open space in the neighborhood is Floresta
Park, which adjoins Monroe Elementary School.
Opportunities     for    new     residential    development   in    the
Floresta/Springlake area are limited to a handful of properties along
Halcyon Drive, Hesperian Boulevard, and Washington Avenue. The
density and scale of development here should be compatible with the
adjacent single family neighborhoods. Elsewhere, the major objectives
are conserving the housing stock, maintaining neighborhood aesthetic
standards, ensuring the compatibility of additions and remodels, and
improving edge conditions where residential uses abut industrial or
commercial uses. The introduction of housing to the retail node at
Washington/Floresta could be considered during the next 20 years, but

the priority at this location is revitalizing commercial activities to
provide services to nearby residents. Aesthetic improvements to the
Washington Avenue commercial strip, such as undergrounding of
utilities and street tree planting, should be pursued. The planned East
Bay Greenway will provide a new amenity for the neighborhood, and
improve bicycle connections to Downtown and the Bay Fair area.
 Washington Manor
 Washington Manor At A Glance
 2000 Population: 16,620
 2015 Population: 17,350
 2035 Projected Population: 17,710
 Major Neighborhoods: Washington Manor, Bonaire, Sandev
                                           Washington      Manor     (“the
                                           Manor”) and Bonaire are well-
                                           established neighborhoods in
                                           southwest San Leandro. Both
                                           neighborhoods exemplify the
                                           type of development that took
                                           place across the United States
                                           in the decade following World
                                           War II, with thousands of
                                           similarly designed homes on a
                                           curving grid of streets. At the
                                           time it was built, Washington
                                           Manor was one of the largest
                                           housing tracts in the Bay Area.
                                           Multiple     generations     of
                                           homeowners       have     made
extensive changes to the housing stock, and today the Manor and
adjacent Bonaire have evolved into a mature community of comfortable
ranch-style homes. Densities average about five units per acre and multi-
family housing is generally limited to the southeastern edge of the
neighborhood.
Today, about one in every six San Leandro residents lives in this area.
This is also one of San Leandro’s most culturally diverse neighborhoods.
More than half of the households speak a language other than English at
home. The Manor is sometimes perceived as a “city within the city,”

with its own centrally located library, parks, schools, and shopping area.
These features, coupled with well-defined edges like San Lorenzo Creek,
Wicks Boulevard, and the Nimitz Freeway, create a strong sense of
community.
The Manor and Bonaire neighborhoods are generally considered to be
built out. No significant land use changes are anticipated during the next
20 years. The emphasis will be on maintaining and enhancing homes and
yards, enforcing codes and addressing nuisance complaints, beautifying
the neighborhoods, and revitalizing local commercial areas. Although
residential alterations and additions are encouraged, care should be
taken to respect the spacious, low-density character of the
neighborhoods. Expanded efforts should be made to update the
commercial centers at Manor and Farnsworth, Manor and Zelma, and
Lewelling and Wicks. The Manor Shopping Center (at Manor and
Farnsworth) in particular, has the potential to be a more vibrant
neighborhood center and community focal point.
 West of Wicks
 West of Wicks At A Glance
 2000 Population: 3,170
 2015 Population: 3,370
 2035 Projected Population: 3,410
 Major Neighborhoods: Heron Bay, Marina Vista, Mission Bay
This area contains three separate but
adjoining residential developments
located on the west side of Wicks
Boulevard in the southwest corner of
San      Leandro.     Two      of    these
developments—Marina          Vista    and
Heron Bay—were built in the late 1990s.
The third—Mission Bay—is a 40-acre
master-planned          mobile      home
community. The Marina Community
Center is an important community
facility serving these neighborhoods and
the adjacent Manor area.

This area is the gateway to the San Leandro Shoreline Marshlands, with
access to the Bay Trail provided at several points. No land use changes
are anticipated during the coming years. Ongoing code enforcement and
compliance programs will ensure that these neighborhoods remain
attractive places to live. Continued efforts also will be made to protect
habitat in the marshlands, reduce the visual impact of renewable energy
facilities, and address the potential impacts of rising sea level on
flooding and biological resources.
  Marina
  Marina At A Glance
  2000 Population: 6,690
  2015 Population: 6,620
  2035 Projected Population: 7,700
  Major Neighborhoods: Marina Faire, Mulford Gardens, Little Alaska,
  Seagate
                                        The Marina area encompasses
                                        the neighborhoods at the west
                                        end of Marina Boulevard,
                                        including Mulford Gardens,
                                        Marina Faire, Little Alaska, and
                                        the Seagate and Marina Gardens
                                        condominium         developments.
                                        Although       each     of    these
                                        neighborhoods is separate and
                                        distinct, they form a well-defined
                                        community with shared concerns
                                        and issues. Mulford Gardens was
                                        originally laid out in the 1920s as
a rural subdivision in unincorporated Alameda County. Although it was
annexed to San Leandro in 1957, the 160-acre neighborhood still retains a
semi-rural quality. Its dense tree canopy, large lots, remnant farms, and
eclectic mix of old and new homes set it apart from other San Leandro
neighborhoods. Little Alaska was developed around 1950, with Alaskan
cities providing the inspiration for its street names. Marina Faire
includes about 475 homes developed in the early 1960s. The Seagate and
Marina Gardens complexes are more recent.
Most of the Marina/Mulford area is built out, although the neighborhood
includes a few vacant parcels and several underutilized commercial
properties. Current zoning in Mulford Gardens allows more than one
home per lot on parcels exceeding 12,000 square feet, creating the
potential for additional dwellings on many of the lots. The area also
includes a planned residential and commercial development at the San
Leandro shoreline. As noted later in this chapter, preliminary plans for
this area include 354 new homes, new restaurant, retail, and office space,
and waterfront parks. This development, coupled with the new Kaiser
Permanente medical complex, may have a transformative effect on the
Marina corridor, and create opportunities for additional commercial and
office uses between Mulford Gardens and Merced Street.
The Marina/Mulford area is particularly sensitive to the impacts of
development on its perimeter, given that is adjoined on the north and
east by general industrial uses and rail lines. Future commercial and
industrial development decisions must address the potential for
increased auto and truck traffic, noise, and other adverse effects on the
area. As in other San Leandro neighborhoods, there will also be a
continued focus on housing conservation, enforcement of community
standards, neighborhood gateway and streetscape improvements, and
improved buffering. Ongoing efforts will address airport noise and truck
traffic issues, revitalization of the Marina Faire Shopping Center,
connections to Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline, and adaptive measures on
the shoreline to address potential sea level rise impacts.
  Bay-O-Vista
  Bay-O-Vista At A Glance
  2000 Population: 2,330
  2015 Population: 2,180
  2035 Projected Population: 2,270
  Major Neighborhoods: Bay-O-Vista, Chabot Park
Bay-O-Vista encompasses the portion of San Leandro located east of I-
580. It is unique among San Leandro neighborhoods because of its hilly
topography and panoramic views. The neighborhood is characterized by
single-story ranch homes on relatively large lots. Densities average about
three units per acre. A majority of the Bay-O-Vista area was developed
during the 1960s, although some homes date back to the 1940s. Many of
                                         the homes have been designed to
                                         maximize westerly views toward
                                         San Francisco Bay.
                                         Although most of Bay-O-Vista is
                                         built out, there are a few parcels
                                         that are vacant or large enough to
                                         be subdivided. Most of these
                                         parcels are quite steep and several
                                         have access constraints. Any
                                         future development on these sites
                                         must mitigate the potential for
                                         erosion and landsliding, both on-
                                         site and on adjacent properties.
                                         Zoning regulations for this area
strongly discourage tall or bulky homes and require development to
respect the area’s characteristically low rooflines. Similarly, additions to
existing homes in Bay-O-Vista are required to minimize the disruption of
views and maintain the overall low profile of housing in the area.
The following section of the Residential Neighborhoods Sub-Element
profiles the major neighborhood planning issues in San Leandro. This
section is followed by goals, policies, and actions which correspond to
these issues. The focus of this Sub-Element is neighborhood conservation
and improvement. A separate part of the General Plan (the Housing
Element) focuses on housing affordability and new housing production.
The two chapters complement and support one another, presenting a
consistent strategy for meeting future housing needs and enhancing the
quality of life in the city.
Community Standards
San Leandro residents take pride in the quality and appearance of their
neighborhoods, including yards, homes, and public spaces. The City
has set high standards for the appearance of these areas and maintains
code enforcement programs to uphold these standards. The Municipal
Code addresses the storage of campers and boats, the location of parked
vehicles, graffiti, fence height, and other attributes which can potentially
affect neighborhood aesthetics. Covenants, conditions, and restrictions
(CC&Rs) within individual developments may set additional

requirements to uphold community standards. CC&Rs are generally
enforced by homeowners associations.
Given San Leandro’s size, instances of neglected yards, unpermitted
construction, code violations, and non-sanctioned activities inevitably
occur. The City’s Community Preservation Ordinance is administered
by the San Leandro Police Department, with assistance from other City
departments. The ability to enforce standards has been challenged by
constrained municipal finances, including the loss of redevelopment
funding, and by a large influx of new residents who are unfamiliar with
local codes and penalties. Increases in household size have led to an
increased number of parked vehicles in front yards and unlawful
outdoor storage in some neighborhoods. At the same time, soaring
housing costs have limited the ability of some households to address
home repair needs. The City has a number of home repair loan and
grant programs for lower income residents, but funding is limited.
Another issue in residential areas concerns commercial activities in
private homes. The Zoning Code and Municipal Code both regulate
activities in residential areas, such as home occupations, garage sales, in-
house day care, and home auto repair. Home occupations are an
important part of the city’s economy and contribute to the livelihood of
many families—however, they must occur in a manner that preserves
the residential character of the city’s neighborhoods.

Residential areas are also prone to impacts from nearby business and
industrial uses. Although homes and businesses may be compatible in
many settings, some neighborhoods abut manufacturing facilities
generating a large amount of truck traffic and noise. Buffering and
performance standards have been developed to reduce conflicts.
Similarly, in mixed use areas, standards have been developed to address
noise, odors, privacy, and other issues when residential uses are sited
above restaurants, bars, dry cleaners, and similar commercial activities.
The issue of compatibility between residential and non-residential uses is
addressed in the Business and Industry Sub-Element of this Chapter.
Neighborhood Character
Some San Leandro neighborhoods have clear boundaries, consistent
architectural styles, centrally located parks or shopping centers, and
other characteristics that distinguish them from nearby areas. The strong
sense of neighborhood identity in these areas has many benefits, from
pride of ownership to a commitment to work together during times of
crisis.
Other San Leandro neighborhoods are less well organized. Some may
lack a neighborhood association or a strong sense of where the
neighborhood begins and ends. Other neighborhoods may lack a clear
center or gathering place. A large number of residents may be limited
English-speakers—and they do not yet feel they are a part of the
community. San Leandro is committed to fostering a stronger sense of
community in these areas, both through changes to the physical
environment and by providing residents with opportunities to become
organized and involved at the neighborhood level.
Building more cohesive neighborhoods also means ensuring that infill
development is compatible with its surroundings. Although this General
Plan anticipates thousands of new housing units in San Leandro—such
development will be directed to under-utilized commercial sites and
transit station areas rather than to single family neighborhoods. Where
higher densities are permitted, care must be taken to ensure high quality
design, smooth transitions to any lower density housing that may be
nearby, and a commitment to ongoing property maintenance.
Throughout San Leandro, a concerted effort will be made to protect
residential privacy and views, conserve significant architectural
qualities, and ensure that new development contributes positively to the
overall character of the neighborhood. New structures should be sited to

conserve natural features, protect creeks and vegetation, and incorporate
sustainable design principles. The increased emphasis on residential
design may mean that some homeowners will need to invest additional
time and effort before altering or adding on to their homes. The end
result will be a more attractive, coherent community—enhancing
property values for all residents and protecting the sizeable investment
that many residents have made in their properties.
New Housing Opportunities
San Leandro is committed to creating new housing opportunities for
current and future residents. New housing will be needed to balance the
projected increase in job growth and to respond to changing community
needs. The policies and actions in Goal LU-3 reflect a commitment to
promote a spectrum of housing types, from market rate single family
homes to affordable units and housing for special needs groups such as
seniors and the disabled. This commitment is echoed in the Housing
Element.
Mitigation of Public Facility Impacts
Development impact fees for improvements to schools, transportation,
parks, and other public facilities are collected when new projects are
approved, so that existing residents are not burdened with these capital
costs. However, the City’s ability to fully recover such costs is limited by
State and federal law. School impact fees are capped by the State, and
other fees must be based on in depth fiscal studies. Before levying
development fees or requiring specific improvements, the City must
demonstrate that there is a “nexus” between the project and the need for

expanded services. Moreover, impact fees cover capital costs but they do
not cover the ongoing costs of service delivery and maintenance.
The City will promote creative solutions to minimize the impacts of new
housing development on existing San Leandro residents in the future.
One effective strategy is to maintain a favorable balance of residential
and non-residential growth. By encouraging economic growth as well as
housing, particularly projects which generate sales tax and other local
revenue, the City can place itself in a better position to maintain or
improve the services it provides to residents.
Citizen Participation
Many San Leandro residents live within the boundaries of an active
homeowners association (HOA) or neighborhood association. The city’s
HOAs represent areas as small as individual condominium complexes
and areas as large as greater Washington Manor, with 5,700 households.
The associations have a long history of active participation in
neighborhood improvement and public safety, but additional means of
outreach and engagement are needed. Social media and web-based
engagement can reach potential new participants, and provide a portal
for those who may not be able to attend neighborhood meetings or join a
local board or organization. In addition, outreach through faith-based
organizations, advocacy groups, and social service organizations is
needed to reach groups with limited English, disabilities, or other special
needs, to ensure that services are inclusive and that all perspectives are
heard.

C OMMUNITY S TANDARDS
GOAL LU-1   Maintain stable, safe, and attractive neighborhoods.
          Housing       Maintenance.        Support     the     on-going
          conservation, maintenance and upgrading of the city’s
          housing inventory.
          Code Enforcement.              Maintain aggressive code
          enforcement and nuisance abatement programs to
          ensure that San Leandro’s neighborhoods remain
          attractive and free of public nuisances.
                             Unpermitted Construction
          Explore a variety of regulatory tools and programs to reduce
          the incidence of illegal construction and ensure that such
          construction is either removed or retroactively permitted and
          brought up to code when it is discovered.
                             Code Enforcement Administration
           Periodically revisit the City's code enforcement activities to
          determine the need for changes in funding, organization,
          staffing, and local ordinances addressing community
          standards and preservation. New funding sources for code
          enforcement and nuisance abatement should be pursued.
                             Mobile Home Park Improvements
          Pursue a variety of strategies and programs to upgrade the
          appearance of mobile home parks without displacing owners
          and tenants.
                             Persistent Problem Properties
           Encourage effective and prompt action by the San Leandro
          Police Department in response to reports from residents and
          community groups regarding nuisance properties and illicit
          activities in residential areas. The City should develop an
          inter-departmental and inter-agency protocol for responding
          to and resolving persistent problem properties, including
          properties requiring frequent code enforcement actions or
          frequent police response to criminal or nuisance activities.

Demographics and Land Use. Recognize the effects of
changing demographics, including larger family sizes
and multi-generational households, on housing
conditions, parking, yards, and other aspects of
neighborhood appearance.          Explore alternatives to
traditional zoning standards to more effectively address
issues the needs of larger households and the potential
impacts of such households on nearby properties.
Collaboration with Community Groups. Work closely
and collaboratively with homeowners associations,
neighborhood associations, and other community
groups to address nuisances, eliminate blight, and
ensure that community aesthetic standards are
maintained.
                Community Compliance Outreach
Use the City's website, social media, and other platforms to
increase awareness of local codes and regulations relating to
blight, property maintenance and appearance, and nuisances.
Work with neighborhood associations, realtors, interest
groups, and other organizations to direct new residents and
businesses to this information.
Front Yards. Encourage the attractive treatment of front
yards and other areas in residential neighborhoods that
are visible from the street. Landscaping of front yards
should be consistent with the City's water conservation
and Bay-friendly landscaping goals.
Home Occupations.            Allow home occupations in
residentially zoned areas, provided that there are no
perceptible impacts on the neighborhood or
surrounding properties.
Day Care Centers in Neighborhoods. To the extent
permitted by State law, maintain regulations for large-
family day care facilities (as defined by the State) and
child care centers which ensure that impacts on
residential neighborhoods are minimized.
Fences.       Require that any fencing in residential
neighborhoods meets high aesthetic and safety
standards. Residential fencing should not obstruct
vehicle sight lines, be compatible with the architectural
design of nearby structures and make a positive
contribution to the character of the neighborhood.
                Fence Guidelines
Develop design guidelines for fences addressing such topics as
height measurement, appropriate materials, decorative
elements, and maintenance of vehicle sight lines. The three-
foot height limit on front yard fences should be retained.
                Through Lots
Undertake a program to improve the appearance of rear yard
fences on through-lots facing major thoroughfares.
Multi-Family Housing Upkeep. Maintain and enforce
high standards of property upkeep for existing and new
multi-family rental housing development.
                Conditions of Approval
Use the development review process to establish conditions of
approval for new or refurbished multi-family housing
development that ensure an ongoing commitment to
maintenance once construction work is completed. Establish
appropriate fines, penalties, and corrective measures in the
event conditions are not being met.
                Maintenance of Rental Properties
Pursue ordinance revisions and incentives to ensure that
landlords are held accountable for the appearance,
maintenance, and safety of rental properties, including yard
areas and structures.
See also Housing Element Policy 56.02 linking financial
assistance for rental rehabilitation to affordability
requirements
Graffiti and Weed Abatement.                 Maintain graffiti
removal and weed abatement programs throughout the
city and respond promptly and effectively to resident
complaints.
Second Units. Recognize second units as an important
part of the city's housing stock, and encourage their
continued development in single family neighborhoods.
Maintain permitting requirements for second units
which address parking, design, owner-occupancy, and
other potential neighborhood impacts.
                 Second Unit Design Standards
Develop design standards for second units which ensure that
the units are architecturally compatible with the primary
residence.
                 Second Unit Incentives
Continue to explore incentives and development standards
which make it easier to construct a second unit, including
provisions to mitigate potential impacts on adjoining
properties.
Encroachment of Incompatible Uses.                 Protect
residential neighborhoods from the impacts of
incompatible non-residential uses and disruptive traffic,
to the extent possible. Zoning and design review should
ensure that compatibility issues are fully addressed
when non-residential development is proposed near or
within residential areas.
Mixed Single Family Residential/ Industrial Areas. In
areas that currently include a "hodgepodge" of industrial
uses (such as auto body shops) and older single family
homes on adjacent small lots, encourage infill
development that creates a more cohesive character and
reduces the potential for future land use conflicts.
Innovative development types and building forms
should be encouraged in such areas.
Construction Impacts.         Ensure that construction
activities are regulated and monitored in a manner that
minimizes the potential for adverse off-site impacts such
as noise, dust, erosion, exposure to hazardous materials,
and truck traffic.
N EIGHBORHOOD C HARACTER
GOAL LU-2   Preserve and enhance the distinct identities of San
            Leandro neighborhoods.
          Complete Neighborhoods.             Strive for “complete
          neighborhoods” that provide an array of housing
          choices; easy access to retail stores, commercial services,
          and medical care; quality public schools; great parks and
          open spaces; affordable transportation options; and civic
          amenities.
                         Retrofitting Neighborhood Form
           Identify opportunities and pursue grants to “retrofit”
          neighborhoods that were originally designed for auto access
          and convenience in a manner that facilitates walking and
          bicycling, and reduces dependence on motorized vehicles for
          short trips.
          Neighborhood Centers. Retain and support small
          neighborhood-serving shopping centers, and improve
          the connections between these centers and adjacent
          residential areas. Work with local small businesses,
          commercial       property     owners      and      landlords,
          neighborhood associations, and residents to improve the
          appearance and economic performance of such centers
          to make them more pedestrian-friendly, and sustain
          them as part of the fabric of San Leandro
          neighborhoods.
                         Façade Improvement Program
          Continue the City's Façade Improvement Program, including
          the Commercial Rehabilitation Program and the Awning,
          Sign, and Paint Program. These programs should enhance the
          appearance of neighborhood commercial districts and
          emphasize their function as local gathering places. The City
          will continue to explore ways to improve neighborhood
          shopping centers and make them a more integral part of the
          neighborhoods they serve.

Healthy Food Access. Maintain access to fresh healthy
produce in all parts of the city, and encourage
supermarkets and corner stores that provide healthier
food choices for residents.
Neighborhood Schools and Parks. Recognize local
schools and parks as key aspects of what makes a
neighborhood desirable and unique. Promote activities
at schools and parks that build community pride and
create a sense of neighborhood ownership.
Pedestrian and Bicycle Improvements.                   Promote
improvements that make San Leandro neighborhoods
more friendly to pedestrians and bicyclists, such as bike
lanes, street trees, and crosswalks.
See Transportation Element Goal T-2 for "Complete Streets"
policies and Goal T-4 for pedestrian and bicycle policies.
Preservation of Low Density Character. Preserve the
low-density character of San Leandro’s predominantly
single family neighborhoods.
Location of Future Multi-Family Development.
Concentrate new multi-family development in the areas
near the BART Stations and along major transit corridors
such as East 14th Street. Ensure that such development
enhances rather than detracts from the character of
surrounding neighborhoods.
Alterations, Additions, and Infill.              Ensure that
alterations, additions and infill development are
compatible with existing homes and maintain
aesthetically pleasing neighborhoods.
Density Transitions. Avoid abrupt transitions from
high density to low density housing. Where high-
density development occurs, encourage such projects to
step down in height and mass as they approach nearby
lower density areas.

Teardowns. Discourage “teardowns” (the replacement
of smaller dwellings with larger and more expensive
homes) where the existing home is in good physical
condition and the proposed home would be
substantially larger than the prevailing scale of the
neighborhood.
 Privacy and Views. Encourage residential alterations,
additions, and new homes to be designed in a manner
that respects the privacy of nearby homes and preserves
access to sunlight and views. Wherever feasible, new or
altered structures should avoid the disruption of
panoramic or scenic views.
Off-Street Parking. Ensure that a sufficient number of
off-street parking spaces are provided in new residential
development to minimize parking "overflow" into
neighborhoods. The visual prominence of parking
should be minimized in new development areas.
See Transportation Element for additional policies on parking.
Gated Communities. Unless overriding public safety
considerations exist, discourage the development of
“gated” communities or the gating of already developed
neighborhoods or subdivisions.
Emergency Access. Ensure that all new development is
designed for adequate access by emergency vehicles.
Usable Open Space Provisions. Require useable open
spaces for community use in large new residential
developments. Wherever feasible, such spaces should
contain play equipment, children’s activity areas, and
other amenities that draw people outdoors, create street
life, and instill a sense of community. In higher density
and mixed use areas, such spaces may provide for
activities such as outdoor performances, farmers
markets, outdoor dining, and community gatherings.
Harmony With Nature. Require new development to be
harmonious with its natural setting and to preserve
natural features such as creeks, large trees, ridgelines,
and rock outcroppings.

          Constrained Sites. Focus new housing development on
          underutilized or infill sites on the city’s flatter lands,
          rather than on previously undeveloped sites in the hills.
          Development on sites with significant geologic,
          hydrologic, or land stability constraints should be
          strongly discouraged.
          See the Historic Preservation and Community Design
          Element for additional policies on residential design.
N EW H OUSING O PPORTUNITIES
GOAL LU-3   Provide housing opportunities and improve
            economic access to housing for all segments of the
            community.
          Mix of Unit Types. Encourage a mix of residential
          development types in the city, including single family
          homes on a variety of lot sizes, as well as townhomes,
          row     houses,     live-work       units,     planned unit
          developments, garden apartments and medium to high
          density multi-family housing.
          Mix of Price Ranges. Encourage a mix of price ranges to
          provide housing choices for San Leandro residents of all
          incomes and ages. Opportunities to include affordable
          units and market rate units within the same
          development projects should be pursued.
          Affordable Housing Design. Design new affordable
          housing to blend in with the existing fabric of the
          community. Affordable housing should be located in a
          variety of neighborhoods rather than concentrated in
          one particular part of the city.
          Promotion of Infill. Encourage infill development on
          vacant or underused sites within residential and
          commercial areas.

                 Single Family Infill Opportunities
Explore potential modifications to the City's zoning
regulations to create opportunities for additional single family
detached dwellings in single family zoned neighborhoods.
This would include allowances for smaller lot sizes and lot
splits on lots that are substantially larger than those around
them. It could also include allowances for two detached
dwellings of comparable size on the same lot for lots meeting
certain size criteria (such as Mulford Gardens).
Mixed Use on Transit Corridors. Encourage mixed use
projects containing ground floor retail and upper floor
residential uses along major transit corridors. Such
development should be pedestrian-oriented, respect the
scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood,
and incorporate architectural themes that enhance the
identity of adjacent commercial districts.
See Goals LU-6 and LU-8 for policies on specific areas where
mixed use development is encouraged,
Housing by Non-Profit Developers.                Promote the
participation of non-profit housing organizations in the
construction of new affordable housing in San Leandro,
with particular emphasis on housing for working
families.
                 Rental Housing Production
Pursue funds through a variety of government-funded
housing programs to assist in the creation of new affordable
rental units.
See the Housing Element for additional actions promoting
affordable rental housing.
Housing for Active Seniors.               Provide additional
housing options for seniors and empty nesters,
including retirement communities for active senior
living.
Amenities and Social Services Within New Housing.
Encourage new affordable housing development to
provide amenities for future residents, such as on-site
recreational facilities and community meeting space.
Where feasible, consider the integration of social services
such as child care within such projects.
Live-Work Development. Provide opportunities for
“live-work” development to provide a housing resource
for artists, craftspersons, and persons working from
home. The design of live-work projects should be
sensitive to the surrounding areas. Live-work is most
appropriate as a buffer land use between residential and
non-residential areas, in transit-oriented development
areas, and in non-residential areas where the long-term
viability of industry is compromised by small (less than
one acre) parcels, buildings that cannot be easily
adapted to higher-value uses, and proximity to sensitive
uses such as schools and housing.
                Live-Work Ordinance
Develop an ordinance addressing “live-work” and “work-live”
development in the city. The ordinance should include updated
definitions of these uses, identify the zoning districts or
specific areas in which they are appropriate, and include
performance standards and form-based design criteria.
Market-Rate Housing. Encourage the provision of a
significant amount of market-rate ownership and rental
housing as part of an effort to maintain and diversify the
city’s economic base.
Conversion of Non-Residential Land to Housing and
Public Uses. Allow the development of new housing on
underutilized sites in industrial areas only if they meet
all of the following criteria:
(a) Sites on the edges of commercial or industrial areas,
immediately adjacent to established residential areas;
(b) Sites with adequate infrastructure, access, and road
capacity to support housing;

          (c) Sites which are not constrained by external
          environmental factors, including freeway and airport
          noise;
          (d) Sites where conflicts with surrounding uses would
          not be created in the event of re-use;
          (e) Sites which lack “prime” qualities for commercial or
          industrial development, such as direct freeway or rail
          access;
          (f) Publicly-owned land which is not being used to its
          fullest potential.
          Sites meeting the above criteria should also be
          considered for churches, libraries, parks, community
          facilities, and other uses that provide necessary services
          and advance the quality of life in the community.
                           : General Plan Amendment Requirements
          Where areas meeting the criteria described above are
          designated for Industrial uses on the General Plan map,
          require a General Plan Amendment prior to allowing
          residential development, unless the text of the General Plan
          specifically indicates otherwise.
M ITIGATION OF P UBLIC F ACILITY I MPACTS
GOAL LU-4   Ensure that new residential development contributes
            its appropriate share toward the provision of
            adequate schools, parks, and other public facilities.
          Concurrent Provision of Services. To the extent
          permitted by law, allow new residential development to
          occur only when the public facilities needed to serve that
          development are available or will be provided
          concurrently with the development.
                           Development Review
          Review all development proposals to assess their impacts on
          the demand for City services and public facilities. Identify
          mitigation measures as appropriate.

Fair Share Contributions. Require new residential
development to pay its fair share of the cost of capital
improvements needed to serve that development.
                 Impact Fee Revisions
Review the City’s impact fees on a periodic basis and revise
them as needed in response to changing costs.
Public Facility Development. Promote collaborative,
creative solutions between the public and private sectors
to develop additional schools, parks, and other public
facilities in the city.
                 School Mitigation Measures
Work with the San Leandro and San Lorenzo Unified School
Districts to address the impacts of development on school
facility needs, and explore ways to close the gap between the
true cost and the amount that may be collected through impact
fees.
Park and School Site Acquisition. Consider acquiring
vacant or underutilized sites for park or school
development in addition to facilitating private
development on those sites.
Infrastructure Financing. Allow for flexibility in the
financing of infrastructure improvements within new
development, including the creation of special
assessment districts for new projects and enhanced
infrastructure financing districts in planned growth
areas.
                      Enhanced    Infrastructure    Financing
Districts
Consider the use of Enhanced Infrastructure Financing
Districts as a new tool for directing property tax revenues to
the financing of projects such as water and sewer line
replacement; streetscape enhancement; road, bike, and
sidewalk improvements; flood control and storm drainage
projects; and park improvement.

C ITIZEN P ARTICIPATION
GOAL LU-5     Provide for active, timely citizen participation in all
              stages of neighborhood planning.
            Coordination and Outreach. Coordinate housing plans
            and programs with organizations that are broadly
            representative of people in the community, including
            homeowners, renters, housing advocates, businesses and
            institutions. Collaborative, productive relationships
            should be promoted between City staff, elected and
            appointed officials, and local neighborhood groups.
                            Meeting Notification
            Continue the practice of notifying residents and organizations
            via e-mail prior to Board of Zoning Adjustments and
            Planning Commission hearings.
                            Formation of New Neighborhood Groups
            Promote the formation of neighborhood organizations and
            homeowners associations in neighborhoods that presently lack
            such groups.
            Stewardship Projects.              Encourage community
            organizations to assist in implementing General Plan
            policies on housing and residential neighborhoods,
            including        neighborhood         beautification      and
            improvement projects.
            Individual Participation. Encourage the participation of
            individuals as well as organizations in the planning
            process, since organizations may not always reflect
            individual needs and opinions.
                            Posting, Noticing, and Advertising
            Maintain posting, noticing, and advertising protocols for
            proposed development which ensure that a high level of
            notification is provided to surrounding residents prior to
            consideration of development applications by the Zoning
            Enforcement Official, the Board of Zoning Adjustments, the
            Site Development Subcommission, the Planning Commission,
            or the City Council. Electronic notification (e-mail and web
            postings) should be used whenever feasible.
Coordination With Developers. Work closely with
developers and business interests to provide a
constructive, cooperative attitude toward meeting the
city’s housing needs. Require developers to initiate early
and      frequent      communication      with    affected
neighborhood residents, businesses, local school boards,
and homeowners associations.
                Consultation with Neighborhood Groups
Continue to consult with neighborhood groups at the earliest
point feasible in the development review process. The City
will continue to strongly encourage applicants for large
development projects to meet with these groups prior to
Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Adjustment
hearings.

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
EMPLOYMENT AND
MIXED USE DISTRICTS
A.       OVERVIEW
San Leandro has a well-balanced economy, with a diverse mix of
manufacturing, wholesale and distribution facilities, transportation and
construction firms, retail and service businesses, health care industries,
and technology and information-driven firms. Almost a third of the
City’s land is designated for employment and revenue generation on the
Land Use Map, including about 1,700 acres of industrial land, 400 acres
of commercial land, and 560 acres of transit-oriented mixed use land.
Industry and commerce provide thousands of jobs, millions of dollars in
annual sales and property tax revenues, and many critical services to San
Leandro residents. The City is committed to keeping its economy
healthy, maintaining a competitive edge within the region, and staying
attractive to established and emerging businesses.
This section of the General Plan provides a policy framework that allows
each of the City’s business districts to evolve and change, while still
maintaining the diversity that makes San Leandro’s economy strong. It
maximizes the private sector’s ability to take advantage of new and
emerging opportunities without compromising the vision described in
the General Plan. It strives to fully leverage the investment that has been
made in high speed fiber, not only for economic growth but also to
implement “Smart City” initiatives that improve the efficiency of
transportation and infrastructure systems. The policies presented here
are focused on land use; a complementary set of policies in the General
Plan Economic Development Element address parallel issues related to
business attraction, retention, and expansion, as well as workforce
development.
The Sub-Element begins with a profile of business and industrial land
use issues in the City. Following this discussion, goals, policies, and
actions provide guidance for decisions. Because most of the City’s
business districts have been identified as Focus Areas, appropriate
sections of the General Plan are cross-referenced for further guidance.
                                                                                                                 3-67

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          B.       EMPLOYMENT AND MIXED USE
                                                   DISTRICTS
                                          Employment and mixed use districts in San Leandro include Downtown,
                                          transit-oriented development areas, industrial/innovation areas,
                                          shopping centers, commercial corridors, and the Marina. Most of the
                                          change envisioned in San Leandro during the next 20 years will take
                                          place in these areas. Specific land use recommendations for each area
                                          are contained in the Focus Area section.
                                          Downtown
                                          Downtown San Leandro includes a mix of traditional “mom and pop”
                                          businesses, conventional shopping plazas and national chains,
                                          restaurants, offices, and services. The area’s role as the city’s major center
                                          for shopping and services changed after the 1950s and has been changing
                                          again more recently with real estate market and consumer trends. In the
                                          1960s and 1970s, Downtown’s role was diminished by the growth of
                                          suburban shopping centers. Downtown itself was “made over” as a
                                          shopping center, with streets closed and older structures replaced with
                                          surface parking and large utilitarian buildings. Since the 1990s, the focus
                                          has shifted back to restoring Downtown as a traditional pedestrian
                                          district. The area is once again becoming a magnet for shopping, dining,
                                          cultural, and civic activities. The retail focus has turned to specialty
                                          businesses, restaurants, and services that thrive in a unique, pedestrian-
                                          oriented environment.
3-68

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
Much of the key to Downtown’s future success depends on
“placemaking”---intentional investments which contribute to the area’s
sense of place and image as a citywide destination. This includes
leveraging the area’s historic buildings and walkable scale, retrofitting
development from the suburban era to be more pedestrian-friendly, and
adding new elements that look to the future, such as public art,
wayfinding signage, and parklets. The street environment should define
Downtown as “the” place in San Leandro where people want to be—a
place to shop, eat, and relax. Outdoor activities such as street fairs,
farmers markets, and lunchtime concerts are an essential part of this
formula. Public safety and maintenance are also essential.
Specific land use recommendations for Downtown are contained on
Page 3-109.
Transit-Oriented Development Areas
San Leandro has designated Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) areas
around both its BART stations. In addition, the East 14 th Street corridor
(discussed under “corridors” below) is a premium service bus route with
the capacity for transit-oriented housing and commercial development.
The TOD areas are intended to support the most intense development in
the city, leveraging their proximity to BART to enable most daily trips to
be made on foot or using public transit.
The TOD areas extend up to one-half mile around the San Leandro and
Bay Fair stations, equivalent to about a 10-minute walk from each
station. At the San Leandro BART station, this radius overlaps the
Downtown area described above. Some of this area has already been
developed with transit-oriented uses, such as the San Leandro Tech
Campus and the Marea Alta housing development, but there is
considerable untapped potential elsewhere. The area includes large
vacant sites with the potential for thousands of new jobs and homes.
At the Bay Fair station, the half-mile radius includes land in
unincorporated Alameda County as well as in the city of San Leandro.
The San Leandro portion of the TOD includes Bayfair Center, several
other shopping centers, and commercially zoned properties along
Hesperian Boulevard and East 14th Street. There is virtually no transit-
oriented development in this area at the present time, and the General
Plan emphasizes a transformation of existing uses and parking areas to
create a more walkable “village” environment.
                                                                                                                3-69

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Development regulations for TOD areas emphasize mixed use
                                          development and allow for considerably more intensity than other
                                          commercial zoning districts in the city. Regulations typically include
                                          minimum densities, as well as maximums, to ensure that land is used
                                          efficiently. Development standards and guidelines for these areas
                                          emphasize easy access to transit and include provisions for car-sharing,
                                          bike-sharing, and electric vehicles. Regulations typically are flexible
                                          enough to accommodate commercial uses, residential uses, or projects
                                          that combine both uses.
                                          Specific land use recommendations for the TOD areas are provided later
                                          in this chapter.
                                          Industrial/Innovation Districts
                                          Industrial activities have played an important role in San Leandro’s
                                          economy since the 1860s, when Baker and Hamilton began
                                          manufacturing agricultural plows on East 14th Street. By 1960, there
                                          were more than 15,000 industrial jobs in the City. That figure gradually
                                          declined for 50 years, to the point where California Economic
                                          Development Department estimates showed about 12,500 industrial jobs
                                          (including warehousing, manufacturing, and wholesale trade) as of 2010.
                                          The number has been increasing since then, although the character of
                                          industrial uses has changed dramatically. Today, the focus is on
                                          innovation, advanced manufacturing, and creative industries such as 3-D
                                          printing and sustainable energy. The City has included an Economic
3-70

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
Development Element in its General Plan to help guide future change in
its industrial areas.
San Leandro’s industrial areas benefit from a strategic location with
excellent transportation access, relatively affordable real estate, and a
strong identity within the region as a manufacturing center. In 2015,
San Leandro had about 5.7 million square feet of manufacturing space,
2.5 million square feet of flex space, and 16.5 million square feet of
warehouse space. The vacancy rate had declined to two percent,
accompanied by an increase in rental rates. However, the City remains
competitive and generally has lower rental rates than comparable space
in Berkeley, Emeryville, Oakland, and Fremont.
As noted in the Economic Development Element, the City will continue
to facilitate the adaptive reuse of its industrial land and building supply
to meet the needs of the regional economy. Adaptive reuse is not a new
phenomenon in San Leandro. During the 1990s and early 2000s, the City
facilitated the conversion of a former Caterpillar tractor assembly plant
into retail space, the reuse of the vacant Kaiser Aerotech plant as airport
parking, and the replacement of the Albertson’s Distribution Center with
Kaiser Permanente Hospital. Continued recycling and repurposing of
the industrial land supply is expected in the future, with warehousing
and underused production space replaced by new activities generating
jobs, revenue, and businesses that strengthen and diversify the local
economy.
                                                                                                                 3-71

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          While economic diversification is encouraged, existing industrial uses
                                          will also be supported. The Economic Development Element identifies
                                          measures to nurture existing businesses, such as one-stop permitting,
                                          business development assistance funds for renovation, utility tax and
                                          personal property tax rebates, and design assistance. The City also
                                          strongly supports business to business relationships among local
                                          industries, and actions to bolster corporate citizenship and stewardship.
                                          Further direction for the industrial/innovation districts is provided in the
                                          Focus Area discussion later in this chapter.
                                          Office Districts
                                          Historically, San Leandro has not been a major regional office center.
                                          However, completion of Creekside Plaza in the early 2000s and
                                          development of the San Leandro Tech Campus in 2016 suggests this may
                                          be changing. As of 2016, most offices are local-serving, providing space
                                          for medical and professional firms, banks, finance and insurance
                                          companies, and other small businesses. The greatest concentration of
                                          offices is in and around Downtown and along Davis Street. Small office
                                          buildings also exist along many of the city’s thoroughfares and in the
                                          area immediately east of Downtown. There is also a growing inventory
                                          of office-flex space within the city’s industrial districts.
3-72

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                           L A N D U S E
San Leandro will establish a clearer identity as an office market in the
future. This will not only enable the city to attract higher-quality jobs, it
will also allow local firms to remain and expand in San Leandro.
Although there are several potential locations in the city where a
regionally recognized office district might be established, the Downtown
BART Station area offers the best prospect.
In addition to the Tech Campus, several other sites along Alvarado Street
west of the BART station hold the potential for office development. The
proximity to BART creates the potential for easy commuting via transit,
and could result in far fewer vehicle trips per employee than suburban
office park development. The area is also a short walk from Downtown
San Leandro, providing potential customers for Downtown businesses
and restaurants.
With relatively affordable rents and a large inventory of light industrial
buildings, San Leandro will also continue to have a dynamic office-flex
market. The LINKS shuttle service between the industrial areas and the
Downtown BART Station provides easy access throughout West San
Leandro. Other potential office areas include the San Leandro Shoreline,
and the Bay Fair area. The Shoreline offers easy access to Oakland
Airport, waterfront vistas, and access to the Bay Trail, golf course, and
planned restaurant and entertainment uses. Bay Fair offers easy access
to BART and to nearby retail development.
Elsewhere in the city, smaller and more locally-oriented offices will
continue to be incorporated in mixed use projects along corridor streets
such as East 14th and MacArthur. In the area east of Downtown, existing
office buildings should be upgraded over time to make them more
appealing to prospective tenants. The area’s proximity to BART and
smaller office configurations makes it appealing for start-ups, smaller
companies, and local service providers.
Retail, Service, and Entertainment Districts
Retail and service uses represent a major part of San Leandro’s economy.
In 2015, about 6,000 persons worked in the City’s retail sector and
another 3,000 worked in restaurants and hospitality- related sectors.
Most of San Leandro’s retail/service businesses are located in regional,
community, and neighborhood shopping areas, and along commercial
corridors such as East 14th Street. General Plan policies seek to establish a
stronger identity and market niche for each retail/service area, thereby
                                                                                                                   3-73

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                             bolstering their economic performance. Figure 3-5
                                                             identifies the major retail/service districts in the City.
                                                             Regional Centers
                                                             Regional shopping areas in San Leandro include
                                                             Bayfair Center, Marina Boulevard, Westgate/Costco,
                                                             and Greenhouse. Each of these centers draws patrons
                                                             from throughout the East Bay. Bayfair includes an
                                                             enclosed mall of about 820,000 square feet as well as
                                                             smaller shopping plazas and commercial uses on its
                                                             perimeter. Marina Boulevard includes the Marina
                                                             Square shopping center and the Auto Mall to its north
                                                             and east. The Westgate area includes “big box” stores
                                                             on historically industrial sites, including Walmart,
                                                             Home Depot, and Costco. The Greenhouse area
                                                             includes the Greenhouse Marketplace Shopping
                                                             Center, the Walmart on Hesperian Boulevard, and
                                                             adjacent commercial uses along Washington Avenue
                                                             and Lewelling Boulevard.
                                                             Policies in the General Plan support expanded regional
                                                             retail activity in each of these locations. Marina Square,
                                                             Westgate, and Greenhouse provide maximum
                                                             exposure to the large volume of traffic on I-880. Their
                                          location at the freeway interchanges minimizes the need for out-of-town
                                          shoppers to travel on neighborhood streets and thoroughfares. Bayfair
                                          Center, meanwhile, is at the heart of a proposed transit-oriented
                                          development area and the focus of a Specific Plan that is now underway.
                                          Community and Neighborhood Centers
                                          Community and neighborhood shopping centers are distinguished from
                                          regional centers by their size and market draw. Community centers
                                          typically draw patrons from throughout San Leandro. These centers
                                          include shopping centers such as the OSH/Living Spaces on Floresta
                                          Boulevard, and service businesses such as lumberyards and building
                                          supply stores. Neighborhood centers primarily serve the surrounding
                                          residential areas, usually within a radius of a mile or two. They typically
                                          include small-scale food stores, dry cleaners, and other convenience
                                          services. Neighborhood centers include auto-oriented plazas, such as
                                          Manor Shopping Center and Marina Faire, and pedestrian-oriented
                                          districts such as Bancroft Avenue/Dutton Avenue.
3-74

    S A N L E A N D R O  G E N E R A L P L A N
                                  L A N D U S E
                      Figure 3-5
Retail-Service Districts
                                          3-75
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          The quality of the community and neighborhood shopping centers can
                                          have a significant effect on the perception of nearby residential areas and
                                          the City as a whole. Shopping centers that are attractive and busy can be
                                          a valuable amenity for the neighborhoods in which they are located.
                                          Conversely, shopping centers that have high vacancy rates or that look
                                          dated or neglected can contribute to blight. Zoning and business
                                          development programs should emphasize the updating of the
                                          neighborhood centers and accommodate businesses which respond to
                                          local needs.
                                          The neighborhood shopping centers provide an opportunity to cultivate
                                          specialty businesses and nurture local entrepreneurial talent. These
                                          centers can provide affordable starting places for small businesses, cafes
                                          and restaurants, and even shops serving San Leandro’s growing market
                                          for multicultural goods and services. Such independent businesses can
                                          contribute to the overall sense of identity in the neighborhood centers
                                          and economic diversity and self-sufficiency. Small neighborhood
                                          businesses have always been valued in San Leandro and will continue to
                                          be valued in the future.
                                          Although none of the neighborhood shopping centers are anticipated to
                                          close at this time, it is possible that market conditions may prompt their
                                          replacement with new uses during the life of this General Plan. It is also
                                          possible that these centers may be redesigned, or may be complemented
                                          by new uses such as housing. Such changes should be encouraged where
                                          they would be compatible with and enhance the surrounding
                                          neighborhood.
3-76

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
Corridors
San Leandro has several major thoroughfares which
have historically been zoned for commercial uses.
These include East 14th Street, MacArthur
Boulevard, Hesperian Boulevard, and Washington
Avenue. In the 1940s and 1950s, strip commercial
corridors evolved along these thoroughfares, with
retail and service businesses, shopping centers, gas
stations, restaurants, car dealerships, auto body
shops, and other auto-oriented commercial uses.
The commercial corridors present some of San
Leandro’s biggest land use challenges. The strategy
for the East 14th and MacArthur corridors is to
more clearly define “districts,” creating a greater
sense of identity and making the streetscape more
attractive. Other corridors may continue to be auto-
oriented in the future. Many of the services
provided on the corridors, such as car dealerships
and equipment rental do not lend themselves as
well to pedestrian-oriented districts. These services
are also important to the community and the
economy, however, and should be retained.
San Leandro Shoreline
Like Downtown, the Shoreline is one of the places that distinguishes San
Leandro from other cities in the East Bay. It is a community focal point
and gathering place, offering a unique combination of recreation and
visitor amenities. The policies in this Element encourage the City to take
advantage of the area’s setting and location by accommodating
additional hotels, restaurants, conference facilities, and housing. While
the Marina itself is no longer considered economically viable, the boat
basin remains a recreational and aesthetic amenity. Future development
in this area should complement existing shoreline features, including the
Bay Trail, the waterfront parklands, and the Monarch Bay Golf Course.
Additional detail on the Shoreline’s future is contained later in this
chapter.
                                                                                                                3-77

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          C.       PLANNING ISSUES
                                          San Leandro’s business districts face a number of land use issues,
                                          including compatibility, aesthetics and landscaping, buffering, parking,
                                          adaptive reuse, off-site impacts, and the encroachment of potentially
                                          incompatible uses. Responses to these issues vary from site to site and
                                          are addressed later in this chapter in the Focus Area discussions.
                                          Additional issues are covered in the Economic Development Element of
                                          the General Plan.
                                          Buffering and Design
                                          One of San Leandro’s long-standing land use priorities has been to
                                          improve the interface between business districts and adjacent residential
                                          neighborhoods. In some parts of the City, the lack of separation between
                                          homes and industry has resulted in conflicts associated with noise,
                                          odors, and other off-site impacts. Aesthetics also may be an issue in these
                                          areas. Policies in the General Plan ensure that San Leandro businesses
                                          are good neighbors to the residential areas they adjoin.
                                          The City has established light industrial and industrial park zoning on
                                          the edges of most industrial areas, limiting the potential for incompatible
                                          uses next to housing.       These more restrictive zones include greater
                                          limitations on uses, and conditional use permit requirements for
                                          activities that could cause off-site impacts. Other compatibility strategies
                                          include landscaping and fencing requirements, and special parking and
                                          access provisions.
3-78

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
In some locations, large manufacturing plants may remain near
residential areas for many years to come. While the continued success of
these industries is supported, long-term strategies to mitigate potential
impacts on nearby homes should be developed. These strategies might
include additional insulation for mechanical equipment, lights directed
away from residential backyards, and landscaping or sound walls along
property lines.
Ultimately, compatibility issues may be mitigated by economics and the
changing nature of industrial uses. As interest builds in “humanizing”
industrial areas by making them more attractive and livable, there may
be collateral benefits to adjacent residential areas. The lines between
“industrial” uses and other uses have become blurred as industrial areas
host new activities such as artist studios, brew pubs, and tech firms. The
reuse of warehouse and distribution buildings with new activities may
raise new issues such as increased traffic and parking.
Land use compatibility issues also exist where commercial uses abut
housing, particularly along corridor streets such as MacArthur
Boulevard and East 14th Street. Overflow parking, noise from bars and
restaurants, and other impacts may disturb nearby neighbors. Zoning
regulations and conditional use permit procedures should continue to
ensure that new commercial activities can be appropriately integrated
into their surroundings. Special care should be taken in the development
of new projects which combine housing and retail uses. The commercial
activities in such projects will need to be carefully managed to ensure
that they can successfully co-exist with residential uses.
                                                                                                                3-79

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          While the predominant buffering issues have been directed at industry,
                                          there are also concerns about the potential impacts of new housing on
                                          established industrial and commercial uses. When new housing is
                                          proposed near industrial areas, the task of buffering and noise
                                          attenuation should fall on the residential developer rather than the
                                          adjacent industries. Disclosure notices should inform prospective
                                          homebuyers of the presence of established industries. Ordinances should
                                          be considered to ensure that industry retains the right to operate after
                                          nearby housing is developed.
                                          The General Plan discourages the conversion of industrial land to
                                          housing, with a few exceptions. These exceptions include sites within
                                          one-half mile of a BART station and isolated pockets of industrial land
                                          surrounded by housing. Similarly, live-work and work-live activities
                                          may be acceptable on the edges of industrial areas, particularly where
                                          small lot sizes prevail and larger-scale industrial activities may not be
                                          feasible (see Policy LU-3.11).
                                          Preparing for the Next Generation Workplace
                                          In 2013, the City of San Leandro commissioned a study exploring how
                                          the Lit San Leandro fiber optics loop could be leveraged to revitalize the
                                          city’s industrial districts.   “Next Generation Workplace Districts”
                                          described the emergence of an innovation economy driven by access to
                                          information, flexibility, nimble decision-making, and creative thought
                                          processes. The Study concluded that San Leandro was ideally situated to
                                          benefit from the new industrial landscape, given its access to high-speed
                                          broadband, transportation assets, business-friendly reputation, and
                                          tradition of “making things.”
                                          Much of the Next Generation Workplace Districts Study focuses on
                                          changes to the physical environment to facilitate industrial
                                          transformation. In addition to adaptively reusing warehouses and
                                          former manufacturing buildings for co-working space, incubators, and
                                          new businesses, the Study called for improved connectivity on the local
                                          street network (including new through-streets), bike lanes and wider
                                          sidewalks, and improved connections to BART. It also suggests
                                          additional employee amenities, such as restaurants, hotels, and easier
                                          access to the area’s shopping districts. As these changes occur, a
                                          concurrent transformation will take place as buildings, transportation
                                          features, energy systems, infrastructure, and the environment become
                                          increasingly connected through an “Internet of Things” relying on high-
                                          speed internet technology.
3-80

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
Place making—that is, creating a stronger sense of
identity and more positive image—is an essential part of
this strategy.     This includes improved architecture,
landscaping, lighting, and aesthetic standards, as well as
investments in public art and signage. It also includes
activating the street environment with uses such as food
trucks and special events. Given the vast size of the
industrial area—some 1,700 acres—it is essential that
such investments are focused on the locations with the
greatest potential for positive impact and benefits to
adjacent properties. The primary focus should be on the
Marina Boulevard and Westgate-Merced corridors, and
secondarily on Williams Street, Fairway/Aladdin, and
Doolittle Drive.
Some of the most important opportunities for
improvement are clustered around the new Kaiser
Permanente Hospital. The vacant 25-acre site north of the
hospital has the potential to be a major regional draw,
providing retail, dining, entertainment, hospitality, and
office uses that serve the adjacent hospital as well as the
industrial and office uses in its vicinity. The adjacent
stretch of Marina Boulevard, extending west to the
shoreline, represents another important opportunity.
Areas such as the Park Street “island” (near Siempre
Verde Park), the Alvarado-Williams neighborhood, and                 mid-
Washington Avenue also present opportunities for transition.
The transition to higher value uses may raise the risk of displacement for
some industries as rents rise and new activities are introduced. Zoning
should support the City’s economic development goals by maintaining
areas suitable for heavy industry as well as innovation-driven
businesses. Areas such as Eden Road and the west end of Davis Street
should be physically improved without losing long-time businesses that
play an essential role in the local and regional economies. Overlay zones
and other tools should be considered to differentiate sub-areas within
the industrial district and achieve desired outcomes.
Growth Management
This General Plan anticipates a level of growth in San Leandro not
experienced in over 30 years. Moreover, this growth will have a
different form and character than the suburban land use pattern that
                                                                                                                3-81

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          characterizes most of the city today. Future housing and employment
                                          growth will be largely concentrated in a handful of areas, all of which are
                                          already part of the fabric of the city. San Leandro must manage growth
                                          carefully, mitigating impacts on transportation and services, while
                                          paying particular attention to urban design, architecture, and the quality
                                          of public space.
                                          The Environmental Impact Report for the General Plan identifies specific
                                          mitigation measures to address the effects of growth on the natural and
                                          built environment. It is predicated on a 20-year growth scenario in
                                          which roughly 12,130 jobs and 5,600 housing units are added to the city.
                                          This growth is presumed to follow a particular spatial pattern, described
                                          by this plan and facilitated by the General Plan Map (and zoning). If
                                          growth exceeds the levels addressed in the EIR, or occurs in substantially
                                          different locations, then additional environmental analysis will be
                                          required. Most likely, amendments to the General Plan would be
                                          needed to facilitate such departures.
                                          A number of aspects of growth management are worth noting. The City
                                          will need to regularly update its development impact fees so that new
                                          development “pays its way” to the greatest extent feasible. It will also
                                          need to coordinate more closely with adjacent communities (especially
                                          Oakland and Alameda County). Many of the impacts associated with
                                          growth, such as traffic, are regional in nature and cannot be solved by
                                          San Leandro alone.
                                          San Leandro will also need to embark on new strategies to achieve a
                                          local jobs-housing balance. While past strategies have succeeded in
                                          creating almost exactly the same number of jobs in the city as employed
                                          residents, they have not solved the “mismatch” between where local
                                          residents work and where local workers live. The reality is that San
                                          Leandro’s location in the center of the region makes it difficult to reduce
                                          out-commuting—some two-employee households even choose the city
                                          specifically to commute in opposite directions.       New initiatives are
                                          needed to match local jobs to residents, train residents to fill local jobs,
                                          and provide the housing choices needed for the local workforce to live in
                                          San Leandro. Only when this is achieved can the city claim that its jobs-
                                          housing balance is effectively working to reduce greenhouse gas
                                          emissions and freeway congestion.
3-82

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                           L A N D U S E
D.       GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
D OWNTOWN R EVITALIZATION
GOAL LU-6 Foster the development of Downtown San Leandro as
              a vibrant pedestrian-oriented destination that is the
              civic and social heart of the City.
Policy LU-6.1 Downtown Plans. In accordance with the adopted
              Downtown Plan and Urban Design Guidelines and the
              Downtown San Leandro Transit Oriented Development
              Strategy, ensure that new downtown development is
              attractive and creates an image conducive to
              revitalization.
              Action LU-6.1.A: Downtown Plan Implementation
              Use the Downtown San Leandro Transit Oriented
              Development Strategy as the primary guide for the future of
              Downtown San Leandro, taking into consideration the
              updates recommended in Action 6.01-B below. Use the
              Downtown Plan and Urban Design Guidelines as the
              benchmark for design review evaluations, facade
              improvements, and streetscape plans.
              Action LU-6.1.B: TOD Strategy Update
              Update the Transit Oriented Development Strategy to reflect
              development approvals since 2007, market trends and fiscal
              conditions, and updated objectives for the Downtown area.
              Among the changes to be pursued are:
              (a) a greater emphasis on office development along the
              Alvarado Street corridor between Davis Street and Williams
              Street;
              (b) allowances for higher residential densities in some of the
              Downtown zoning districts, consistent with the General Plan
              Map;
              (c) an update of the list of 8 Special Policy (SP) areas and 39
              opportunity sites, and the assumed capacity on each site based
              on current conditions;
                                                                                                                   3-83
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          (d) an update of the transportation plan to reflect the approved
                                          BRT alignment, completion of San Leandro Boulevard
                                          improvements, construction of the municipal parking garage,
                                          and emerging parking management strategies.
                                          The changes should maintain the maximum total net increase
                                          in the potential number of dwelling units evaluated in the
                                          TOD Strategy EIR (3,430 units, from a 2007 baseline) but
                                          should consider an increase in the office space cap (719,000
                                          square feet, from a 2007 baseline).
                                          Action LU-6.1.C: Downtown Zoning Changes
                                          Update zoning regulations for the DA- zones to ensure
                                          consistency with the updated General Plan Map and Land
                                          Use categories.
                                          Action LU-6.1.D: Minimum and Maximum Densities
                                          Maintain zoning regulations for the Downtown area which
                                          include minimum densities and intensities on larger parcels,
                                          and which limit very high densities on small parcels. With
                                          regard to maximum densities, pursue modifications to some of
                                          the Downtown zoning districts that make floor area ratio
                                          (FAR) the metric for determining a residential (or mixed
                                          residential-commercial) building’s size, rather than using
                                          density controls (e.g., limits on the maximum allowable
                                          number of units per acre). Using FAR would acknowledge
                                          that projects comprised of smaller units (studios and one-
                                          bedroom apartments) have different impacts than projects
                                          comprised of an equivalent number of larger units.
                                          Action LU-6.1.E: Downtown Capital Projects
                                          Include public projects as identified by the Downtown TOD
                                          Strategy and the Downtown Plan and Urban Design
                                          Guidelines in the City's Capital Improvement Program.
                                          These projects include restoring the traditional street grid; re-
                                          establishing a civic plaza at Washington and East 14th;
                                          adding bike lanes, wider sidewalks and other pedestrian
                                          improvements; expanding parkland along San Leandro Creek,
                                          implementing the East Bay Greenway; and upgrading
                                          infrastructure to support new mixed use development.
                                          Recommended projects should maintain strong forward
                                          momentum to facilitate Downtown’s restoration as the
                                          commercial and social center of San Leandro.
3-84

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
Policy LU-6.2 Downtown Sub-Districts. Create or reinforce a series of
              "districts" within Downtown based on existing land
              uses, circulation features, building types, and
              development opportunities. Zoning regulations should
              strengthen the character and form of each sub-district.
Policy LU-6.3 Retail-Service Improvements. Develop and implement
              business development strategies that improve the mix of
              retail and service businesses Downtown, with an
              emphasis on higher-end retail shops, sit-down
              restaurants, and entertainment uses. Downtown San
              Leandro should be the city’s primary destination for
              dining and entertainment, and efforts to attract higher-
              end restaurants and entertainment venues should focus
              on the Downtown area.
              Action LU-6.3.A: Removal of Zoning Constraints
              Modify zoning regulations as needed to remove constraints to
              the development of retail and entertainment uses in the
              Downtown Area, and in other non-residential areas where
              entertainment activities are desired.
Policy LU-6.4 Office Development.               Support the growth of
              Downtown San Leandro as an office center. The City
              will encourage the renovation and upgrading of existing
              office space, and the development of new office space.
              Action LU-6.4.A: Zoning for Office Space
              Use zoning regulations and design guidelines to encourage
              smaller scale infill office development in the Downtown core
              and area to the east of Downtown, and to direct larger
              footprint office uses to the area west of the BART station.
              Downtown should retain a zoning district which emphasizes
              local-serving professional office space as a primary use.
Policy LU-6.5 Reducing VMT Through Land Use Choices. Provide a
              mix of land uses, site planning and design practices, and
              circulation improvements in the BART Station area that
              maximize transit ridership and the potential to reduce
              vehicle miles traveled (VMT).
                                                                                                                3-85

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Policy LU-6.6 Downtown Housing Diversity. Encourage a mix of
                                                        market-rate and affordable housing in the Downtown
                                                        area, including ownership and rental housing at a
                                                        variety of price points. Recognize the opportunity to
                                                        make future Downtown housing more affordable by
                                                        reducing accompanying transportation costs and
                                                        making it more feasible to use transit, bicycles, bicycle
                                                        and car-sharing, and other innovative modes of
                                                        transportation as these become viable.
                                          Policy LU-6.7 BART Accessibility.             Maintain and strengthen
                                                        pedestrian, bicycle, and transit connections between the
                                                        BART Station, Downtown, and nearby neighborhoods.
                                                        Action LU-6.7.A: BART Area Streetscape Improvements
                                                        Continue streetscape improvements in the BART Station area
                                                        which enhance pedestrian and bicycle connections between the
                                                        BART Station and the San Leandro Tech Campus and future
                                                        office/residential development on the west and Downtown San
                                                        Leandro on the east. Streetscape improvements should include
                                                        tree planting, planted medians and curbside strips, sidewalk
                                                        extensions (bulb-outs), wider sidewalks, enhanced paving, and
                                                        lighting that encourages pedestrian movement.
                                                        Action LU-6.7.B: BRT Improvements
                                                        Undertake streetscape redesign and improvement projects to
                                                        accommodate the development of Bus Rapid Transit from East
                                                        14th Street to the San Leandro BART Station.
                                                        Action LU-6.7.C: Safe Routes to Transit
                                                        Pursue funding for a Safe Routes to Transit project at the San
                                                        Leandro BART station. Such projects make it safer and easier
                                                        to reach local transit stations on foot or by bicycle through
                                                        bike lanes, bike lockers, crosswalk improvements, signal
                                                        changes, wayfinding signage, and similar improvements.
                                                        Action LU-6.7.D: BART Wayfinding Signage
                                                        Improve wayfinding signage for persons arriving at the San
                                                        Leandro BART station, particularly for those seeking to travel
                                                        to Downtown, the Shoreline, City Hall, and other major
                                                        destinations.
3-86
                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                           L A N D U S E
Policy LU-6.8  Pedestrian-Friendly Environment. Provide public and
               private improvements that create a safe, friendly, and
               comfortable environment for pedestrians and bicyclists
               in Downtown.
Policy LU-6.9  Urban Design. Promote quality Downtown architecture
               that is well articulated, enhances the pedestrian setting,
               preserves the City’s architectural heritage, and fits in
               with the scale and texture of existing historic structures.
               Discourage “franchise architecture” that will detract
               from creating a unique and distinctive Downtown
               setting.
               Action LU-6.9.A: Building Height
               Generally maintain building heights of six stories or less in
               the area east of San Leandro Boulevard to respect the historic
               scale of development, and the integrity of Downtown San
               Leandro. Taller buildings are encouraged in the area west of
               the station.
Policy LU-6.10 Parking. Ensure that parking for Downtown businesses
               remains convenient, but take steps which de-emphasize
               surface parking lots as a dominant feature of the
               Downtown landscape.            Continue to focus on
               strategically-located parking structures and efficiently
               striped on-street spaces to meet demand. Avoid the
               provision of an over-supply of surface parking in new
               Downtown development, focusing instead on improving
               connections to BART and AC Transit stops and
               implementing transportation demand management
               strategies.
               Action LU-6.10.A: Downtown Parking Study
               Implement the recommendations of the 2016 Downtown
               Parking Study, and use the findings as the basis for revised
               parking policies and management strategies.
Policy LU-6.11 Coordination. Fully involve and coordinate with local
               business owners, property owners, adjacent residents,
               and business organizations such as the Chamber of
               Commerce, San Leandro Improvement Association, and
               Downtown Association in all planning and development
               activities within the Downtown area.
                                                                                                                   3-87

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Policy LU-6.12 Business Partnerships. Support public and private
                                                         efforts to enhance and market Downtown San Leandro.
                                                         Encourage partnerships between the City, the Chamber
                                                         of Commerce, the San Leandro Improvement
                                                         Association, Downtown Association, and private entities
                                                         (such as property owners, tenants, developers, etc.).
                                                         Action LU- 6.12.A: Downtown Community Benefit District
                                                         (San Leandro Improvement Association)
                                                         Support the Downtown Community Benefit District (also
                                                         known as the San Leandro Improvement Association) and
                                                         review the goals and programs of the District annually.
                                          Policy LU-6.13 BART Station Area Transit Village.                Foster the
                                                         development of the BART Station area as a mixed use
                                                         “transit village,” with a full complement of office, high-
                                                         density residential, and retail uses, along with
                                                         pedestrian plazas, open space, BART parking, and other
                                                         transit facilities. Development in this area should
                                                         include a balance of new housing, office, and retail use,
                                                         oriented in a compact form to make it more feasible to
                                                         walk and use transit for most trips.
                                                         Action LU-6.13.A: Parking Improvements
                                                         Complete the planned parking structures at Marea Alta and
                                                         the San Leandro Tech Campus, and retain spaces in these
                                                         structures that are available for public use.           Pursue
                                                         opportunities for additional shared publicly available parking
                                                         as a component of new private development in the station
                                                         area.
                                                         Action LU-6.13.B: Alvarado “Business Main Street”
                                                         Undertake additional land use, urban design and market
                                                         feasibility studies to re-imagine the area west of the San
                                                         Leandro BART station as a transit-oriented office employment
                                                         center, including the transformation of Alvarado Street
                                                         between Davis and Williams into a "Business Main
                                                         Street/Downtown West."
3-88

                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                            L A N D U S E
               Action LU-6.13.C: BART Area Housing
               Strongly encourage the development of high-density housing
               on vacant and underutilized land at the northern terminus of
               Alvarado Street, and along the San Leandro Boulevard
               corridor to the north and south of the BART station. The City
               should continue to require minimum densities in these areas
               to ensure that the opportunity for transit-oriented
               development is maximized.
               Action LU-6.13.D: Park Street Island
               Encourage the gradual transition of the 8-acre “island”
               between Park Street and San Leandro Blvd to mixed use
               development. Future residential uses in this area should be
               oriented along Park Street, while the San Leandro Boulevard
               frontage should be used for non-retail commercial uses.
               Streetscape improvements, including undergrounding of
               utilities, should be pursued to beautify San Leandro Boulevard
               as a City gateway in this area. Siempre Verde Park should be
               maintained and enhanced as a neighborhood open space.
Policy LU-6.14 Downtown Open Space. Develop a network of
               Downtown open spaces to serve the growing population
               and workforce. This network should include civic
               plazas, parks, a linear greenway along the former Union
               Pacific Railroad right-of-way (part of the East Bay
               Greenway), and a San Leandro Creek greenway along
               the northern edge of Downtown.                   In addition,
               streetscape improvements should include street trees
               and sidewalks which connect these spaces and increase
               greenery in the downtown area.
               Action LU-6.14.A: Thrasher Park and San Leandro Creek
               Study the feasibility of relocating Thrasher Park from its
               current location at Davis and Alvarado Streets to a new
               location of equivalent or greater land area at the north end of
               Alvarado Street. The former park site would then be utilized
               for transit-oriented development, including public open space.
               In addition, pursue opportunities for linear park development
               along San Leandro Creek, creating a greenbelt and creekside
               trail west of San Leandro Boulevard.
                                                                                                                    3-89

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                         Action LU-6.14.B: Town Square Park
                                                         Explore the feasibility of closing (or reducing to one-lane and
                                                         one-way) Hays Street (Dan Niemi Way) between Davis and
                                                         East 14th in order to expand Root Park or create a larger
                                                         creekside open space and public gathering place.
                                          Policy LU-6.15 Conservation of Lower Density Downtown Areas.
                                                         Recognize certain areas within Downtown--particularly
                                                         clusters of single family homes, public and institutional
                                                         uses, and historic buildings---as well-established and
                                                         stable, and avoid changes that would adversely affect
                                                         these areas.
                                          I NNOVATION D ISTRICTS
                                          GOAL LU-7        Sustain dynamic innovation districts which place
                                                           San Leandro on the leading edge of the Bay Area's
                                                           manufacturing and technology economy.
                                          Policy LU-7.1  Leveraging Locational Assets. Build on the locational
                                                         strengths and transportation features of San Leandro's
                                                         industrial area to support the area's continued
                                                         development as a major advanced manufacturing,
                                                         technology, and office employment center.
                                                         Action LU-7.1.A: West San Leandro Plan Update
                                                         Update the 1997 West San Leandro Plan to reflect changes
                                                         over the last 20 years, the findings of the Next Generation
                                                         Workplace District Study, opportunities created by the Lit
                                                         San Leandro fiber optic loop, and to respond to changes in the
                                                         local and regional economies.
                                          Policy LU-7.2  Adaptive Reuse. Encourage private reinvestment in
                                                         vacant or underutilized industrial and commercial real
                                                         estate to adapt such property to changing economic
                                                         needs, including the creation of flex/office space and
                                                         space for technology-driven businesses.
3-90
                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                          L A N D U S E
              Action LU-7.2.A: Renovation Assistance
              Develop new programs and continue existing programs that
              increase the utilization of industrial floor space and support
              the use of such space for production rather than warehousing.
              This should include programs to convert obsolete buildings
              into spaces that meet the needs of modern industry and
              manufacturing, including the division of large single-purpose
              buildings into smaller leasable spaces that can serve multiple
              companies. Investments in renewable energy systems and
              energy efficiency should be encouraged as part of the adaptive
              reuse of such buildings.
              Action LU-7.2.B: Parking Efficiency
              Allow the reconfiguration of on-street parking in industrial
              areas (e.g., changing parallel spaces to angled spaces) where
              sufficient right-of-way exists, in order to meet potential
              increases in demand resulting from higher employment
              densities.
Policy LU-7.3 Zoning Flexibility.        Ensure that industrial zoning
              regulations are flexible enough to achieve the vision of
              San Leandro’s industrial area as an “innovation
              ecosystem”, where new methods of production,
              operations, and design are supported.
              Action LU-7.3.A: Zoning Review
              Regularly review the Zoning Code to respond to real estate
              market and development trends, as well as changes in
              technology. The City shall routinely review the lists of
              permitted and conditionally permitted uses in industrial areas
              to ensure that desired and potentially compatible uses are not
              excluded.      Particular attention should be given to
              accommodating ancillary uses associated with manufacturing
              and industrial operations, such as employee fitness centers
              and the sale of goods produced on-site, as well as uses that
              make the industrial areas more attractive to employees. In
              addition, the City will consider the use of form-based zoning
              regulations to provide added flexibility in industrial areas.
              Such regulations could include illustrative graphics showing
              how industrial sites might be repurposed for higher value
              employment uses, including massing, frontage orientation,
              and general architectural character.
                                                                                                                  3-91

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Policy LU-7.4 Tax      Base     Enhancement.         Encourage     business
                                                        development that improves the City’s ability to provide
                                                        the public with high-quality services and which
                                                        minimizes increases in the tax burden for existing
                                                        businesses and residents.
                                          Policy LU-7.5 BART and Downtown Access. Improve access to San
                                                        Leandro's industrial area from the Downtown San
                                                        Leandro BART station and from Downtown San
                                                        Leandro, with an emphasis on transit, bike lanes, and
                                                        sidewalks. For those working in the industrial area,
                                                        Downtown should be promoted as a destination of
                                                        choice for employee services, dining and entertainment.
                                                        Action LU-7.5.A: LINKS Shuttle Improvements
                                                        Continue to evaluate potential expansion and improvement of
                                                        the LINKS shuttle route, including partnerships with local
                                                        employers to extend the route or increase service frequency.
                                                        Bus shelters and seating areas should be provided to facilitate
                                                        transit use.
                                          Policy LU-7.6 Circulation and Land Use Improvements. Improve the
                                                        appearance, operation, and safety of the street system in
                                                        San Leandro’s industrial districts, with an emphasis on
                                                        better conditions for pedestrians and bicyclists, reducing
                                                        conflicts between truck traffic and residential traffic, and
                                                        improving connectivity between destinations.
                                                        Action LU-7.6.A: Pedestrian and Bicycle Facilities
                                                        Improve pedestrian and bicycle travel in the industrial areas
                                                        by adding bicycle lanes, widening sidewalks, providing
                                                        pedestrian-scaled streetlights, adding crosswalk markings, and
                                                        extending dead end streets and cul-de-sacs as opportunities
                                                        arise. A particular emphasis should be placed on improving
                                                        bicycle and pedestrian connections to BART, the Marina area,
                                                        and existing and planned retail centers.
                                                        Action LU-7.6.B: Westgate Parkway/ Merced Street Spine
                                                        Improve Merced Street and Westgate Parkway as a north-
                                                        south “spine” through the industrial area, connecting the
                                                        retail uses and workplaces at Davis/Westgate with the Kaiser
                                                        Permanente complex, and creating opportunities to improve
                                                        the intervening properties. Work with property owners to
3-92

                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                             L A N D U S E
              explore the realignment of Westgate Parkway/Merced Street
              in the vicinity of Williams Street so that the two streets are
              directly connected without a "dogleg" on Williams Street.
               Action LU-7.6.C: Marina Boulevard West
               Undertake improvements to Marina Boulevard between I-
               880 and the San Leandro Shoreline to enhance this area as a
               "gateway." Zoning for properties with frontage on Marina
               Boulevard should support the transformation of this corridor
               into an attractive, dynamic business district connecting
               Downtown San Leandro and the BART Station with new
               development at the San Leandro waterfront.
               Action LU-7.6.D: Eden Road
               Improve the Eden Road/ West Davis area in a manner that
               attracts higher value industrial land uses and improves the
               appearance and image of this area. This should include
               paving of Eden Road and frontage improvements on adjacent
               properties.
Policy LU-7.7 Arts, Makers, and Industry. Promote the industrial area
              as a location for those in arts and “maker” industries.
              This should include the expanded presence of public art
              in industrial areas, including art that incorporate themes
              connected to the area's industrial past or elements
              provided by local manufacturers.
              Action LU-7.7.A: Creation of Art
              Implement initiatives to create and install art in the industrial
              areas, including industrial-themed sculpture, murals, utility
              box wraps, and other measures that make the area more
              visually interesting, contemporary, and authentic.
Policy LU-7.8 Sense of Place. Create a stronger sense of place and a
              more positive regional image in the industrial districts
              through improved site planning, landscaping,
              architecture, façade improvements, fencing and
              screening, and design, as well as investments in
              streetscape improvements.
                                                                                                                     3-93

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                        Action LU-7.8.A: Façade Improvements
                                                        Promote the City’s façade improvement program as a way to
                                                        upgrade the appearance of buildings in the industrial districts.
                                                        Seek additional funding sources to expand the program.
                                                        Action LU-7.8.B: Design Awards
                                                        Maintain design awards programs which recognize and
                                                        acknowledge design excellence for industrial buildings.
                                          Policy LU-7.9 Business Amenities. Improve business amenities such
                                                        as restaurants, support services for business, public
                                                        transit, walkable streets, and bike lanes.
                                                        Action LU-7.9.A: Kaiser North
                                                        Encourage development of the "Kaiser North" parcel located
                                                        north of the Kaiser Permanente Hospital with uses such as
                                                        restaurants, a hotel and conference center, destination retail,
                                                        business services, personal services, and offices and
                                                        workspaces. The design of new development should create an
                                                        active street presence along Merced Street, with wider
                                                        sidewalks and ground floor storefronts, as well as interior
                                                        activity streets and public spaces, including outdoor dining
                                                        areas.
                                                        Action LU-7.9.B: Ancillary Eating and Drinking Places
                                                        Allow on-site restaurants, bars, and entertainment venues
                                                        within large food and beverage processing facilities where such
                                                        activities showcase products manufactured on site, are
                                                        secondary to the processing operation, and do not adversely
                                                        affect adjacent properties.
                                                        Action LU-7.9.C: Pop-Up Dining and Food Trucks
                                                        Allow “pop-up” dining areas, food trucks, and mobile food
                                                        vending in industrial areas, and encourage “pods” for
                                                        multiple food vendors in locations with higher employment
                                                        densities and available off-street space. Potential locations
                                                        could include Merced Street near the Kaiser Permanente
                                                        Hospital, the Farallon/Catalina area, the Doolittle/Williams
                                                        area, and the Adams Avenue area in northwest San Leandro,
                                                        among others.
3-94

                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                      L A N D U S E
Policy LU-7.10 Community Engagement in Industrial Land Use
               Decisions. Ensure that residents of the neighborhoods
               adjoining the industrial areas, such as Davis West,
               Mulford Gardens, and Marina Faire, are engaged in
               decisions affecting future industrial land uses,
               particularly where the potential for off-site impacts or
               land use conflicts exists.
Policy LU-7.11 Mid-Washington Business District. Sustain the mid-
               Washington corridor between San Leandro Boulevard
               and Halcyon Drive/ Floresta Boulevard as a mixed
               industrial and commercial district. While the existing
               commercial zoning may be retained in this area, it is
               envisioned as a diverse business corridor including a
               variety of uses, including manufacturing, warehousing
               and distribution, heavier commercial activities, and
               general commercial and service uses.
Policy LU-7.12 Alvarado from Marina to Thornton. Pursue the gradual
               transition of the area roughly bounded by Orchard
               Avenue, Thornton Street, Marina Boulevard, and San
               Leandro Boulevard into a neighborhood of live-work
               space, multi-family housing and townhomes, small
               professional offices and artist/craft studios, maker
               industries, and similar compatible uses.
R ETAIL AND S ERVICE D ISTRICTS
GOAL LU-8        Establish excellent community and neighborhood-
                 serving retail and entertainment uses.
Policy LU-8.1  Retail Hierarchy. Maintain a range of retail uses in the
               City, consisting of:
               (a) Regional shopping concentrated around the existing
               centers at Bayfair, Marina Square, and Westgate;
               (b) Community retail uses centered in Downtown San
               Leandro, reinforcing the area’s image as the City center;
                                                                                                              3-95

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                        (c) Neighborhood shopping districts located within
                                                        subareas of the City, providing basic goods and services
                                                        within easy access of neighborhood residents; and
                                                        (d) Larger-scale general commercial activities such as
                                                        building       suppliers,    lumberyards,       and      home
                                                        improvement stores that occur on the edges of industrial
                                                        areas.
                                                        Action LU-8.1.A: Over-Concentration
                                                        Consider the use of zoning regulations to limit the
                                                        proliferation of business types that may be over-concentrated
                                                        or clustered to the point where the quality of the district and
                                                        shopping opportunities for residents are diminished.
                                          Policy LU-8.2 Aesthetics. Upgrade the City’s commercial corridors by
                                                        building upon their existing strengths and improving
                                                        their aesthetic qualities. The City should implement
                                                        programs to underground utilities, abate weeds and
                                                        graffiti, eliminate litter, improve buffers to adjacent
                                                        residential uses, control excessive signage, and provide
                                                        streetscape amenities and landscaping along the
                                                        corridors.
                                          Policy LU-8.3 Corridor Mixed Use Areas. Pursue the following land
                                                        use and development principles in those areas
                                                        designated “Corridor Mixed Use" on the General Plan
                                                        Map:
                                                        (a) An emphasis on pedestrian- and transit-oriented site
                                                        design, rather than auto-oriented or “drive-through”
                                                        design;
                                                        (b) An emphasis on mixed use infill projects which
                                                        incorporate upper story office or residential uses and
                                                        ground floor commercial uses (the General Plan should
                                                        be consulted for further description of the balance
                                                        between residential and non-residential uses within each
                                                        mixed use area);
                                                        (c) A shift toward higher value neighborhood-serving
                                                        retail uses and higher-density housing.
3-96

                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                             L A N D U S E
              Action LU-8.3.A: Limiting Passive Uses on the Ground
              Floor
              Use zoning to identify specific shopping districts (or portions
              of shopping districts) areas where “passive” ground floor uses
              such as offices are either not permitted or require a conditional
              use permit. Such districts should include parcels where the
              City and neighborhood vision is for “active” ground floor uses
              such as restaurants, retail shops, and personal services.
              Design guidelines in such areas should require transparent
              windows, attractive signage, clearly identified building
              entries, and other features that create a welcoming street
              presence.
Policy LU-8.4 Neighborhood           Shopping       Centers.          Promote
              reinvestment in the City’s neighborhood shopping
              centers, with an emphasis on new retail uses that serve
              the adjacent neighborhoods and contribute to the overall
              vitality of the centers.
              Action    LU-8.4.A:     Neighborhood       Shopping       Center
              Revitalization
              Continue to identify neighborhood shopping centers for
              enhancement and improvement, while remaining open to the
              possibility that marginal or obsolete centers may be converted
              to housing or mixed use development.
Policy LU-8.5 Commercial Uses With An Industrial Character.
              Maintain areas in the City that are appropriate for
              lumberyards, construction suppliers, automotive repair
              shops, and other commercial uses that are industrial in
              character or that typically locate in industrial areas.
              While development standards in these areas should
              respect the operational characteristics of these uses, they
              should still promote aesthetic improvements, adequate
              buffering for nearby uses, traffic safety, and a more
              positive visual image.
Policy LU-8.6 Cultural Arts and Entertainment. Provide additional
              opportunities        for     cultural,    recreational,      and
              entertainment uses in the City, including cinemas,
              theaters, live-performance venues, sports facilities, and
              art galleries.
                                                                                                                     3-97

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Policy LU-8.7 Pop-Up Activities and Temporary Uses. Allow “pop-
                                                        up” activities and other temporary uses in vacant
                                                        commercial storefronts, in an effort to activate older and
                                                        vacant buildings and provide space for new enterprises
                                                        and activities that cannot feasibly occur elsewhere.
                                          Policy LU-8.8 Visitor Services. Aggressively pursue the development
                                                        of additional hotels, lodging, and conference facilities in
                                                        the City. Hotels are particularly encouraged in locations
                                                        with good freeway visibility, pedestrian connections to
                                                        restaurants and other services, easy access to Oakland
                                                        Airport or BART, and proximity to amenities such as the
                                                        shoreline.
                                          Policy LU-8.9 East 14th Street. Facilitate the transformation of East
                                                        14th Street from an unbroken commercial “strip” into a
                                                        series of distinct mixed use neighborhood centers, each
                                                        with a unique design identity and mix of uses. The land
                                                        use pattern should emphasize a more attractive and
                                                        human scale of development throughout the corridor,
                                                        with pedestrian-oriented buildings, streetscape and
                                                        transit improvements, and a lively mix of higher density
                                                        residential, commercial, and civic uses.
                                                        Action LU-8.9.A: East 14th Corridor Plan Updates
                                                        Update City plans for the East 14th Street Corridor, including
                                                        the portion of the corridor covered by the North Area Plan
                                                        (Downtown to the Oakland city limits) and the South Area
                                                        Development Strategy (Downtown to 150th Avenue). An
                                                        Area Plan update for the northern part of East 14th, as well as
                                                        the Bancroft and MacArthur corridors (see Action LU-
                                                        8.11.A) is one of the highest priorities of this General Plan and
                                                        should be initiated within two years after the General Plan is
                                                        adopted, if feasible.
                                                        In the area north of Downtown, plans should include revised
                                                        zoning and design standards and circulation improvements
                                                        that respond to current issues in the community, and
                                                        proposals for park and open space improvements. In the area
                                                        south of Downtown, the recommendations of the South Area
                                                        Development Strategy should be carried forward, with
                                                        updates made to reflect current conditions and recent
                                                        accomplishments, new opportunities, and emerging issues.
3-98

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                           L A N D U S E
               The South Area should continue to evolve into a series of
               unique “districts,” including:
                (a) A Southern Downtown district between Maud and Sybil
               Avenues, characterized by uses and densities similar to those
               found Downtown;
               (b) A predominantly multi-family residential area between
               Sybil Avenue and San Leandro Boulevard;
               (c) A "Palma District" between San Leandro Boulevard and
               141st Avenue, including health care, retail, service, and
               residential uses;
               (d) An “International and Cultural” district between 141st
               and Lilian Avenues, including the Bal Theatre; and
               (e) a mostly retail "Gateway" district between Lilian and
               150th Avenue.
               Zoning regulations and local business development programs
               in the South Area should support the types of uses described
               in the South Area Development Strategy. The illustrative site
               development studies in the Strategy should be used as the
               foundation for site planning and design.
Policy LU-8.10 Bay Fair Area. Transform the area around the Bay Fair
               BART station, including Bayfair Center, other shopping
               centers, and properties along Hesperian, East 14th, and
               other major arterials, into a dynamic new transit
               oriented development area. Future development in this
               area should reposition Bayfair Center to reflect current
               trends in retailing; add a mix of higher-density
               residential, office, and other commercial uses; maximize
               the potential for BART use; and minimize dependence
               on autos for daily trips.
               Action LU-8.10.A: Bay Fair Station Transit Village
               Complete the Bay Fair BART Transit Village Specific Plan
               now underway. The Plan should outline a vision for the
               area's future development, include standards and guidelines
               for future development, and present a strategy for achieving
               desired end results. Following its adoption, undertake
               rezoning     and     capital   improvements     to  facilitate
               implementation.
                                                                                                                   3-99

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                         Action     LU-8.10.B:    East    14th    Street     Streetscape
                                                         Improvements
                                                         Work collaboratively with Alameda County to improve East
                                                         14th Street in the Bay Fair area to make the area more
                                                         attractive, distinctive, and friendly to pedestrians, bicyclists,
                                                         and transit users.
                                                         Action LU-8.10.C: Bay Fair BART Connections
                                                         Improve the pedestrian and bicycle connection between the
                                                         Bay Fair BART Station, adjacent transit waiting areas,
                                                         Bayfair Center, and nearby neighborhoods and shopping
                                                         districts.
                                          Policy LU-8.11 MacArthur and Bancroft Corridors. Encourage
                                                         continued improvement and investment in the
                                                         MacArthur Boulevard and Bancroft Avenue commercial
                                                         districts. Mixed use development should be encouraged
                                                         along MacArthur Boulevard, with an emphasis on local-
                                                         serving commercial, residential, office, retail, and civic
                                                         uses between Durant and Joaquin Avenues. Zoning for
                                                         the corridor should be flexible enough to allow a full
                                                         spectrum of residential and commercial uses.                  At
                                                         Bancroft and Dutton Avenues, the focus should be on
                                                         improvements to sustain a vibrant, pedestrian-oriented
                                                         neighborhood shopping district.            Continued efforts
                                                         should be made to improve the streetscape, sidewalks,
                                                         landscaping, and building facades on both Bancroft and
                                                         MacArthur, making this area an attractive destination
                                                         for residents of nearby neighborhoods.
                                                         Action LU-8.11.A: Plan Updates
                                                         Update City plans for the MacArthur and Bancroft corridors.
                                                         For MacArthur Boulevard, this should include:
                                                         (a) Updated standards and guidelines for the desired mix of
                                                         uses along various segments of the corridor;
                                                         (b) Updated proposals for streetscape design, landscaping,
                                                         lighting, parking, open space, and facades for the corridor;
                                                         (c) Collaboration with the City of Oakland in plans for the
                                                         area near the city limits and Foothill Square, recognizing the
                                                         corridor’s designation by Oakland as a "Priority Development
                                                         Area."
3-100

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                           L A N D U S E
               (d) Zoning changes which promote mixed use development,
               including infill development combining upper floor housing
               and ground floor commercial uses.
               (e) Improvements to the intersection of MacArthur Boulevard,
               Foothill Boulevard, and Superior Avenue to improve its
               appearance and enhance traffic safety for all modes of travel.
               For the Bancroft Corridor, this should include plans to
               enhance and strengthen the Bancroft/Dutton commercial
               district and improve the safety of bicycles and pedestrians
               along the corridor.
Policy LU-8.12 Marina Boulevard. Improve the Marina Boulevard
               corridor as an east-west connector between Downtown
               San Leandro and the waterfront. This should include
               continued investment in regional retail and Auto Mall
               development between I-880 and San Leandro Boulevard.
               It should also include the gradual transformation of the
               area between Merced and Doolittle from industrial to
               higher value retail, service, and other commercial uses,
               with accompanying changes to make the street more
               pedestrian and bicycle friendly. Marina Boulevard
               should be viewed as the "front door" into San Leandro--a
               major gateway that communicates a positive impression
               of the city.
               See also Action LU-7.6-C on Marina Boulevard
               Action LU-8.12.A: Estabrook Street
               Encourage the assembly of parcels along Estabrook Street to
               create through-lots to Marina Boulevard. In the event that
               such parcels are created, re-use with commercial development
               fronting on Marina (rather than light industrial uses fronting
               on Estabrook) should be promoted.
                                                                                                                  3-101
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          S AN L EANDRO S HORELINE
                                          GOAL LU-9       Reinforce the San Leandro Shoreline as a regional
                                                          destination for dining, lodging, entertainment, and
                                                          recreation, while creating a new waterfront
                                                          neighborhood with housing, retail, and office uses.
                                          Policy LU-9.1 Waterfront Enhancement. Enhance the San Leandro
                                                        waterfront as a distinguished recreational shoreline and
                                                        conservation area, with complementary activities that
                                                        boost its appeal as a destination for San Leandro
                                                        residents and visitors. Future development at the
                                                        Shoreline should be compatible with the area's scenic
                                                        and recreational qualities.
                                          Policy LU-9.2 Harbor and Channel Maintenance. Recognize the
                                                        economic uncertainty of funding for channel and harbor
                                                        dredging, as well as the City’s existing debt burden
                                                        related to past harbor improvements and dredging, in
                                                        land use decisions for the shoreline. Although the City
                                                        will remain open to scenarios in which harbor
                                                        operations become economically viable, municipal
                                                        subsidy for dredging is considered infeasible under
                                                        current conditions. Redevelopment of the harbor basin
                                                        may be necessary when the channel is no longer
                                                        navigable.
                                          Policy LU-9.3 Public Amenities in Shoreline Development. Ensure
                                                        that future development at the Shoreline includes
                                                        complementary amenities that benefit San Leandro
                                                        residents and current shoreline users, such as improved
                                                        park space, restaurants, pedestrian and bicycle paths,
                                                        and access to the Bay Trail.
                                          Policy LU-9.4 Land Use Mix. Strive for a mix of land uses in the San
                                                        Leandro Shoreline area that requires little or no City
                                                        investment and results in a Shoreline that is financially
                                                        self-supporting. Development should be phased in a
                                                        manner that is consistent with this policy, and should
                                                        maximize the extent to which commercial development
                                                        funds public amenities and services.
3-102

                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                            L A N D U S E
              Action LU-9.4.A: Shoreline Development Plans
              Include the following components in the shoreline
              development:
              (a) A banquet conference facility and hotel;
              (b) Multiple restaurants;
              (c) Housing;
              (d) Class A office space;
              (e) An enhanced public library and community building; and
              (f) Recreation areas and public gathering spaces.
              Action LU-9.4.B: Sustainability and Sea Level Rise
              Ensure that future development at the shoreline takes place in
              an environmentally sensitive manner, taking into
              consideration the potential effects of rising sea levels.
              Action LU-9.4.C: Water-Oriented Recreation
              Continue to explore potential water-oriented recreational
              activities at the San Leandro Shoreline, such as swimming,
              non-motorized watercraft rentals, and windsurfing.
Policy LU-9.5 Gateway        Improvements.         Encourage         “gateway”
              improvements which enhance the approach routes to the
              Shoreline while minimizing the impacts of increased
              traffic on area neighborhoods. Improvements could
              include new signage, streetscape enhancements along
              Marina Boulevard and Fairway Drive, entry monuments
              and landscaping at the Shoreline itself, and longer-term
              circulation changes.
              See also Policy LU-8.12 and Action LU-7.6.C
              Action LU-9.5.A: Shoreline Area Roadway and Transit
              Improvements
              Pursue roadway, sidewalk, bike lane, and transit
              improvements which beautify the entry to the Shoreline area,
              make it easier to travel to the Shoreline without a car, and
              more evenly distribute Shoreline-bound trips between Marina
              Boulevard and Fairway Drive.
                                                                                                                   3-103

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Policy LU-9.6 Urban Design. Encourage cohesive urban design and
                                                        high-quality architecture at the Shoreline. Buildings
                                                        should be oriented to maximize water views and
                                                        shoreline access. Architecture, signage, lighting, street
                                                        furniture, landscaping, and other amenities, should be
                                                        coordinated to achieve an integrated design theme.
                                          Policy LU-9.7 Pedestrian       and     Bicycle     Circulation.   Promote
                                                        improvements at the Shoreline which enhance
                                                        pedestrian and bicycle circulation through the area,
                                                        including public shoreline walkways and trail
                                                        connections to adjacent regional parklands and
                                                        neighborhoods.
                                                        Action LU-9.7.A: Shoreline Promenade
                                                        Require the improvement of a strip of land at least 20 feet in
                                                        width along the shoreline as a public promenade, including
                                                        vista points for the enjoyment of scenic views.
                                          Policy LU-9.8 Special Events. Promote special activities, such as golf
                                                        tournaments, farmers markets, and community events,
                                                        in the Shoreline area as a means of increasing awareness
                                                        and appreciation of the Shoreline as a community
                                                        resource.
                                          Policy LU-9.9 Neighborhood Impacts. Maintain an ongoing dialogue
                                                        with residents of neighborhoods adjacent to the
                                                        Shoreline to address traffic, noise, and other issues
                                                        associated with future development. Early and frequent
                                                        opportunities for neighborhood input should be
                                                        provided in Shoreline development decisions.
3-104
                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                            L A N D U S E
L AND U SE C OMPATIBILITY
GOAL LU-10 Ensure that commercial and industrial projects are
                 attractively designed and are sensitive to
                 surrounding areas.
Policy LU-10.1 Zoning.       Use zoning district boundaries, zoning
               standards, and other regulatory tools to control the
               interface between heavier industrial uses and residential
               areas, and to limit the impacts of industrial activities on
               nearby neighborhoods.
Policy LU-10.2 Off-Site Impacts. Consider the setting and context of
               each site when evaluating proposals for development in
               industrial areas. The potential for impacts on adjacent
               uses, including the potential for land use conflicts and
               increased parking demand and truck traffic, should be a
               key consideration.
Policy LU-10.3 Buffering. When new development or adaptive reuse
               takes place in industrial areas, use a variety of buffering
               measures including land use restrictions, landscaping
               and screening, sound walls and insulation, and limits on
               hours of operations and activities to promote land use
               compatibility. The City’s zoning regulations should
               continue to contain development and design standards
               that minimize the potential for conflicts between
               industrial and residential uses, and between commercial
               and residential uses.
               Action    LU-10.3.A:     Industrial-Residential       Buffering
               Standards
               Continue to implement zoning provisions for buffering along
               industrial/residential interface areas. These provisions—which
               include performance standards and lower thresholds for site
               plan review—should continue to ensure that land use changes
               are adequately reviewed and that appropriate steps are taken
               to avoid land use conflicts when new projects are proposed.
               They are not intended to apply retroactively to existing
               industrial uses.
                                                                                                                   3-105

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                         Action LU-10.3.B: Design Guidelines
                                                         Develop design guidelines for new development in commercial
                                                         and industrial areas to promote aesthetic improvements in
                                                         these areas.
                                                         Action LU-10.3.C: Warehouse Conversions
                                                         Consider zoning code amendments that accommodate the
                                                         conversion of former warehouse and manufacturing buildings
                                                         into "maker" spaces, start-ups, and other innovation economy
                                                         firms, without adversely impacting nearby heavier industrial
                                                         uses.
                                                         See also Policy LU-3.7 on live-work development and LU-
                                                         7.2.A on renovation assistance
                                          Policy LU-10.4 Industrial Sanctuary. Protect the City’s major industrial
                                                         areas from encroachment by uses that are potentially
                                                         incompatible with existing viable industrial activities, or
                                                         which may inhibit the ability of industry to operate
                                                         effectively.
                                          Policy LU-10.5 Big Box Retail Encroachment. To protect the City’s
                                                         industrial land supply, limit the further expansion of
                                                         “big box” retail and other large footprint retail uses in
                                                         the City’s industrial areas. Conversion of industrial land
                                                         for big box uses should only be permitted in the vicinity
                                                         of the existing concentrations of such uses at I-880/Davis
                                                         Street and along Marina Boulevard.
                                          Policy LU-10.6 Light Industrial and Industrial Transition Buffer
                                                         Areas.       Use the “Light Industrial” General Plan
                                                         designation to create buffers between industrial and
                                                         residential areas. Use the "Industrial Transition" General
                                                         Plan designation to facilitate the transformation of
                                                         specifically identified industrial areas to higher value
                                                         land uses which capitalize on locational assets (such as
                                                         proximity to BART or high visibility).
3-106

                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                            L A N D U S E
               Action LU-10.6.A: Conditions of Approval
               On an ongoing basis, establish conditions of approval for new
               commercial and industrial development located adjacent to
               residential areas, and for new residential areas located
               adjacent to commercial and industrial areas, which ensure
               that the potential for future conflict is minimized.
Policy LU-10.7 Relocation.       Where land use conflicts cannot be
               reasonably mitigated, consider the relocation of isolated
               residences surrounded by industrial uses.
G ROWTH M ANAGEMENT
GOAL LU-11 Manage the city’s growth in a way that maintains the
                 quality of life and reflects the capacity of
                 infrastructure and public services.
Policy LU-11.1 Use of the General Plan Environmental Impact Report.
               Use the 2035 household and employment forecasts in
               this General Plan as parameters for environmental
               analysis for future development projects within the San
               Leandro city limits. The General Plan and its associated
               Environmental Impact Report presumed an incremental
               increase of 5,600 housing units and 12,130 jobs between
               2015 and 2035. In the event that proposed development
               in the city would exceed these amounts, the Director of
               Community          Development          shall    require   that
               environmental review for any subsequent development
               address growth impacts that would occur as a result of
               development exceeding the General Plan projections.
               This does not preclude the City, as lead agency, from
               determining that an EIR would be required for any
               development to the extent required under the relevant
               provisions of CEQA (e.g. Section 21166 and related
               guidelines).
               Action LU-11.1.A: Development Tracking
               As part of the annual General Plan progress report, track the
               incremental addition of housing units and jobs that occur on a
               yearly basis relative to the General Plan forecasts. Consider a
               variety of sources to estimate current employment and job
               growth over time.
                                                                                                                   3-107

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Policy LU-11.2 Land Supply. Ensure that land in San Leandro is zoned
                                                         to accommodate a diverse mix of industrial, commercial,
                                                         and residential development. The City will strive to
                                                         balance local job growth, housing growth, and retail-
                                                         service growth as a strategy for reducing vehicle miles
                                                         traveled and related greenhouse gas emissions.
                                          Policy LU-11.3 Coordination with Nearby Jurisdictions. Work with
                                                         the City of Oakland to monitor planned and conceptual
                                                         development proposals with the potential to directly or
                                                         indirectly impact San Leandro. This should include
                                                         changes associated with the proposed Coliseum City
                                                         development near the Oakland Coliseum, future
                                                         expansion of Oakland Airport, and plans for the Priority
                                                         Development Areas along International Boulevard and
                                                         MacArthur Boulevard. In addition, the City will work
                                                         with Alameda County to improve the Ashland area,
                                                         particularly the East 14th Street business district and the
                                                         residential neighborhoods abutting San Leandro.
                                          Policy LU-11.4 Sphere of Influence. Recognize Alameda County as the
                                                         governing agency for land use matters in the
                                                         unincorporated San Leandro sphere of influence. The
                                                         City may comment on development proposals in the
                                                         unincorporated sphere and may participate in County
                                                         planning processes for this area. However, land use,
                                                         transportation, and community service decisions in the
                                                         unincorporated sphere are presumed to be guided by
                                                         adopted County plans. No changes to such plans are
                                                         proposed in this General Plan.
3-108
                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                       L A N D U S E
FOCUS AREAS
This section of the General Plan provides direction for eight “Focus
Areas” within San Leandro (see Figure 3-6). Each Focus Area has unique
issues that require more detailed discussion than is provided in the rest
of the General Plan. Some of the Focus Areas have been targeted for
immediate land use changes or gradual transition during the next two
decades; others have special challenges related to land use, resource
conservation, transportation, urban design, and other planning issues.
The Focus Area discussion includes a description of each area and
relevant issues, keyed to specific General Plan policies and action
programs addressing the area. In some instances, preparation of more
detailed plans has been recommended to provide further direction.
A.       DOWNTOWN
Downtown is the heart of San Leandro and has been a
hub of commerce and employment for more than 150
years. It includes the City’s largest concentration of
historic structures and its most pedestrian-oriented
street environment, as well as important civic and
cultural landmarks. Downtown has been the subject of
several planning initiatives in recent years, resulting in
area-specific policies, regulations, and guidelines.
For the purposes of the General Plan, Downtown San
Leandro includes three sub-areas. The first is the
traditional Downtown Core, which includes the area
along East 14th Street and Washington Avenue between
San Leandro Creek and Sybil Avenue/Castro Street. The
second sub-area is “Downtown East,” which includes
the area extending east to Bancroft Avenue along
Callan, Estudillo, and Joaquin Avenues. The third sub-
area includes the BART Station and adjacent blocks
along the Alvarado Street and San Leandro Boulevard
corridors. The first two sub-areas are addressed in the
paragraphs below. The third (BART Station) sub-area is
addressed as its own Focus Area in in the next section.
                                                                                                              3-109

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                              Figure 3-6
                                          Focus Areas
3-110
                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
Detailed land use guidance for the Downtown
Core was provided in the Downtown San
Leandro Transit Oriented Development (TOD)
Strategy, adopted in 2007. The Strategy was
followed by application of new zoning
regulations encouraging higher density housing,
offices, retail and entertainment uses, and mixed
use buildings. Several different zones were
created, reflecting existing uses, historic
resources, development opportunities, and the
desired future character of different sub-areas.
Design guidelines were adopted to make the area
more pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly, and to
improve circulation, parking, and traffic flow.
While the Downtown TOD Strategy is almost a
decade old, the vision it presents for the
Downtown Core remains valid. The City seeks to
promote economic vitality, create a stronger
sense of place, improve aesthetics, create new
housing opportunities, protect and restore
historic resources, and provide for the long-term
maintenance of Downtown investment. The goal
is to make Downtown a more vibrant and
inviting place—a destination that welcomes all
San Leandro residents.
Future development in the Downtown Core should respect its function
as the commercial, civic and cultural heart of the city. More than any
other place in town, Downtown defines San Leandro’s image. The
bulky, coarse architectural styles of the 1960s and 1970s should be
discouraged in the future, and there should be a greater focus on the
area’s historic context. The intent is not to replicate the Downtown of a
century ago, but rather to bring back traditional elements such as
attractive, high quality buildings, wider sidewalks, and active ground
floor uses. Taller buildings (up to six stories) and a variety of classical
and contemporary architectural styles should be encouraged in this
context. Activities which increase the daytime and evening population
of Downtown are particularly encouraged, in order to create a more
lively street environment and a stronger market for new businesses.
                                                                                                                3-111

S A N L E A N D R O  G E N E R A L  P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                           In a Nutshell...
                                       Downtown Design Guidelines and Principles
              The City adopted Design Guidelines and Principles for Downtown San Leandro in 2007, updating an
              earlier set of design guidelines from 2001. The Guidelines seek to revitalize East 14th Street as a
              pedestrian-oriented main street and strengthen Downtown as a successful retail, entertainment, and
              service district. One of the key objectives is to attract motorists to “stop and explore.” This is to
              be achieved through outstanding architectural and construction quality, active and interesting ground
              floor uses, destinations such as restaurants and specialty stores, and respect for historic resources.
              The Guidelines address various building components, including corners, entrances, storefronts,
              display windows, facades, awnings, and rooflines, using a combination of photos and renderings. The
              guidelines also address building materials, lighting, and color. The emphasis is on reinforcing the
              historic context of Downtown, creating a stronger sense of place by designing new buildings and
              retrofitting existing buildings to be designed for strolling shoppers, rather than passing motorists.
              Outdoor space is a major component of the Guidelines. Borrowing from successful examples across
              the country, the document describes how paving, outdoor seating, planting, railings, landscaping,
              water features, signage, and other exterior elements can create places where people want to be.
              Maintenance issues also are addressed, including repairs, trash collection, and graffiti removal.
3-112

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                       L A N D U S E
Restoration of the original street grid has been a long-standing part of
the vision for Downtown San Leandro. The grid was interrupted almost
50 years ago by the development of the San Leandro Plaza (Safeway)
Shopping center. Steps have since been taken to improve pedestrian
connections to BART, including the arch and arcade along West
Estudillo. Ultimately, the shopping center has the potential to be remade
into a mixed use development combining ground floor retail uses with
upper story housing, office uses, structured parking, and restored
pedestrian streets.
Similar opportunities exist on other Downtown sites. North of the Plaza,
the block bounded by Hays (Dan Niemi Way), Davis, and East 14 th
presents the opportunity for office, retail, or mixed use development.
This site, known as “Town Hall Square,” includes several parcels owned
by the City of San Leandro and several private parcels. The northern
end of the block abuts San Leandro Creek, presenting the opportunity to
reconfigure or narrow Hays Street, expand Root Park, and provide an
attractive new public space at the northern gateway to Downtown.
Across East 14th Street to the east, a vacant CVS store and municipal
parking lot offer a similar opportunity. North of San Leandro Creek, a
City-owned parking lot has the potential for expanded park space,
medium density housing, or a similar use that provides a connection
from City Hall to Downtown.
South of Downtown along East 14th Street, Washington Avenue, Hays
Street, and the east-west cross streets, there are a number of smaller
parcels which could potentially be redeveloped over the next 20 years.
There are also older developments such as Pelton Center with the
potential to be updated to include more pedestrian-oriented spaces and
additional floor area. Zoning regulations for Downtown have been
                                                                                                              3-113

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          structured to accommodate substantially more development than exists
                                          today, and to maximize flexibility in uses and activities. In some cases,
                                          this could include the addition of upper stories to existing one and two
                                          story buildings.
                                          Improvements to the pedestrian, bicycle, and transit systems are
                                          planned, and new parking management strategies are being developed
                                          to address the needs of local businesses, customers, and residents.
                                          Streetscape and public realm improvements should be implemented,
                                          especially as Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) service is initiated to the San
                                          Leandro BART station. A combination of public and private investment
                                          along Davis Street, Washington Avenue and East 14th Street should make
                                          these streets more attractive gateways into Downtown. Programmed
                                          activities such as the farmer’s market, the Cherry Festival, and summer
                                          concerts can also strengthen the area’s role the city’s gathering place.
                                                           The area east of Downtown contains a concentration of
                                                           small professional and medical office buildings. The area
                                                           also includes the San Leandro Public Library, single
                                                           family homes, and several multi-family housing
                                                           developments. Additional housing, office development,
                                                           and related office services should be encouraged here,
                                                           with an emphasis on small scale, local-serving projects.
                                                           Stronger pedestrian connections between this area and
                                                           Downtown should be encouraged. Development in this
                                                           area should be lower in scale than in the Downtown
                                                           Core, recognizing the proximity to nearby single family
                                                           neighborhoods.
                                                           Some of the city’s most important historic resources are
                                                           contained on the blocks immediately west of
                                                           Downtown, in the area roughly bounded by Davis
                                                           Street, Juana Avenue, Carpentier Street, and Hays Street.
                                                           Creation of a small “Old San Leandro” historic district
                                                           should be considered in this area, this area,
                                                           encompassing landmarks such as the Casa Peralta and
                                                           the Daniel Best Home. Other in the sites in this area
                                                           provide opportunities for multi-family infill housing.
                                                           Please consult Goal LU-6 and related policies and actions for
                                                           additional guidance on Downtown San Leandro.
3-114

                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                      L A N D U S E
B.      SAN LEANDRO BART STATION AREA
The Downtown BART Area includes the San Leandro BART Station and
the surrounding blocks in the Station vicinity. The City adopted a
Transit-Oriented Development Strategy for this area in 2007, including
land use, circulation, and urban design recommendations (see text box
on the next page). The area was subsequently rezoned to facilitate its
redevelopment as a new urban neighborhood, with taller buildings,
denser housing, and a significant increase in office employment. The
idea is to capitalize on the investment made in BART by directing a
substantial share of the city’s future growth to the station area.
Several import ant milestones have been achieved in the decade since the
TOD Strategy was adopted. These include the redesign of San Leandro
Boulevard with new crosswalks, pedestrian safety, and bicycle
improvements; the development of the 200-unit Marea Alta Apartments
on the former BART parking lot at San Leandro Boulevard and Juana;
and the first phase of the San Leandro Tech Campus on Alvarado Street.
Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) improvements from East 14 th Street to the BART
station also are underway. An update to the TOD Strategy should be
programmed for the next five years to reflect these achievements and
respond to market trends and emerging conditions.
                                                                                                             3-115

S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                         In A Nutshell...
                       Downtown San Leandro Transit Oriented Development Strategy
             In 2007, the City adopted a Transit Oriented Development (TOD) Strategy for a roughly 300- acre
             area including Downtown San Leandro and the BART Station vicinity. This area is projected to
             accommodate more than half of the city’s growth between 2015 and 2035. Recommendations for
             the TOD area were shaped by a 27-member Citizens Advisory Committee and several large
             community workshops.
             The TOD Strategy establishes a land use framework, circulation system, and development guidelines
             addressing building design, heights, and streetscapes. The document also identifies the capital
             improvements, open spaces, and public amenities that should accompany private development. The
             Strategy seeks to increase transit ridership and enhance Downtown San Leandro as the retail, civic,
             and cultural hub of the city.
             Most of the development opportunities in the study area are associated with 39 parcels (or groups of
             parcels) located on scattered sites along East 14th Street, Washington Avenue, Davis Street, Alvarado
             Street, and San Leandro Boulevard. These parcels have been grouped together into eight “Special
             Policy Areas” and are the subject of specific land use and building massing recommendations in the
             strategy document.
             The TOD Strategy projected a cumulative capacity of 3,430 housing units, 719,000 square feet of
             office space, and 121,000 square feet of retail space on the 39 sites. These totals should be revisited
             in the coming years to identify new sites, and allow for more office and retail space.
3-116

                                                                        S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                     L A N D U S E
There are significant opportunities for infill
development around the station. At the north end of
Alvarado Street (south of San Leandro Creek), an
area of more than 10 acres is vacant and zoned for
high density residential/mixed use development. A
minimum density of 60 units per acre applies in this
area and FARs up to 4.0 are allowed. The design of
new structures should preserve and enhance the
creekside setting while encouraging pedestrian access
to the nearby BART station. A creekside trail and
open space buffer should be created along the
northern edge.     Office uses are envisioned to the
south of this area along Davis Street, reflecting
existing uses as well as the desire to create transit-
oriented workplaces near BART. The possibility of
relocating Thrasher Park to Alvarado Street on the
south bank of San Leandro Creek, enabling the
current park site to be used for development, has
been raised in the past. The idea may continue to be
explored, provided that the new park site is as large
or larger than the current site and has equivalent
usable recreation area.
Completion of the San Leandro Tech Campus will significantly change
the character of the area west of the station. “Truth is Beauty”—a
landmark piece of public art—will define the image of the district, and
become the centerpiece of a dynamic public/private space and gateway
for arriving BART passengers. Additional office space should be
developed along the Alvarado corridor between Davis Street and
Williams. The area is within 1,000 feet of the BART platform, and can
become a future “business main street” with upper story offices and
ground floor uses serving local employees and nearby residents.
The Alvarado Street corridor also has the capacity for a substantial
number of new housing units, including housing types that do not yet
exist in San Leandro. The City has identified a need and market for
housing serving millennial households, including “micro” units, live-
work units, and mixed use buildings that combine housing and other
uses such as hotels and offices. The warehouses, one-story office
buildings, and older industrial land uses along Alvarado Street may
ultimately be replaced by mid-rise offices and residential mixed use
projects.
                                                                                                            3-117

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          The area along San Leandro Boulevard from Davis Street northward to
                                          Oakland also presents opportunities for positive change. Today, the
                                          corridor includes older commercial and industrial uses, such as mini-
                                          warehouses, a nursery, several auto body and tire shops, a restaurant,
                                          and Siempre Verde Park. Given the proximity of this corridor to the
                                          BART station and Downtown, a shift to higher value land uses is
                                          desired. North of San Leandro Creek, the Park Street “Island” should
                                          transition to uses that provide a more compatible edge to the nearby
                                          Farrelly Pond neighborhood. These uses could include residential and
                                          live-work uses along Park Street, and low-impact commercial uses (such
                                          as medical and professional offices, artists studios, and business services)
                                          facing San Leandro Boulevard.
                                          Between San Leandro Creek and Davis Street, shallow parcels may limit
                                          the feasibility of large offices on the west side of San Leandro Boulevard,
                                          so service businesses and other uses which complement the nearby
                                          Creekside Office Center and Tech Campus should be encouraged. The
                                          TOD Strategy designates this area as “Office Mixed Use,” making it an
                                          ideal location for smaller scale local-serving offices, live-work and other
                                          activities that capitalize on proximity to BART.
                                          Changes throughout the Station Area should create a stronger sense of
                                          cohesion and identity. Bicycle and pedestrian paths are proposed,
                                          serving not only new development but the neighborhoods and
                                          employment areas beyond. The proposed East Bay Greenway, a linear
                                                                                     green space and bikeway in the
                                                                                     former railroad right-of-way,
                                                                                     will provide an amenity that
                                                                                     helps shape the area, while also
                                                                                     providing a link to other parts of
                                                                                     the city.
                                                                                     Please consult the following policies
                                                                                     and actions for additional guidance
                                                                                     on the Downtown BART Station
                                                                                     Area: Action LU-6.01.B (TOD
                                                                                     Strategy Update); Policy 6.04
                                                                                     (Office Development); Policy LU-
                                                                                     6.07 (BART Accessibility) and
                                                                                     related actions; and Policy LU-6.13
                                                                                     (BART Station Area Transit
                                                                                     Village) and related actions.
3-118

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
C.       EAST 14TH CORRIDOR
East 14th is San Leandro’s “Main Street.” It is the City’s major
commercial spine and has a 160-year history as the principal
transportation route linking the cities of the East Bay. The East 14th
Corridor is home to many of the City’s retail shops and service
businesses, its largest shopping center, numerous bars and restaurants,
medical and professional offices, and even City Hall. The street also
includes hundreds of housing units, some in apartment and
condominium complexes, and some in mixed use developments with
shops and services on the ground level.
East 14th Street is a designated State Highway (Route 185) and is
operated by Caltrans. Prior to World War II, the street was two lanes
wide with an electric streetcar operating down the median. Much of the
development in the Downtown area and the North area dates from the
streetcar era, with pedestrian-oriented shops sited close to the street and
little or no parking provided on-site. By contrast, most of the area
between Downtown and Bayfair Center was developed in the post-war
era. This section of the street was developed for auto access, with
buildings set back a considerable distance from the street, prominent
signs, and large parking lots along the street frontage. With little design
control or coordination, the area had evolved into a quintessential
commercial strip by the late 1950s.
                                                                                                                3-119

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Both the pre-war and post-war sections of East 14th Street entered a
                                          period of transition in the 1960s and 1970s as competition from larger
                                          suburban shopping centers and changes in consumer behavior made
                                          retailing more difficult. Some of the buildings deteriorated and some
                                          were replaced by newer auto-oriented uses. Although the street
                                          continued to function as a viable shopping area, there was a growing
                                          emphasis on drive-through type businesses, used car sales, and
                                          automotive service and repair uses. These land uses, coupled with signs
                                          of disinvestment in some areas, have perpetuated a negative image of
                                          the street within nearby neighborhoods.
                                          For the last 25 years, the City has been implementing programs to
                                          improve the image and competitiveness of the East 14th Corridor so that
                                          it becomes a more attractive and economically robust destination. The
                                          City adopted a plan for the North Area in 1991, including the roughly 12-
                                          block long corridor between Oakland and San Leandro Creek. During
                                          the 1990s, the City narrowed this section of East 14 th Street from four
                                          lanes to two, added street trees, widened the parking lane to
                                          accommodate bicycles, and constructed a gateway monument at the
                                          Oakland border. Developments such as Broadmoor Plaza and Carlton
                                          Plaza provided multi-family senior housing, and started the corridor’s
                                          transformation to a mixed use boulevard.
                                          Today, the North section of East 14th presents both challenges and
                                          opportunities. The area includes local-serving businesses, including
                                          furniture and grocery stores, automotive services, restaurants, an AT&T
                                                                              facility, offices, hair and nail salons,
                                                                              real estate and insurance offices,
                                                                              upholstery, dry cleaning, and
                                                                              similar small businesses. The built
                                                                              environment includes a mix of
                                                                              older structures with storefronts
                                                                              along the sidewalk, and single-
                                                                              story buildings surrounded by
                                                                              parking lots and driveways. Most
                                                                              parcels are less than a half-acre in
                                                                              size, with a depth of less than 125
                                                                              feet. This limits the potential for
                                                                              larger-scale mixed use projects,
                                                                              particularly in the absence of a
                                                                              Redevelopment Agency with the
                                                                              potential to assemble property.
3-120

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
An update to the North Area Plan should be completed following
adoption of the General Plan. The new Plan should revisit existing
conditions, articulate a new vision for the corridor, and implement new
strategies for revitalization. The Plan should consider the potential to
leverage public investment in AC Transit’s new Bus Rapid Transit (BRT)
line, which will connect Downtown Oakland to the San Leandro BART
station via East 14th Street and Davis Street. BRT boarding platforms are
planned at Durant, Georgia, and Begier Streets. Some of the sites near
the platforms have the potential for small-scale infill development with
one to two stories of housing above ground floor commercial uses.
There is an opportunity to provide a more inviting street environment,
and close gaps in the street frontage with new development.
The land use pattern is different south of Downtown San Leandro. The
street is four to five lanes wide along this segment, with much of the
frontage dedicated to uses such as car sales, auto repair services, strip
shopping centers and fast food.           The pattern of uses appears
disorganized and there is little cohesion. This segment also includes
“magnet” uses such as San Leandro Hospital, the Senior Community
Center, the Post Office, and the Bal Theatre. The corridor also has assets
such as street trees, tree-lined sidewalks, and pockets of strong business
activity such as Eden Center and Palma Plaza.
                                                                                                               3-121

S A N L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L  P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                               In a Nutshell…
                                       East 14th Street South Area Development Strategy
                 In 2004, the City adopted the South Area Development Strategy in response to concerns over the
                 quality and quantity of new businesses along the East 14th Street corridor. The Strategy includes an
                 existing conditions assessment, covering land use and urban form, real estate market conditions and
                 demographic trends, and transportation. The analysis provides the basis for goals and policies to
                 guide the area’s development. Key goals include the transformation of the unbroken commercial
                 ‘strip’ into a series of mixed use districts, the creation of a more pedestrian-friendly environment on
                 East 14th, and the accommodation of high-quality multi-family housing along the corridor.
                 The South Area strategy includes a number of components, including a concept plan and illustrative
                 development studies for sites of different character and land uses. Also included are design
                 guidelines, a streetscape improvement plan, and implementation strategies. The design guidelines
                 apply to new development and to remodeling projects and changes in use that require City permits.
                 The streetscape plan calls for specific changes to crosswalks, sidewalks, and travel lanes to make the
                 street safer and more comfortable for bicycles and pedestrians.
                 Following adoption of the South Area Strategy, the City adopted three zoning districts (SA-1-2, and -
                 3) to implement the Plan. Each zone is tailored to emphasize a slightly different mix of uses. The
                 zoning regulations allow for close review of noise, odor, glare and other potential nuisances.
3-122

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
The 1.5-mile long corridor between Sybil Avenue
and Bayfair Center is covered by a Development
Strategy adopted in 2004. The focus of the Strategy
is to create distinct activity nodes based on existing
land uses and assets. These nodes include:
    A higher density residential and mixed use area
     located between Sybil Avenue and San Leandro
     Boulevard. Plans and zoning regulations for this
     area should emphasize continued infill
     development with multi-family and community
     service uses, similar to recent affordable housing
     developments such as Estabrook Place senior
     housing and Casa Verde.
    The Palma District, from San Leandro Boulevard to
     141st Avenue. This is envisioned as a major
     commercial and office hub. Plans and zoning
     regulations capitalize on the presence of San
     Leandro Hospital, medical offices, and civic
     uses, as well as opportunities for new retail
     activities and housing.
    An International and Cultural District, from 141st
     Avenue to Lilian Avenue. This area has proven to
     be a successful location for businesses serving
     the Latino and Asian communities. Infill development which carries
     this theme to new development should be encouraged, along with
     marketing of this area as a regional center for ethnic foods,
     restaurants, clothing, and other products.
    A Gateway District, from Lilian Avenue to 150th Avenue. This district
     includes slightly larger structures and parcels, including landmarks
     such as the Bal Theatre. The potential for new community-serving
     retail uses is high, as is the potential for mixed use development.
The South Area Development Strategy identified 34 opportunity sites
along the corridor, each with an aggregate land area of 27.5 acres. These
sites were identified as having the capacity for 134,500 square feet of new
commercial space and 1,000 new residential units. Design guidelines for
the corridor address height, bulk, and setbacks, as well as facades,
parking, entrances, signage, and open space. Overall, the Development
Strategy aims to create a more pedestrian-oriented environment,
accompanied by safety and beautification measures.
                                                                                                                3-123

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          A streetscape improvement plan also has been developed for the South
                                          Area. It includes recommendations for reconfiguring the travel lanes to
                                          introduce bulb-outs, pedestrian islands, medians, and wider sidewalks.
                                          Undergrounding of utilities is also a key component. New development
                                          is encouraged to include plazas, usable open space, and other amenities
                                          that serve residents, shoppers, and employees, while improving aesthetic
                                          quality. Programs have been initiated to help existing business owners
                                          with façade improvements and renovation.
                                          One of the key objectives in reshaping East 14th Street is to improve the
                                          transition between the “strip” and adjacent residential neighborhoods.
                                          This includes the “stepping down” of new three and four story buildings
                                          so they do not loom over adjacent single family homes to the rear.
                                          Measures to mitigate traffic impacts on adjacent neighborhoods should
                                          also be pursued as projects are approved. In some locations, it may be
                                          appropriate to limit uses with high traffic generation to avoid
                                          neighborhood impacts.
                                          Please consult Policy 8.09 (East 14th Street) and Action 8.09-A (E. 14th Area
                                          Plan Updates) for additional guidance on the East 14th Street corridor.
3-124

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
D.       BAY FAIR BART STATION AREA
Bayfair Center (the Mall) is the largest shopping center in San Leandro
and the hub of a 130-acre retail district that extends along East 14th
Street, Hesperian Boulevard, and Fairmont Avenue in the southeast part
of the City. The mall itself was developed in 1957 on the site of a former
auto racing track. It was the first enclosed regional mall in the East Bay,
and set the standard for similar malls throughout the region in the late
1950s and 1960s.
The Bay Fair Station Area is currently the focus of a transit-oriented
development specific plan that will guide its transformation from an
auto-focused shopping district to a pedestrian-focused mixed use center.
The City received a planning grant from the Metropolitan Transportation
Commission in 2014 to prepare the Plan, with Alameda County,
Madison Marquette (the owner of Bayfair Center), and BART as
partners. Policy guidance is being provided through community
workshops and a 21-member steering committee. Because the Specific
Plan is scheduled for completion in mid-2017, the Focus Area discussion
below is intended to document existing conditions and opportunities,
rather than provide prescriptive guidelines for the future.
Approximately 60 percent of the land within the study area is covered by
parking lots and driveways. Given its proximity to a BART station, there
is an opportunity for much more intensive use, and a re-orientation of
the street network and parcelization pattern to facilitate transit use. At
the same time, the City seeks to retain the essential function of Bayfair
and its perimeter shopping centers as a retail district. Bayfair Center has
over 823,000 square feet of enclosed floor space, while the adjacent
Fairmont Square and Fashion Faire shopping centers have another
312,000 square feet. The Bayfair Center area is an important source of
jobs, tax revenue, and local services for San Leandro and its environs.
The BART station itself includes 18 acres of parking, the BART tracks,
and boarding facilities. For many years, BART has been exploring
opportunities to transfer surface parking into a structure, freeing up
most of the parking lot area for mixed use development. A TOD and
Access Plan was completed in 2007 to explore such options. It is
anticipated that the Specific Plan will incorporate a parking structure
and mixed use development on the station property, as well as
connectivity improvements between the Station, the Mall, and nearby
neighborhoods.
                                                                                                                3-125
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Plans to substantially change the format and look of the Mall may also be
                                          included. The traditional model of the regional mall as a single use,
                                          inwardly-focused space has changed in the last 30 years. Design changes
                                          to such centers have been made across the country, often with very
                                          positive results. Such changes emphasize architectural quality and
                                          pedestrian amenities over auto convenience and function. Future
                                          development in and around the Mall should promote a synergistic mix
                                          of uses, such as retail shops, restaurants, entertainment venues, housing,
                                          and offices. New buildings along the Mall’s East 14 th frontage near
                                          Fairmont Avenue could reduce the visual image of the Mall as a
                                          “fortress” surrounded by parking. Pathways or promenades could create
                                          a more inviting environment for pedestrians.
                                          There is also an opportunity to add a sizeable number of housing units
                                          on the Mall site, creating a “24-7” environment, and providing an
                                          expanded market for restaurants, services, and retail shops. A number
                                          of alternatives may be explored through the Specific Plan, each retaining
                                          essential retail functions but adding new uses that make the site more
                                          successful as a destination. Mixed use development can help San
                                          Leandro achieve its greenhouse gas reduction goals, while also adding
                                          much needed housing, creating jobs, and making the station area more
                                          sustainable.
                                          Beyond the Mall property, the Hesperian corridor includes a number of
                                          sites with the potential for reuse. The corridor, which extends from East
                                          14th Street to Highway 238 and beyond, includes office, retail, public,
                                          utility, restaurant, mini-warehouse, and residential uses. The street is six
                                          lanes wide south of Fairmont Drive, and would benefit from
                                          improvements which make it easier to cross from the residential areas on
                                          the west. At East 14th Street, the convergence of Hesperian, Bancroft, and
                                          150th Avenue form a triangle which presents the opportunity for a major
                                          city gateway, as well as other aesthetic improvements.
3-126

                                                                                 S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                              L A N D U S E
East 14th Street itself also presents opportunities for improvement. South
of 150th Avenue, the east side of the street is in unincorporated Alameda
County while the west side is in San Leandro. The County has
completed a number of plans and streetscape improvement programs for
the street as it passes through the unincorporated Ashland-Cherryland
district. Within the San Leandro city limits, the west side of the street
includes vacant parcels to the north of the AMC Theaters with the
potential for private development or a future civic use.
Place making is an important part of the Bay Fair planning process. As
higher density uses are introduced into the district, there are
opportunities to create a more distinctive image. Stronger pedestrian
connections between the Mall and the surrounding shopping centers
should be pursued, along with improved transitions between the retail
areas and the nearby residential neighborhoods. Plans for the area
should also address localized development constraints, such as flooding,
congestion at key intersections, and transitions to nearby low density
neighborhoods.
Please consult Policy LU-8.10 and related actions for additional guidance on the
Bayfair area.
E.       SAN LEANDRO SHORELINE
Located at the west end of Marina Boulevard along San Francisco Bay,
the San Leandro Shoreline is the city’s largest recreation area. It
currently contains a mix of active recreational and commercial uses,
including a hotel, two large restaurants, a 27-hole golf course, a 462-berth
marina, two yacht clubs, and a boat launch. The marina was constructed
                                                                                                                     3-127

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          in the early 1960s with fill dredged from San Francisco Bay. The boat
                                          basin is connected to the navigable waters of San Francisco Bay by a two-
                                          mile channel, which is prone to siltation. Due to the high cost of
                                          dredging and the loss of federal funds, the City no longer maintains the
                                          channel, and the marina is becoming less viable for most motorized
                                          boats.
                                          Goal LU-9 presents goals, policies, and actions for the Shoreline. The
                                          City has identified a core area of approximately 50 acres at the heart of
                                          the 900-acre shoreline recreation area for commercial and residential
                                          development. While the area’s role as a water-oriented hotel and
                                          restaurant district has been a part of City plans for five decades, the full
                                          potential of the site has yet to be realized. The City has long aspired for
                                          a more robust mix of activities that capitalize on the waterfront location,
                                          panoramic views, golf course, and park, as well as the proximity to
                                          Oakland Airport just a few miles to the north.
                                          In 2008, a developer was selected to work with the City on plans for the
                                          site. A Shoreline Citizen Advisory Committee was created, and met for
                                          three years to provide input. One of the foundational principles was that
                                          development should be self-sustaining and not depend on municipal
                                          subsidies to operate. Revenue from the development should help
                                          support amenities and services that benefit the entire San Leandro
                                          community. Another principle is that the development should be
                                          compatible with nearby residential and industrial uses, and improve
                                          connections between nearby neighborhoods and the shoreline.
3-128

                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                      L A N D U S E
A General Plan Amendment for the Shoreline Development Project
(SDP), including an Environmental Impact Report, was approved in
2015. The overarching objective of the SDP is to build an economically
viable and vibrant mixed use development which provides needed
amenities and services for San Leandro residents. The Shoreline is
envisioned as a regional destination for dining, lodging, entertainment,
and recreation. Development at this location should improve waterfront
access and access to scenic views.
The SDP is 52 acres, and includes the following preliminary components:
   A 150,000 square foot waterfront office campus
   A 200-room hotel, including various amenities for guests
   A 15,000 square foot banquet and conference facility, and three new
    restaurants
   A 3-story parking structure with 800 spaces
   A 20-foot wide pedestrian promenade along the shoreline.
   354 housing units, including 61 mixed use condominiums, 159 multi-
    family units, 92 townhomes, and 42 single family detached homes.
    The townhomes and single family homes described above would be
    accommodated through a redesign of five holes at the Monarch Bay
    Golf Course.
                                                                                                             3-129

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          A variety of public amenities are planned as part of the project, including
                                          an aquatic center, bocce ball, picnic areas, a beach, pedestrian piers, a
                                          small amphitheater, boardwalks and lookouts,, a small boat launch, a
                                          kayak storage facility, and two miles of waterfront promenade. The SDP
                                          also includes provisions to rebuild the Mulford-Marina library, either on
                                          its current site or on a new site within the development. The Plan also
                                          includes improvements to surface parking, resulting in a net gain of 100
                                          spaces, and a grand total of over 2,000 parking spaces at the site.
                                          The Marina will be maintained as long as financially feasible. It is
                                          assumed that the boat slips will be removed as the channel becomes less
                                          navigable, and that the basin will ultimately become suitable for non-
                                          motorized watercraft only. However, shoreline land use decisions
                                          should not preclude the possibility that a funding source for dredging
                                          will be identified in the long-term future, and that more active boating
                                          could become feasible again at some point. Over the years, studies of
                                          commuter ferry service on San Francisco Bay have identified the Marina
                                          as a potential stop. Looking ahead 20 years, this possibility should not
                                          be ruled out entirely.
                                          Planning for the Shoreline area must consider the potential impacts of
                                          rising sea level. New development will be required to be elevated above
                                          projected coastal flood hazard levels. Design features should ensure that
                                          improvements are resilient and sufficiently protected from potential
                                          impacts. Improvements to water, sewer, storm drainage, and energy
                                          utilities also are planned.
                                          Development will also be designed to ensure compatibility with adjacent
                                          uses, and to meet airport land use compatibility criteria. Architectural
                                          styles and forms should take advantage of the waterfront location and
                                          view opportunities, while respecting the shoreline’s role as the “crown
                                          jewel” of San Leandro’s park system. Future development should be
                                          sensitive to potential impacts on nearby wetlands, parks, and residential
                                          areas. Building heights should not exceed three stories.
                                          The City envisions the Shoreline Development Project as a community
                                          focal point—a place for family gatherings and celebrations—as well as a
                                          haven for business travelers. New activities and special events should be
                                          pursued, particularly those with the potential for revenue generation.
                                          Farmers markets, golf tournaments, community fairs, and similar events
                                          could contribute to the perception of the Marina as San Leandro’s
                                          playground. Historic markers that recall the area’s past as an oyster
                                          farming and shipping area also should be considered.
3-130

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                          L A N D U S E
F.       MARINA BOULEVARD CORRIDOR
The Marina Boulevard Corridor Focus Area extends from the Shoreline
on the west to San Leandro Boulevard on the east, a distance of just over
two miles. Marina Boulevard is one of San Leandro’s busiest arterials,
providing essential connections between the I-880 freeway and nearby
business districts and neighborhoods, while also serving as the primary
link between Downtown and the Shoreline. The corridor is the location
of San Leandro’s largest hospital, a regional shopping center, the San
Leandro Auto Mall, and several large industrial uses. It is also the
location of some of San Leandro’s most important development
opportunities, including the 25-acre Kaiser North parcel at Marina
Boulevard/I-880.
At its western end, Marina Boulevard is a residential street, lined with
homes and apartments near the shoreline. The segment between
Neptune Drive and Doolittle Drive is relatively stable and most
structures are in good condition. There are opportunities for streetscape
improvements, including undergrounding of utilities, additional street
trees and landscaping, and sidewalk and curb repair. There are a
number of small infill sites with the potential for new development that
can improve the character of the area as a gateway to the San Leandro’s
shoreline. Rehabilitation and updating of some of the older “motel-
style” apartment buildings west of Aurora Drive should be pursued.
At Doolittle Drive, the corridor becomes commercial, with a gas station,
a fast food restaurant, a small supermarket, and a shopping strip with
local-serving uses (Marina Center) on the corner. The block extending
from Doolittle east to the Union Pacific Railroad tracks includes a mix of
unrelated commercial uses, including several restaurants, a sports bar,
small offices, and local service businesses. There are also several small
apartment buildings and homes here. This block provides a transition
between the industrial area to the east and residential area to the west. It
would benefit from façade and other property improvements, signage
and streetscape improvements, and a redesign of the street to include
wider sidewalks and bring more cohesion to adjacent properties.
Between the railroad and Merced Street, the landscape becomes
industrial. The pattern of parcels, structures, and parking areas changes
here, with much larger properties, large footprint industrial buildings,
and substantial areas used for open storage and outdoor operations.
Most of the north side of the street is occupied by Georgia Pacific/
Gypsum LLC and International Paper, while the south side includes
                                                                                                                 3-131

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          warehousing and distribution facilities, a Caltrans Service Center, mini-
                                          warehouses, and a small industrial park on Verna Court. Higher-value
                                          commercial uses, including banks and restaurants, and small office
                                          buildings, are located at the Merced/Marina intersection.
                                          The section of Marina Boulevard between the Union Pacific Railroad and
                                          Merced Street has been designated as “Industrial Transition” on the
                                          General Plan Map. This designation allows existing industrial uses to
                                          continue operating under similar zoning rules as they have had in the
                                          past, while creating opportunities for new uses that capitalize on the
                                          location of this corridor as a major connector between I-880 and the
                                          Shoreline. The value of improvements on some of these properties is
                                          quite low, while land values are high, creating conditions favorable for
                                          redevelopment.
                                          The corridor is envisioned as a possible location for professional and/or
                                          medical offices, retail uses, restaurants, hotels, as well as higher value
                                          industrial and tech uses. Housing is not considered an appropriate use
                                          in this area, nor along Merced Street between the Bonaire and Davis
                                          West neighborhoods. Ideally, future uses will take advantage of the LIT
                                          San Leandro fiber optic network, and bring high quality jobs to the city.
                                          The transformation of the corridor is expected to be gradual. Public
                                          investment in streetscape and landscaping improvements can help
                                          facilitate private investment.
3-132

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
East of Merced Street, the 25-acre vacant site north of Kaiser Permanente
Hospital presents a significant retail opportunity. The Draft EIR for the
Kaiser project presumed the site would develop with at least 387,000
square foot of retail space. Space for additional development exists,
including additional retail space, a hotel, or a similar commercial use.
Mixed use housing (e.g., above retail or office) also has been discussed as
a development component, and would be allowed by the General
Commercial land use designation.
The objectives for the Kaiser North site are to bring new retail
opportunities to residents and employees in Western San Leandro, build
a comprehensively planned and integrated retail destination, provide
jobs, create a pedestrian and bicycle friendly environment, and maximize
sales and property tax revenue. The shopping center is also seen as a
catalyst for the revitalization of the western Marina Boulevard corridor.
Both large single tenant uses and smaller multi-tenant retailers are
encouraged here. Larger buildings should be located nearer to the
freeway, with architectural elements and massing used to minimize the
freeway’s presence on the interior of the complex.
The Kaiser Permanente Medical Center itself is expected to continue to
expand during the lifetime of the General Plan. The new complex
currently includes a 436,000 square foot (264 bed) hospital and 275,000
square foot hospital support building, as well as parking and utility
areas. Future phases may add 375,000 square feet of space, including a
175,000 square foot (120 bed) hospital expansion and two 100,000 square
foot office buildings, along with a parking structure. However, Kaiser’s
Development Agreement provides the flexibility for other uses in lieu of
medical offices, including retail and commercial activities.
                                                                                                                3-133

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          To the east of I-880 and west of Alvarado Street, the existing land use
                                          pattern along Marina Boulevard is fairly well established. Marina
                                          Square will be retained and improved as a retail destination, while
                                          adjacent properties will be sustained as the city’s Auto Mall. More
                                          intensive job- or sales-generating activities on some of the larger sites
                                          could be considered in the future.
                                          East of Alvarado Street, there are a number of development
                                          opportunities. On the north side of Marina Boulevard, there is a fast
                                          food restaurant and a 6-acre vacant light industrial site with frontage on
                                          Marina Boulevard, extending north to Castro Street. On the south side of
                                          Marina Boulevard, there are commercial infill development
                                          opportunities adjacent to the railroad. Again, this is a major gateway
                                          and transition zone between the Marina corridor and Downtown San
                                          Leandro.       High-quality architecture, signage, landscaping, and
                                          streetscape features are desired to create a more attractive environment,
                                          with retail frontage along Marina.
                                          Alvarado Street north of Marina includes a number of deep, narrow
                                          parcels with a mix of residential and industrial uses. This mixed
                                          industrial-residential pattern also extends along Castro Street and
                                          Williams Street. Single family homes sit side by side with automotive
                                          repair shops, metal foundries, and similar uses in this area, with little or
                                          no buffering. Most of the homes in this area date from the early 20th
                                          century, and some are in poor condition. The commercial and industrial
                                          uses are generally concrete block buildings or metal barns with few
                                          architectural details. Along the railroad, substantial areas are used for
                                          the storage of wood palettes, scrap items, and vehicles. Although many
                                          of the businesses are viable, the area conveys a negative visual
                                          impression.
3-134

                                                                                 S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                              L A N D U S E
Future development in the Alvarado Street corridor (between Marina
Boulevard and Williams Street) should phase out the land use conflicts
that now exist and improve overall visual quality. The older homes
could be restored, converted to offices, or relocated to more suitable
sites. Replacement of blighted industrial structures with more attractive
and well landscaped buildings will be encouraged. As in the area closer
to BART, new uses that take advantage of the BART station’s proximity,
consolidate small parcels, and improve land utilization should be
promoted.
Please consult the following policies and actions for additional guidance on the
Marina Boulevard Corridor: Action LU-7.6.C (Marina Boulevard West), Policy
LU-7.12 (Alvarado St), Policy 8.12 (Marina Blvd Corridor), Action 8.12-A
(Estabrook St), and Policy LU-9.5(Gateway Improvements).
G.        MACARTHUR CORRIDOR
MacArthur Boulevard extends from the Oakland border south for
approximately a mile on San Leandro’s northeast side. During the first
half of the 1900s, MacArthur was the primary highway linking the
Central East Bay with the Livermore Valley and points east. Some of the
automotive businesses and storefronts along the street are remnants of
that era.
Construction of the I-580 freeway in the 1960s changed the character and
function of the street and rendered many uses along MacArthur
obsolete. Bypassed by Interstate 580, the northern half-mile of the street
experienced a period of general decline and disinvestment. The southern
half-mile became a freeway frontage road, with commercial uses along
the west side and an engineered freeway wall on the east. In both areas,
the variable condition of the commercial areas stands in contrast with
adjacent residential neighborhoods, which have retained their
consistently high quality. The MacArthur Corridor is the primary local
commercial area serving Bay-O-Vista, Broadmoor, and Estudillo Estates,
San Leandro’s highest-income neighborhoods.
Plans for revitalizing the corridor date back to the 1980s. In 1991, the
City adopted the North Area Plan, including land use recommendations
for MacArthur Boulevard. A decade later, the City adopted a MacArthur
Streetscape Plan, identifying improvements to make the street more
pedestrian-friendly, and stimulate revitalization of the commercial areas.
The improvements were subsequently implemented and a number of
                                                                                                                     3-135

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                            properties were upgraded. Between 2000 and 2010,
                                                            residential infill projects were constructed on several
                                                            sites, including Cherry Park Square and Greenbrier
                                                            Court (former Evergreen Nursery).
                                                            The vision for the corridor laid out in the North Area
                                                            Plan is now 25 years old and should be revisited. Some
                                                            aspects may still be relevant, while others need
                                                            updating. An action item in this General Plan calls for
                                                            an updated study of development opportunities and
                                                            plans for MacArthur, based on community input and a
                                                            more careful assessment of existing conditions and
                                                            market demand.         The General Plan provides a
                                                            framework to begin that process.
                                                            At the present time, the land use pattern between
                                                            Dutton and Joaquin Avenues is fairly well established.
                                                            There may be opportunities to modernize some of the
                                                            individual properties along this segment, encourage
                                                            more active ground floor retail uses, and update the
                                                            Rite-Aid Shopping Center. Opportunities to make San
                                                            Leandro Creek a more evident and accessible feature of
                                                            the landscape in this area should be explored. The
                                                            remaining streetscape improvements should be
                                                            completed as planned.
                                          The segment of the corridor between Dutton and Superior Avenue is
                                          most problematic, due to the location of I-580 off-ramps and frontage
                                          roads, and the numerous angled intersections with north-south
                                          residential streets. The blocks in this area contain churches, small office
                                          buildings, single story retail stores built to the streetfront, and auto
                                          service uses. A number of the commercial buildings are vacant or
                                          underutilized. Efforts to revitalize businesses on this section of the
                                          corridor should be continued.          This segment is best suited for
                                          commercial uses with low traffic generation and parking demand, given
                                          access and site constraints. Reconfiguration of the intersection at
                                          MacArthur Boulevard and Superior Avenue is planned.
                                          The segment between Superior Avenue and Durant Avenue holds the
                                          greatest potential for improvement.            Streetscape improvements,
                                          including curb extensions and bike lanes, have been added to encourage
                                          reinvestment. There is a large amount of underutilized land in the
                                          triangle block formed by Foothill, MacArthur, and Victoria. This area
3-136
                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
has the potential for townhomes, multi-family housing, or mixed use
development with housing above retail uses facing MacArthur. Several
small parcels on the segment between Victoria and Broadmoor are
vacant or contain vacant storefronts with the potential for new uses.
Retail, office, mixed use, and other commercial uses would all be
appropriate here. Entirely residential projects also are acceptable on
these blocks.
The short block between Broadmoor Boulevard and Durant Avenue is
especially well suited for more active sidewalk-facing retail uses,
restaurants, and local services, given the existing building pattern and
urban form. This is also a major gateway into San Leandro.
New construction along the northern MacArthur corridor should create
more cohesion between buildings, close the gaps in the street wall, and
be sympathetic to the area’s historic form and scale. The goal is to create
a “Main Street” environment in which people can comfortably walk to
businesses and shops. Updated design guidelines should be prepared
and implemented as new development takes place.
Please consult Policy LU-8.11 and related action LU-8.11.A for additional
guidance on the MacArthur Corridor.
                                                                                                                3-137

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          H.       MID-WASHINGTON CORRIDOR
                                          Washington Avenue stretches more than three miles from the
                                          Downtown San Leandro Plaza south to San Lorenzo Creek. The street
                                          was initially developed in the 1850s as a plank road linking San Leandro
                                          to a wharf in San Lorenzo. It later became a major thoroughfare between
                                          the north and south sides of the City and is now the primary gateway
                                          into Downtown from the Floresta and Washington Manor areas.
                                          Although the entire length of the street warrants close attention, the
                                          Focus Area is limited to the roughly one mile section between San
                                          Leandro Boulevard and Halcyon Drive (“Mid-Washington”). More than
                                          any other part of the street, this section has the greatest potential for
                                          change and the most extensive opportunities for improvement.
                                          This section of Washington Avenue is presently characterized by a mix
                                          of commercial services, light industrial uses, and two major industrial
                                          anchor sites— Ghirardelli Chocolate on the north and the soon to be
                                          vacated Kraft/ Heinz on the south. Existing uses on the corridor include
                                          a trucking company, brick and stone sales, marine supplies, RV rentals, a
                                          furniture store, mini-warehouses, a lumberyard, a commercial print
                                          shop, and several auto body and paint shops. Mid-Washington is
                                          particularly important as an automotive services district, with many auto
                                          parts, repair, body shop, and service businesses clustering in this
                                          location. The area functions well as a location for commercial services
                                          that would not be appropriate Downtown, in neighborhood shopping
                                          centers, and along the city’s mixed use boulevards.
3-138

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
Despite its functionality, the Mid-Washington corridor would benefit
from reinvestment and aesthetic improvements. The street handles high
traffic volumes and serves as a major connector and city gateway. North
of 143rd Avenue, travel lanes have been reduced and the street has been
improved with bike lanes, medians, landscaping, and newer utility
poles. South of 143rd, the street is more utilitarian and there have been
few improvements in the last 20 years.
The southern end of the corridor is home to a 27-acre Kraft/Heinz food
processing facility. In 2015, Kraft announced the facility would be
closing, leading to the loss of 130 jobs. While there are no pending plans
for the site, future uses should aim for more economically productive
activities. This is one of San Leandro’s largest industrial properties and
its current employment density (less than 5 employees per acre) is far
less than it could be. Future options could include reuse of the existing
facility, replacement of the facility with new industrial, office, or tech
uses, or replacement with an entirely new use that would require a
General Plan Amendment. Further study and community input may be
necessary to evaluate options for the site.
A variety of zoning districts apply in the Mid-Washington corridor. The
zoning pattern does not appear particularly logical given the mix of uses,
and contributes to the eclectic character of the area. The “core” parcels
between the railroad underpass and the active Union Pacific tracks were
historically zoned Community Commercial, despite a prior General Plan
designation of Light Industrial. The 2035 General Plan applies an
Industrial Transition designation to these properties, recognizing the
existing pattern and accommodating a diverse mix of uses in the future.
The area may continue on its current path as a heavy commercial area, or
                                                                                                               3-139

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          it may trend toward technology, light industrial, or higher value
                                          commercial uses. Housing is not considered an appropriate use on the
                                          corridor due to the potential for conflicts with industrial uses and the
                                          ingress and egress constraints along the street.
                                          Improving the corridor’s visual quality and continuity should remain a
                                          priority. Design standards should ensure that new buildings are
                                          attractively designed and landscaped, and that outdoor storage areas are
                                          well screened. Additional public improvements, such as tree planting,
                                          banners, billboard removal, landscaping, and the undergrounding or
                                          redesign of utilities should also be pursued here. Marketing of this area
                                          as a distinct business district themed around particular products (auto,
                                          construction, food processing, furniture, etc.) is also encouraged. Given
                                          the proximity to residential areas, new activities that generate large
                                          amounts of truck traffic should be discouraged here.
                                          The proposed East Bay Greenway crosses the northern part of this
                                          corridor, using the Union Pacific Railroad right of way. This is one of the
                                          few grade-separated crossings in San Leandro, and its conversion to a
                                          bikeway and greenbelt creates intriguing possibilities for Mid-
                                          Washington. The trail could remain as a ”bridge” over Washington,
                                          with bicycle and pedestrian connections added to reach Washington
                                          Avenue on each side. Alternately, the “tunnel” could be removed, a
                                          grade-level crossing could be established, and Washington could be
                                          reconfigured as a boulevard. While this approach would be more
                                                                                  expensive and perhaps less
                                                                                  desirable for bicycle connectivity,
                                                                                  it would significantly change the
                                                                                  character of Washington as it
                                                                                  approaches        San     Leandro
                                                                                  Boulevard and create new
                                                                                  development and investment
                                                                                  opportunities on adjacent sites.
                                                                                  Continued study of alternatives
                                                                                  is recommended.
                                                                                  See Policy LU-7.11 for additional
                                                                                  guidance on the Mid-Washington
                                                                                  Avenue corridor.
3-140

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
BEYOND THE CITY LIMITS:
SAN LEANDRO’S
PLANNING AREA
A.        OVERVIEW
Development outside the City limits has the potential to significantly
affect San Leandro neighborhoods and business districts. This is
especially true in the area sometimes referred to as “unincorporated San
Leandro,” located east and southeast of the City. Many residents and
businesses in this area—which includes Ashland, Hillcrest Knolls, the
County Hospital complex, and a small portion of Castro Valley—have
San Leandro addresses and use San Leandro services and community
facilities.
The Alameda County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO)—
the County Commission charged with reviewing proposals for
annexation— has designated these communities as San Leandro’s sphere
of influence. The sphere is defined by the California Government Code as
the “probable ultimate physical boundaries and service area” of a city.
Cities are empowered by the State to consider these areas and other
unincorporated areas that bear relation to the city’s future in their
general plans. In theory, this provides cities with a means of shaping the
future of areas they will eventually annex.
The inclusion of Ashland and western Castro Valley in San Leandro’s
sphere dates back to the early 1960s when the Alameda County LAFCO
was first created. At that time, San Leandro was operating under a
General Plan that called for the annexation of more than four square
miles to the east and southeast of Bayfair Center (then known as Bayfair
Mall). The 1958 General Plan envisioned City limits that would
eventually extend south beyond Highway 238 to Hayward, and nearly as
far east as the present-day Castro Valley BART Station. More than 41,000
residents were ultimately envisioned for this area.
                                                                                                               3-141

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                                           Figure 3-7
                                          Unincorporated San Leandro Planning Area
3-142
                                                                                 S A N  L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                               L A N D U S E
                                               In A Nutshell...
                        The Unincorporated San Leandro Planning Area
The San Leandro Planning Area includes three-square miles of unincorporated Alameda County located
to the east and southeast of the City. Although this area is beyond the City limits, its development has the
potential to affect San Leandro neighborhoods and business districts.
State law provides the City with the authority to advise the County on its vision for this area through the
General Plan. Accordingly, this section of the General Plan establishes the following objectives:
 Work collaboratively with the City of Oakland and Alameda County to address land use,
    transportation, public safety, and other issues of mutual concern along and beyond the San Leandro
    City boundaries.
 Implement Measure D (November 2000) Urban Growth Boundary requirements.
 Participate in the review of development and capital improvement proposals for the San Leandro
    sphere of influence, including Ashland, Hillcrest Knolls, Fairmont Ridge, the County Hospital, and
    western Castro Valley.
 Support the continued improvement and beautification of the Ashland District, particularly along East
    14th Street.
 Revitalize the County portion of the Bay Fair TOD area to complement the City’s portion and ensure
    that the area functions as a unified and cohesive transit-oriented district.
 Maintain Fairmont Ridge as open space, conserving its unique ecological features while minimizing
    wildfire hazards and supporting passive recreational improvements such as trails.
 Actively participate in long-range planning for the County Hospital properties.
 Conserve the rural-residential character of the Hillcrest Knolls area.
 Promote the preservation of historic resources in the Four Corners area (northeast of Lewelling and
    Hesperian).
                                                                                                                      3-143

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          For a variety of reasons, these areas were never annexed and continued
                                          to develop under the jurisdiction of Alameda County. Most public
                                          services, including planning and building, are still provided by the
                                          County today. Special districts provide community services such as
                                          wastewater treatment and education. The area has grown steadily over
                                          the past 40 years, transforming from a semi-rural area of greenhouses,
                                          nurseries, and postwar subdivisions into a more urban and diverse
                                          community. In 2015, Ashland had a population of about 23,000, while
                                          the portion of the sphere east of I-580 had a population of less than 5,000.
                                          The communities comprising the San Leandro sphere of influence are
                                          shown in Figure 3-7. The sphere boundary has been amended only once
                                          since 1963, when a portion of Castro Valley was removed in 2002.
                                          Although San Leandro has no plans to annex Ashland or western Castro
                                          Valley, these areas remain of interest to the City.
                                          The following sections of the Plan identify the City’s current concerns
                                          and strategies for unincorporated San Leandro. Because primary
                                          planning authority in these areas rests with the County, the discussion is
                                          more generalized than that for land within the City limits. The Alameda
                                          County General Plan, along with the County Area Plans and Specific
                                          Plans that cover these areas, should be consulted for further information
                                          and guidance.
3-144

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                        L A N D U S E
Figure 3-8 presents the Land Use Plan for the San Leandro sphere of
influence. The Plan reflects the County designations depicted in the Eden
Area Plan (for Ashland), the Castro Valley Area Plan (for Hillcrest
Knolls, the Fairmont Campus, and Western Castro Valley), and the
Ashland-Cherryland Business District Specific Plan. Most of the General
Plan designations for these areas reinforce existing patterns of land use.
The emphasis is on infill and redevelopment rather than outward
expansion of the urbanized area. No changes to the County’s
designations have been proposed by the City.
The City has no planning jurisdiction over unincorporated San Lorenzo
or the City of Oakland. However, development in these areas may
impact San Leandro as much (or even more) than development in the
City’s sphere of influence. The Cities of San Leandro and Oakland have
been working for several years to address issues of mutual concern,
strengthen the bonds between the two communities, and jointly plan for
areas along their common borders. These collaborations should continue
in the future.
B.       ASHLAND
The unincorporated community of Ashland occupies the triangular-
shaped area bordered by Hesperian Boulevard / Bayfair Center on the
west, San Lorenzo Creek on the south, and I-580 on the east. The
community’s lot and block pattern reflects its origins as an agricultural
center. Many of the parcels were initially subdivided as small farms,
orchards, and nurseries in the 1920s. With the completion of freeways
in the 1950s and 1960s, the area became more suburban in character.
Some of the housing consists of 1950s-era tracts similar to those in San
Lorenzo and Washington Manor. Other parts of the area were
developed to County standards, with large lots, narrow streets, and no
sidewalks or curbs. Some of the older housing is in poor condition and is
in need of rehabilitation.
Ashland also has several large pockets of higher density housing. Two
and three-story apartment blocks, many dating from the 1960s, are
located east of East 14th Street between 159th and 165 th Avenues. Pockets
of higher density housing also exist along Ashland Avenue and San
Lorenzo Creek. The quality of this housing is extremely variable. The
City of San Leandro is particularly interested in County programs that
improve blighted residential properties and address safety and security
issues in Ashland.
                                                                                                               3-145

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                                       Figure 3-8
                                          Unincorporated Area Land Use Diagram
3-146
                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
Commercial uses in Ashland are generally located along East 14th Street
and Lewelling Boulevard. The East 14th “strip” includes a large number
of car dealerships and auto service uses, while Lewelling contains a mix
of retail, service, office, and residential uses. Some of the commercial
properties are vacant or underutilized and have been identified by the
County as infill development sites.
The Ashland area includes San Lorenzo High School, a handful of
elementary schools, parks and public uses, and a few light industrial
uses along the Union Pacific railroad. Ashland also includes the original
center of Eden Township, located to the northeast of Lewelling and
Hesperian Boulevards (“Four Corners”). Although little remains of the
old town, there are a number of homes dating from around 1900 as well
as a historic cemetery and church. Preservation of these resources and
additional recognition of their historic significance would be desirable
and would complement San Leandro’s own historic preservation efforts.
A General Plan for the Eden Area, which includes Ashland, was adopted
by Alameda County in 2005. The Plan is intended to guide land use and
development decisions through 2025. The Eden Area Plan also covers
San Lorenzo, Hayward Acres, and Cherryland, which are not in the San
Leandro sphere of influence.
An update of the Eden Area Plan was completed in 2009, including
changes to ensure consistency with the County Housing Element. The
Plan aims to increase livability, provide diverse housing choices, create a
comprehensive transportation network, and expand park and recreation
resources. ABAG’s projections for unincorporated Ashland indicate a
gain of approximately 1,900 households and 2,900 jobs in the area
between 2010 and 2040. Most of this development will occur along the
East 14th Street/ Mission Boulevard corridor.
The Eden General Plan designates most of Ashland for residential uses.
Most of the area south and west of the BART line is designated as Low
Density Residential (0-9 units per acre). Low-Medium densities (7-12
units per acre) are mapped along 150th Avenue and Fairmont Drive, and
along Ashland Avenue. Much of the area east of East 14th Street from
Mono Avenue eastward to 168th Avenue, is designated for Medium
Density Residential, with densities between 10 and 22 units per acre.
The highest allowable densities are located on the unincorporated
portion of the Bay Fair BART parking lot, where 86 units per acre is
permitted.
                                                                                                                3-147

S A N L E A N D R O  G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                                           In a Nutshell…
                                          Making Ashland A Healthier Community
              Alameda County recently expanded the County General Plan to specifically address public health
              conditions in Ashland and Cherryland. Data from the Census and the County Health Department
              indicates that this area has higher rates of poverty, obesity, heart disease, asthma, and early mortality
              than other parts of Alameda County. In December 2015, the County Board of Supervisors adopted
              a Health and Wellness Element for Ashland and Cherryland. The Element identifies goals, policies,
              and actions to address how land use and building policies can support health, social equity, and
              environmental justice within these communities.
              The Health and Wellness Element is based on principles of equity, accountability, collaboration,
              diverse participation, and the development of local assets. It includes a profile of resident health in
              the Ashland area and a capacity evaluation of the service delivery system. Its policies and actions are
              organized under ten broad goals addressing health and social services, public safety, land use and
              housing, exposure to toxins, substance abuse, economic opportunity, safe transportation and transit,
              healthy food access, parks, and sustainability.
3-148

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                         L A N D U S E
A “General Commercial” corridor has been mapped along East 14 th
Street, and on most of Lewelling Boulevard. However, large portions of
Lewellling Boulevard east of Ashland Avenue are designated for multi-
family housing. Residential “overlays” have been adopted for the
commercial corridors to encourage housing as a secondary use above
commercial buildings. The Plan aims to strengthen the intersection of
East 14th Street and Ashland Avenue as a “district,” and also revitalize
the Four Corners area at Hesperian and Lewelling, immediately adjacent
to San Leandro.
Ashland is also covered by a Specific Plan for the Ashland and
Cherryland Business District adopted by Alameda County in 2015. The
Specific Plan supplements the Eden Area General Plan by providing an
updated Development Code, an infrastructure plan, a mobility and
parking plan, and an implementation and financing plan for specific
improvements. The Plan covers a 246-acre area roughly encompassing
East 14th Street/Mission Boulevard between San Leandro and Hayward,
and Lewelling Boulevard between Hesperian and Mission Boulevards.
The purpose of the Specific Plan is to foster economic revitalization on
the corridor and provide a framework for public and private
improvements. The Plan envisions the corridor as a place for higher
intensity uses, with improved edge conditions where these uses
transition to adjacent single family neighborhoods.
The Specific Plan includes guidelines and prescriptive standards for a
number of sub-areas, several of which abut San Leandro. These include
the Bay Fair Corridor, which extends from 150th Avenue (e.g., the San
Leandro city limits) east to 159th Avenue; and the Four Corners District,
which is located on the east side of Hesperian south of Highway 238. A
vision has been developed for each area, focused on the redevelopment
of key opportunity sites, pedestrian and bicycle improvements, and
public realm improvements.
On the Bay Fair (East 14th) Corridor, the Specific Plan focuses on public
safety and streetscape improvements, and creation of a transit-oriented
district with buildings of up to four stories in height. The Bay Fair TOD
Specific Plan effort now underway will address land use and urban
design issues along the edges between San Leandro and Ashland in the
East 14th Street area. At Lewelling/Hesperian, the Specific Plan focuses
on commercial revitalization, envisioning the area as a retail destination.
The Plan allows buildings up to five stories in height and also allows
temporary uses of vacant parcels and structures.
                                                                                                                3-149

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          The County presently refers major development proposals or plans for
                                          the Ashland area to the City of San Leandro for review and comment.
                                          This practice should continue in the future. San Leandro is particularly
                                          interested in the impacts of proposed development on traffic and public
                                          services, including schools. Additional long-range planning by and for
                                          the Ashland community is strongly encouraged by the City.
                                          C.        HILLCREST KNOLLS/FAIRMONT RIDGE
                                          Hillcrest Knolls is a residential area of about 350 homes located adjacent
                                          to the San Leandro City limits on the east side of I-580. The population
                                          was about 1,100 in 2015. The area is characterized by narrow, winding
                                          streets, hilly terrain, and single family homes in a country setting. The
                                          area is mostly built out, with some potential for infill housing. In 2012,
                                          land use policies and maps for Hillcrest Knolls were transferred from the
                                          Eden Area General Plan to the Castro Valley Area General Plan. The
                                          area has a “Hillside Residential” General Plan designation, which allows
                                          up to 8 dwelling units per acre.
                                          Fairmont Ridge consists of a large open hillside to the east of the Bay-O-
                                          Vista neighborhood. The ridge is an important visual resource for San
                                          Leandro and provides a picturesque backdrop for much of the City.
                                          Most of the land was acquired by the East Bay Regional Park District in
                                          the early 1990s. The land is designated as open space by the County
                                          General Plan and there are no plans for additional development there.
                                          Due to its steep slopes, visual sensitivity, and ecological resources, the
                                          ridge is envisioned as a conservation area rather than an area for active
                                          recreation. The City supports plans for trails and staging areas on the
                                          site, and continued management to reduce fire hazards and protect
                                          natural resources.
                                          At the south end of Fairmont Ridge, the 204-acre County Hospital
                                          complex includes a campus of public buildings along Fairmont Drive
                                          and Foothill Boulevard. These buildings include the County Medical
                                          Center, juvenile justice center, animal shelter, maintenance facilities,
                                          traffic hearing offices, and health care and behavioral health care
                                          facilities. The County General Plan designates these areas for Public
                                          Facilities. However, much of the area is undeveloped and approximately
                                          30 percent of the land is unsuitable for structures due to its proximity to
                                          the Hayward Fault. The 2012 Castro Valley General Plan recommended
                                          that a Master Plan be prepared for the County Hospital complex to guide
                                          future building, programming, open space, and circulation decisions.
3-150

                                                                                                                                   S A N   L E A N D R O   G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                    L A N D U S E
                                                                          Reprinted through Creative Commons:
                                                                          : https://www.flickr.com/photos/42614915@N00/453599560
D.      WESTERN CASTRO VALLEY
Western Castro Valley includes the area along the east side of Interstate
580 from the County Hospital to approximately Miramar Drive. As
noted earlier, the San Leandro sphere was contracted in 2002 to eliminate
lands south of Miramar Drive. The portion of the sphere in San Leandro
includes several hundred single family homes on winding hillside
streets, offices and multi-family housing along Foothill Boulevard, and
the James Baldwin Academy School.
Land use decisions in this area are governed by the Castro Valley
General Plan, which is part of the Alameda County General Plan. A Plan
Update took place between 2004 and 2012, with maps and policies
revised to reflect the current planning context and setting. The 2012 Plan
reflects the Measure D Urban Growth Boundary and implements
Alameda County Housing Element policies.
Certain goals of the Castro Valley Plan, such as the preservation of
defining natural features, improved access to schools and parks, safer
streets, and protection of small town character, are particularly relevant
in this area. Similarly, the priorities stated in the Castro Valley Plan—
such as hillside preservation, elimination of billboards, streetscape
improvements, property maintenance, and better residential design
standards—also are relevant. Residential development potential in this
area consists mostly of vacant lots and large lots with the potential to be
divided. There are a few larger vacant sites off of Strang Avenue and
                                                                                                                                                                           3-151

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
L A N D U S E
                                          Gramercy Drive. These are designated Hillside Residential, with
                                          densities up to 8 units per acre.
                                          The City will continue to participate in the review of major development
                                          and transportation proposals in this area in the future, along with other
                                          changes that could affect services and infrastructure in San Leandro.
                                          E.       FORMER SAN LEANDRO ROCK QUARRY
                                          The former San Leandro Rock Quarry is located immediately east of the
                                          city limits on the south side of Lake Chabot Road. The Quarry was
                                          established in 1886 and provided high quality rock and construction
                                          material to communities throughout the East Bay for 100 years. In 1986,
                                          the Quarry was closed; the 58-acre site was graded and terraced, and a
                                          series of flat areas, benches, and engineered slopes was created. The
                                          portion of the site closest to the City limits was later developed as a golf
                                          driving range, while the rest of the site remained undeveloped.
                                          During the 1990s, several development proposals were made for the
                                          Quarry site, each combining single family housing and open space. The
                                          proposals generally called for single family homes on the flatter portions
                                          of the site and open space conservation on the steeper slopes. Extensive
                                          geologic investigations were made and several environmental impact
                                          reports were prepared. However, neighborhood concerns over the visual
                                          impacts of development on nearby parklands and developer concerns
                                          over geologic hazards presented obstacles to the Quarry’s reuse.
                                          In November 2000, Alameda County voters approved Measure “D.” The
                                          Measure established an Urban Growth Boundary (UGB), with strict
                                          limits on parcel sizes and land uses for properties beyond the boundary.
                                          The Rock Quarry site is located outside the UGB, limiting its potential for
                                          future development. The County General Plan designates the site for
                                          open space uses, with a corresponding Agricultural zoning designation.
                                          At this point in time, City and County General Plan Amendments and a
                                          Measure D vote would be required to permit subdivision of the site into
                                          developable parcels.
3-152

                                                                             4
                                                                             TRANSPORTATION
A.      OVERVIEW
The Transportation Element addresses the movement of people and
goods in and around San Leandro. It works in tandem with the Land Use
Element to create a more livable city, where residents can travel safely,
easily, and affordably using a variety of transportation modes.
Historically, local transportation plans focused on automobile speed and
convenience. This Plan takes a more balanced approach, looking at
additional factors such as environmental health, equity, greenhouse gas
reduction, and the quality of public space along the city’s transportation
routes. The Element is also more balanced in its treatment of each mode
of travel, with greater attention given to bicycling, walking, public
transit, and other “active” modes.
Transportation has always been an important issue in San Leandro. The
city’s location affords quick access to many of the major freeways,
bridges, transit lines, railroads, and airports serving the region. At the
same time, San Leandro’s location between the region’s major centers of
employment growth and its major centers of housing growth make it
especially vulnerable to traffic congestion. Traffic delays on the city’s
freeways continue to increase, and are projected to get worse in the
future. Regardless of San Leandro’s plans, the city will be impacted by
regional growth and cross-commuting in the years ahead.
For many years, the response to traffic congestion was to add more
capacity to the street and highway system. These improvements helped
provide mobility and spurred great economic growth in the Bay Area,
but also encouraged a land use pattern where a private automobile
became a necessity. Over the past two decades, a greater emphasis has
been placed on integrating other modes of transportation and linking
                                                                                              4-1

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          land use and transportation decisions more carefully. In San Leandro as
                                          in other cities in the East Bay, it is no longer feasible to respond to traffic
                                          simply by adding more freeway lanes or building more roads.
                                          Fundamental changes in travel patterns and habits are needed.
                                          Technology is also reshaping the way we travel.                   Smartphone
                                          applications, on-demand ride services, car-sharing, real-time congestion
                                          data, and intelligent transportation systems provide travelers with
                                          resources to get around more easily, affordably, and efficiently. Electric
                                          cars and non-gasoline powered vehicles are creating the demand for new
                                          infrastructure such as charging stations. During the time horizon of this
                                          Plan, autonomous vehicles may begin to mix with operator-driven
                                          vehicles on our roads, placing new demands on the road system. Since
                                          the full impact of such technology is unknown at this time, the
                                          Transportation Element must be fluid and flexible. Plan amendments
                                          will be needed as conditions change.
                                          Transportation is also being reshaped by environmental concerns.
                                          Adoption of the Global Warming Solutions Act (AB 32) in 2006 set in
                                          motion a chain of events that has already transformed the way California
                                          cities plan and grow. The intent of AB 32 was to proactively address
                                          global climate change by reducing statewide greenhouse gas emissions.
                                          AB 32 triggered subsequent legislation, including SB 375, which aimed to
                                          reduce emissions by coordinating land use, housing, and transportation
                                          plans. It also triggered AB 1358—the California Complete Streets Act of
                                          2008. These laws and other state policy directives have shifted the
                                          planning focus from congestion management to the reduction of vehicle
                                          miles traveled (VMT). The objective is for automobile trips to be fewer in
                                          number, shorter in length, and less impactful on the environment.
4-2

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                              T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
The concept of “complete streets” is central not only to the
Transportation Element, but to the entire San Leandro General Plan. The
idea is to design streets for all modes of travel, rather than automobiles
alone. Many San Leandro neighborhoods were designed with cul-de-
sacs and meandering streets, creating circuitous routes for pedestrians.
These neighborhoods are separated by wide streets with fast-moving
traffic, making it challenging to safely walk or bicycle around the city.
The General Plan aims to connect the city, linking neighborhoods to
Downtown, the shoreline, transit, and each other.
At the heart of the Transportation Element is a series of goals and
policies to guide transportation decisions during the years ahead. To set
the context for the goals and policies, the Element begins with a
description of transportation modes in the city. It presents traffic
forecasts for 2035, as well as a discussion of plans and programs for each
transportation mode. Although the Element’s focus is on the city’s
circulation system, several other important issues are addressed. These
include neighborhood traffic management, parking, traffic safety, and
intergovernmental coordination.
                                                                                                                      4-3

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          B.         TRANSPORTATION DEMOGRAPHICS
                                          Travel Patterns in San Leandro
                                          Based on US Census data, approximately 19.6 percent of San Leandro’s
                                          employed residents both live and work in the city. Of this total
                                          approximately 3.0 percent work from home. Relative to other cities in
                                          Alameda County, the percentage of residents who both live and work in
                                          the city is somewhat low. The figure is 44.3 percent in Oakland, 31.7
                                          percent in Fremont, 27.2 percent in Hayward, and 27.1 percent in
                                          Alameda. On the other hand, San Leandro’s figure is higher than Union
                                          City (17.1 percent) and Newark (17.0 percent). 1
                                          The remaining 80.4 percent of the city’s employed residents commute
                                          out from San Leandro to another location. Of this total, 20 percent work
                                          in Oakland, 34 percent work in another city in Alameda County, and 26
                                          percent work in another county. Major workplace destinations for San
                                          Leandro residents include Oakland, San Francisco, Fremont, Hayward,
                                          Berkeley, San Ramon, Pleasanton, and the Silicon Valley. The number of
                                          persons commuting into San Leandro for work is almost the same as the
                                          number commuting out.2 This results in a daytime population that is
                                          almost identical to the night-time population.
                                          Travel patterns in San Leandro illustrate one of the challenges of
                                          maintaining a jobs-housing balance. While the overall numbers of jobs
                                          and employed residents in the city are almost equal, there is still a large
                                          volume of commuting in and out of the city. Many factors, including the
                                          cost of housing and life circumstances, make it difficult for all of those
                                          who work in San Leandro to also live here. At the same time, San
                                          Leandro is more affordable than the Silicon Valley and San Francisco,
                                          making it an attractive choice for persons working in those cities. As a
                                          result of these dynamics, traffic volumes on Interstates 880 and 580 are
                                          high in both directions during both the morning and evening commutes,
                                          as employed residents leave and workers arrive.
                                                     1
                                                       Based on American Community Survey data for 2006-2010 on “Place of
                                          Work” (Commuter-Adjusted Daytime population). More recent data was not yet
                                          available at the time of publication of the General Plan.
                                                     2 Commuter Adjusted Daytime Population, AC 2006-2010. www.census.gov
4-4

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                             T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Mode of Travel to Work
Chart 4-1 provides information on how San Leandro residents travel to
work, based on five-year (2009-2013) data from the American
Community Survey. The data indicates that 71.7 percent of the city’s
residents drive alone to work. This is somewhat lower than the
percentages for Hayward (72 percent) and Fremont (75 percent) but
higher than the percentage for Alameda (62 percent) and Oakland (55
percent).
About 10 percent of the city’s residents carpool to work. Approximately
11 percent use public transit. About three-quarters of this number
(roughly 3,500 workers a day) use BART, with most of the remainder
(about 1,000 workers a day) using the bus.
Much smaller percentages of residents walk or bicycle to work. The
combined total of pedestrian and bicycle commuters was 2.4 percent of
the city’s employed residents in 2009-2013. While the number has
increased since 2000, it is still a small fraction of the total, with
substantial potential for growth.
CHART 4-1: MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION TO WORK FOR EMPLOYED SAN LEANDRO RESIDENTS
  35000
             29195
  30000
  25000
  20000
  15000
  10000
                        4154        4579
   5000
                                               92        250     753     449        1233
       0
          Drive Alone Carpool     Transit   Motorcycle Bicycle  Walk    Other    Worked at
                                                                                   Home
Source: American Community Survey, 2009-2013
                                                                                                                     4-5

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L      P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                  Vehicle Ownership
                                                  Most San Leandro households own two or more vehicles. Data from the
                                                  US Census indicates that only four percent of the city’s households have
                                                  no vehicle at all, while about 20 percent own just one vehicle. About 39
                                                  percent of the city’s households own two vehicles and 37 percent have
                                                  three vehicles or more.
                                                  The data is similar to cities such as Hayward and Fremont, where nearly
                                                  40 percent of all households have three or more vehicles. However, the
                                                  percentage of households with two or more vehicles is substantially
                                                  higher in San Leandro than it is in Alameda (25 percent) and Oakland (22
                                                  percent). Similarly, the percentage of “car-free” households in San
                                                  Leandro is higher than in Fremont or Hayward, but about half of what it
                                                  is in Oakland.
                                                  This data is displayed graphically in Chart 4-2.
                            CHART 4-2: VEHICLES OWNED PER HOUSEHOLD IN SAN LEANDRO
                                                            5+ vehicles          No vehicle
                                                                 4%                 4%
                                                            4 vehicles
                                                                9%
                                                                                  One vehicle
                                                                                     20%
                                                      3 vehicles
                                                         24%
                                                                          Two vehicles
                                                                               39%
                           Source: American Community Survey, 2009-2013
4-6

                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                            T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Commute Length and Timing
The American Community Survey (2009-2013)
indicates that 48 percent of the city’s employed
residents have a commute of 25 minutes or less.3
This is similar to nearby cities, including Oakland
(50 percent), Alameda (48 percent), Hayward (46
percent),      and       Fremont         (43     percent).
Approximately 20 percent of San Leandro’s
employed residents have a commute length of less
than 15 minutes. Conversely, 11 percent have a
commute of one hour or more.
C.       TRANSPORTATION AND
         LAND USE
One of the overarching objectives of the General
Plan is to recognize the link between
transportation and land use. This includes
encouraging more compact development around
transit stations and major bus lines, integrating a
variety of land uses within new projects, and
ensuring that the urban environment is designed
first and foremost for people rather than cars.
Integrating land use and transportation also means that long-range
development plans should reflect traffic conditions on the City’s road
network and the possibilities to divert auto trips to other modes at
congested locations. Where roadway capacity cannot be increased, a
number of options can be considered. The first is to limit the amount of
potential new development in these areas through zoning and other
development regulations. The second is to improve provisions for other
modes of travel, such as buses and bicycles. The third is to accept a
higher level of congestion, recognizing that other public benefits—such
as jobs and housing—may be provided. In the third case, the choice
must reflect the context of the site. Congestion may be more acceptable
in the middle of downtown than at a crossroads in the industrial area.
         3
           Excludes residents working from home.
                                                                                                                    4-7

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          The reality is that all three of these options are applied in planning for
                                          San Leandro’s transportation system. Future development intensities
                                          will be limited in the industrial areas, residential areas, and shopping
                                          districts away from the BART stations and major bus lines. Shuttle
                                          buses, Bus Rapid Transit (BRT), and other forms of mass transit will be
                                          expanded to meet increased demand, and a larger share of the
                                          population is expected to walk or bicycle to work, shopping, and
                                          services. The City also recognizes that increased congestion is inevitable,
                                          given the forecasted population and employment growth in the region
                                          and the limited ability to expand the freeway system. Even if San
                                          Leandro adds no jobs or households in the future, the Bay Area is still
                                          projected to add almost 2 million residents in the next 25 years,
                                          increasing travel demand.
                                          The commitment to integrated land use and transportation planning is
                                          particularly important around the BART Stations and along East 14 th
                                          Street. These areas have been planned to maximize opportunities for
                                          future transit use. In each case, a combination of office, residential, retail,
                                          and open space uses is planned, to facilitate walking, bicycling, and
                                          access to the bus and BART system.
                                          Some of the specific ways in which the land use and transportation
                                          connection is recognized in the General Plan are highlighted in the box
                                          on the following page.
4-8

                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                   T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                    Integrating Land Use and Transportation Planning
The San Leandro General Plan integrates land use and transportation planning in the following ways:
To ensure that transit-accessible land is efficiently used, the Plan includes:
   Designation of Priority Development Areas (PDAs) at the BART stations and along the East 14 th
    Street corridor.
   Transit-oriented development land use designations around the Downtown BART station and the
    Bay Fair BART station. The designations encourage a mix of office, commercial, and high-density
    residential uses, integrated with plazas and open spaces.
   Minimum density requirements for housing around the Downtown BART station and along major
    transit corridors such as East 14th Street.
   Guidelines to encourage pedestrian-oriented design around BART, Downtown, and along transit
    corridors.
   Policies to locate new public facilities along transit routes.
To ensure that development reflects road capacity constraints, the Plan includes:
   Variable level of service standards, with more congestion deemed acceptable around BART and in
    Downtown and less congestion deemed acceptable in other parts of the city.
   Siting of regional commercial uses around freeway interchanges rather than in neighborhoods or
    industrial districts.
   Requirements to re-assess parking needs when older industrial buildings are converted to higher
    intensity uses such as offices.
To improve the transportation system to respond to the Land Use Plan, the Plan includes:
   Improved transit service to support planned higher density housing, including Bus Rapid Transit.
   Implementation of a Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan, including new bike lanes and walkways and
    improved safety features.
   Development of a major regional biking and walking trail along a former railroad right-of-way.
   Complete streets policies and design standards that facilitate non-auto travel.
   Periodic review of the Development Fee for Street Improvements (DFSI) to ensure that it
    adequately covers the cost of needed improvements.
To reduce the amount of traffic generated by new development, the Plan includes:
   A commitment to balance job growth and housing growth to avoid the need for regional cross-
    commuting.
   Incentives for employers to participate in BART shuttle services, and to develop ridesharing,
    carpooling, and flextime programs.
   Opportunities for live-work and mixed use development to reduce commute hour traffic and
    shorten trip lengths.
   Promotion of business services, restaurants and other employee-serving uses in industrial areas to
    reduce the need for long trips during the workday.
                                                                                                                           4-9

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          D.       MOVING TOWARD COMPLETE
                                                   STREETS
                                          The Complete Streets Act of 2008 (AB 1358) requires local jurisdictions to
                                          adopt policies which provide for the needs of all road users, including
                                          pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit riders as well as motorists. Since 2011,
                                          any California county or city that undertakes a substantive update of the
                                          circulation element of its general plan has been required to incorporate
                                          “complete streets” policies and programs.
                                          Caltrans has also issued directives to plan for the needs of travelers of all
                                          ages and abilities. This includes specific provisions for roadway design,
                                          construction, operations, and maintenance.            Other agencies have
                                          adopted similar policies and standards.                 The Metropolitan
                                          Transportation Commission (MTC) requires all projects receiving
                                          federal, state, or bridge toll funds to plan for the accommodation of
                                          bicycles and pedestrians. The Alameda County Transportation
                                          Commission requires all jurisdictions receiving local Measure B sales tax
                                          funds to have an adopted complete streets policy.
                                          San Leandro adopted such a policy on February 4, 2013. The policy
                                          promotes safe and convenient travel for all persons while recognizing
                                          community context and integrating community goals. In 2016, San
                                          Leandro was also participating in a study with Hayward and Alameda
                                          County to plan for complete streets throughout Central Alameda
                                          County. Design guidelines, street typologies, and checklists are likely to
                                          be produced through this study. Redesign of several major streets may
                                          be recommended through this process.
4-10

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                              T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
The idea behind “complete streets” is that it should be safe and easy for
all persons, regardless of age, ability, or income, to travel safely using
any mode of travel. Since San Leandro’s street system is already in
place, some streets will need to be retrofitted and redesigned over time
so they better accommodate pedestrians, bicycles, and transit. There is
no singular design approach to creating a complete street—the concept is
based on the idea that each street is unique and has its own community
context. In San Leandro, creating a complete street usually involves
improving sidewalks and curb cuts, adding a bike lane or wider
shoulder, and introducing elements such as special bus lanes, median
islands, accessible push-button signals, curb extensions (“bulb-outs”)
and similar improvements.
Redesigning streets to meet the needs of all travelers will increase
mobility while also promoting health and wellness. Walking and
bicycling are generally described as “active” transportation, because they
involve some level of exercise and physical movement. Complete streets
can make the city healthier, by encouraging heart-healthy travel and
reducing obesity at the same time they reduce road hazards. Complete
streets also improve road efficiency and capacity, by focusing on the
movement of people rather than cars.
Of course, not all San Leandro streets will be redesigned in the next 20
years. Most local streets have low volumes and are already relatively
safe for all modes of travel. The focus of improvements will be
Downtown, the BART station areas, the East 14th Street corridor, and
major collectors and arterials around the city.
E.       TRAVEL MODES
Bicycling and Walking
San Leandro encourages bicycling and walking as practical means of
transportation as well as a form of recreation. The city offers many
qualities favorable to both activities, including flat terrain, temperate
climate, and attractive scenery. Obstacles to bicycling and walking
include heavy traffic, poor pavement, narrow streets, the absence of
shade trees and sidewalks, and the lack of convenient, direct access
routes to major destinations. The City has made considerable progress
since adopting its first Bikeway Plan almost 20 years ago. Continued
                                                                                                                     4-11

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                         planning, funding and implementation efforts will further
                                                         improve local facilities.
                                                         Bikeway Plan
                                                         San Leandro’s most recent Bicycle and Pedestrian Master
                                                         Plan (BPMP) was adopted in 2011. The Plan contains an
                                                         assessment of existing conditions for bicyclists and
                                                         pedestrians and provides recommendations for biking and
                                                         walking facilities, the interface between bicyclists and
                                                         transit, and related programs. The Plan establishes the
                                                         following nine goals:
                                                                  Support bicycling and walking and the
                                                         development of a comprehensive bicycle and pedestrian
                                                         transportation system as a viable alternative to the
                                                         automobile.
                                                                  Implement bicycle and pedestrian improvements
                                                         maximizing the amount of funding for which San Leandro
                                                         is eligible.
                                                                  Develop a bicycle system that meets the needs of
                                                         utilitarian and recreation users, helps reduce vehicle trips,
                                                         and links residential neighborhoods with local and
                                              regional destinations.
                                             Create a well-connected pedestrian environment by improving the
                                              walkability of all streets in San Leandro through the planning,
                                              implementing, and maintaining of pedestrian supportive
                                              infrastructure that meets the needs of all users.
                                             Maximize bicycle and pedestrian access to transit.
                                             Improve bicycle and pedestrian safety.
                                             Develop detailed bicycle and pedestrian improvements.
                                             Raise awareness of the benefits of walking and biking by developing
                                              a coordinated public outreach strategy to encourage bicycling and
                                              walking.
                                             Develop land use policies and development standards that promote
                                              bicycling and walking for utilitarian and recreation trips.
                                          The planned bikeway network is shown in Figure 4-1. The network
                                          identifies three types of bicycling facilities:
4-12

S A N   L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                     T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                        Bicycle Network
                           Figure 4-1
                                                          4-13
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                             Class I bikeways (bike paths) provide a completely separated right-
                                              of-way for the exclusive use of bicycles and pedestrians with
                                              minimal automobile cross flows.
                                             Class II bikeways (bike lanes) provide a striped lane for one-way
                                              travel on a street or highway.
                                             Class III bikeways (bike routes) provide for shared use with motor
                                              vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
                                          A fourth category of bike lanes, commonly referred to as “Class IV” is
                                          used to describe cycletracks or buffered bike lanes (striped bike lanes
                                          separated from the vehicle lanes by the parking lane, or by bollards or a
                                          physical divider). There are no Class IV lanes in San Leandro at this
                                          time. According to the 2011 BPMP, the City has approximately 25 miles
                                          of bikeway facilities consisting of 4.2 miles of Class I bike paths, 17.7
                                          miles of Class II bike lanes, and 3.1 miles of Class III signed bike routes.
                                          The City’s Class I bike paths are associated with the Bay Trail, a planned
                                          500-mile network of paved trails that will ultimately encircle San
                                          Francisco and San Pablo Bays. Most of the San Leandro portion of the
                                          Bay Trail is in place along the shoreline between Oakland and San
                                          Lorenzo. A small portion between Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline and
                                          Marina Boulevard is a Class III bike route within the right of way of
                                          Neptune Drive. The San Leandro Bay Trail Slough Bridge, completed in
                                          2010, provides a connection for the Bay Trail between San Leandro and
                                          Oakland.
4-14

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                             T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Prospects for the Future
Fewer than one percent of San Leandro residents
presently use a bicycle to travel to work. However,
based on trends and local demographics, the city can
support a greatly expanded bicycle system. The 2011
Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan indicates a target of
increasing the bicycle commute mode share to 3.0
percent. This will be achieved by closing gaps in the
existing bike system and developing new bicycle
facilities. The 2011 Plan identifies 38.8 miles of
additional bikeways, including 8.4 miles of Class I bike
paths, 10 miles of Class II bike lanes, and 20.4 miles of
Class III bike routes.
The Bikeway Plan identifies improvements to better
define and connect the existing bikeway network and
improve its effectiveness. The focus of the Plan is on
connecting major activity centers, such as schools,
parks, libraries, retail destinations, and major
employment centers. Connections to BART are also
critical, including provisions for bicycle storage at the San Leandro and
Bay Fair Stations. Bike path improvements are planned throughout the
city, including the trail systems at Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline and in
the Shoreline Development project area.
The policies and actions in the San Leandro General Plan are consistent
with the 2011 Plan and support bicycling as a viable alternative to the
automobile. Key General Plan objectives are to improve bicycle safety,
reduce barriers, encourage bicycle use, and provide bicycle parking at
community facilities and major shopping and employment centers. The
City of San Leandro is also pursuing educational, promotional, and
safety improvements related to bicycle travel. It carries out educational
programs teaching bicycle safety and sponsors events such as Bike to
Work Day, Safe Moves, and bicycle rodeos.
Recommended safety improvements include special bicycle crossings
(including signalized crossings) near schools, and pavement
maintenance programs to reduce the risk of collisions. Regular sweeping
of bicycle trails, volunteer maintenance, and a maintenance log of
hazardous conditions also are recommended. Programs such as colored
bike lanes and coordinated signage are recommended so that bikeways
are clearly marked and easy to navigate.
                                                                                                                    4-15
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          Funding for capital projects and bicycle programs is an important
                                          component of the BPMP. The Plan identifies potential governmental and
                                          non-governmental funding sources, and potential partnerships for joint
                                          projects. The Bikeway Plan includes a recommendation for five-year Plan
                                          updates, recognizing the importance of keeping priorities current in
                                          order to maximize eligibility for funding. Updates also enable the City
                                          to incorporate emerging opportunities, such as the proposed East Bay
                                          Greenway and the San Leandro Creek Trail. The East Bay Greenway
                                          will provide a Class I bicycle connection between Oakland and
                                          Hayward, making it easier to commute through the Central East Bay by
                                          bicycle.
                                          Pedestrian Facilities
                                          There are over 200 miles of locally maintained streets in San Leandro,
                                          most with sidewalks. Many parts of the City provide an environment
                                          that is conducive to walking. This is especially true in older
                                          neighborhoods and Downtown. There are other areas in San Leandro
                                          that are less walkable, despite the presence of sidewalks and crosswalks.
                                          These include many of the City’s commercial thoroughfares,
                                          neighborhood shopping centers, and industrial districts. Walkability is
                                          influenced by all aspects of the built environment, including elements
                                          such as street trees, sidewalk width, building setbacks and architectural
                                          features, and traffic speed on adjacent roadways.
4-16

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                              T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Thoroughfares like San Leandro Boulevard and East 14th Street were
designed for vehicle convenience and speed. Pedestrians on these streets
may feel uncomfortable due to high volumes of fast-moving traffic,
along with the fumes and noise associated with such traffic. The City will
continue to take steps to create a more hospitable environment for
pedestrians through streetscape improvements and updated design
standards. Ten Pedestrian Improvement Areas are identified in the 2011
Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan, and 20 specific locations have been
highlighted for future improvements. Many of these locations are near
schools where Safe Routes to School programs could improve walk and
bike access through capital improvements and educational programs.
Recommended improvements include Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) compliance measures, repair of sidewalk surfaces, curb ramp
improvements, accessible signals, and updated push buttons. The 2011
Plan also calls for enforcement of parking regulations at crosswalks and
intersections, streetscape enhancements, and specific capital projects,
including new pedestrian crossings, elimination of rolled curbs, redesign
of key streets, consolidation of curb cuts on East 14th Street, and
improvements to freeway underpasses. Development of a trail along
portions of San Leandro Creek also will be pursued.
                                                                                                                     4-17
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          Public Transit
                                          San Leandro is served by BART, AC Transit, and a number of shuttle
                                          and para-transit services.
                                          BART provides heavy-rail, regional transit service to Alameda, San
                                          Francisco, Contra Costa, and San Mateo counties. The two BART stations
                                          in San Leandro are located to the west of Downtown and adjacent to
                                          Bayfair Center. Between 6,100 and 6,400 passengers per day arrive at and
                                          depart from each of these stations. Direct service is provided to San
                                          Francisco, Oakland, Fremont, Richmond, and Dublin/Pleasanton.
                                          Connecting service is provided to Concord/Pittsburg. BART operates
                                          with 15-minute headways during commute periods.
                                          Future improvements to BART include extensions to San Jose and
                                          Livermore. In addition, the Bayfair Connector project, which is funded
                                          by Alameda CTC through Measure BB funds, will facilitate rider transfer
                                          at Bay Fair between the Pleasanton and Fremont lines.
                                          AC Transit provides bus service in Alameda County and the western
                                          portion of Contra Costa County, and transbay commuter service to San
                                          Francisco and the Peninsula. Its local buses connect San Leandro
                                          neighborhoods and business districts with various destinations,
                                          including the two BART stations. AC Transit also provides school bus
                                          and para-transit services, and it is a participating transit provider for the
                                          regional, All-Nighter bus system, providing night owl bus service when
                                          BART is not operating. AC Transit buses are equipped with front-
                                          loading racks that can hold up to two bicycles.
4-18
S A N   L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                     T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                      Rail and Transit Network
                         Figure 4-2
                                                                 4-19
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          Some of AC Transit’s busiest service corridors pass through San
                                          Leandro. Daily ridership on the East 14th Street corridor was over 21,000
                                          passengers per day in Fall 2014. The Bancroft Avenue corridor had daily
                                          ridership of 10,000 passengers per day in Fall 2014 while ridership along
                                          the MacArthur Boulevard was 8,000 passengers per day. Bus routes
                                          throughout the city are illustrated in Figure 4-2.
                                          During the next 15 years, San Leandro will work with BART and AC
                                          Transit to achieve local service improvements. A major focus of this
                                          effort will be to improve connections between the two modes so that
                                          they work in tandem. Key initiatives are described below.
                                          BART Improvements
                                          BART is in the process of extending service on the Fremont line to San
                                          Jose/Santa Clara. Service to Warm Springs (South Fremont) is expected
                                          to by the end of 2016, while service to San Jose should begin by 2025.
                                          The San Jose extension will include connections to the Caltrain and VTA
                                          systems, achieving the long time vision of rail transit circumnavigating
                                          San Francisco Bay. Plans for a second BART tube (from Oakland to San
                                          Francisco) are being considered, recognizing the need to invest in transit
                                          as the region grows and increase BART capacity as transit-oriented
                                          development plans are implemented.
4-20

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Growth in San Leandro is also expected to generate additional BART
riders, both through new housing development and increased
employment. The EIR for the 2035 General Plan projected an increase of
2,240 new daily BART trips at San Leandro’s two stations in the next 20
years. Local BART ridership also may grow as the BART system
expands, particularly when BART becomes a viable means of commuting
to San Jose and Silicon Valley. The City will work with BART to ensure
that its infrastructure is maintained to meet increased demand. BART is
acquiring new rail cars and regularly updates its plans for station
ingress, egress, bus connections, and parking.
As noted throughout the General Plan, the investment that has been
made in the BART system is being leveraged to promote transit-oriented
development (TOD) on the station perimeters. TOD starts with
improvements to the stations themselves, including safety improvements
for pedestrians, better-timed connections to buses, and improved
connectivity between the stations and the neighborhoods around them.
Over the years, improvements have been made to the San Leandro and
Bay Fair stations to improve their functionality and accessibility. These
efforts will continue as land around the stations redevelops.
The availability of parking is an ongoing issue around both of San
Leandro’s BART Stations, particularly the Downtown Station. Both
stations have historically relied on BART-owned surface parking lots to
meet demand. Both the Marea Alta and San Leandro Tech Campus
developments include structured parking for BART passengers as well
as parking for the developments themselves. Future mixed use projects
on the station perimeter, including development on BART-owned
parking lots, may include garage parking for BART passengers. At Bay
Fair, development of at least a portion of the surface parking lot is likely
in the future, with structured parking used to replace lost spaces. The
City is also working with AC Transit to improve feeder bus service, so
that commuters can arrive by bus rather than driving to the station.
AC Transit Improvements
AC Transit is currently developing a Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) system in
the East Bay. The initial BRT line will extend 9.5 miles from Downtown
Oakland to the San Leandro BART station. This line will enter San
Leandro on East 14th Street (International Boulevard) at the Oakland city
limits, extend south to Davis Street, and then west to the BART station.
Although a dedicated bus lane is proposed for most of the route in
Oakland, the portion in San Leandro will include a dedicated lane for
                                                                                                                       4-21

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                                     only about two blocks, with bus traffic
                                                                     transitioning into auto traffic just south of
                                                                     Broadmoor Boulevard. Amenities along the
                                                                     route include sheltered seating at bus stops,
                                                                     off-bus fare payment, real-time arrival times,
                                                                     and traffic signal priority.
                                                                     AC Transit is studying potential extension of
                                                                     BRT service from San Leandro station to Bay
                                                                     Fair station.     A northerly extension from
                                                                     Oakland to Emeryville also is being
                                                                     considered. These improvements are being
                                                                     studied as part of various long-range planning
                                                                     studies, including a Service Expansion Plan, a
                                                                     “Major Corridors Study,” and a Short-Range
                                                                     Transportation Plan that seeks to increase
                                                                     service on the 11 highest-ridership bus routes
                                          in the service area. The Service Expansion Plan is evaluating possibilities
                                          for increased service frequency, expansion of night and weekend service,
                                          and elimination of loop routes. The Major Corridors Study is evaluating
                                          potential infrastructure improvements such as bus stops, bus lane, and
                                          traffic signal pre-emptions.
                                          Although the City of San Leandro does not control bus service and
                                          operations, it plays an important role in sustaining a viable bus system.
                                          One of its most important roles is to create a street environment where
                                          transit users feel safe and comfortable, and where buses may operate
                                          efficiently. Bus shelters should be clean, attractively designed, well-
                                          lighted, and well maintained. Local design standards for streets with
                                          frequent bus service should accommodate bus pullouts, and passenger
                                          amenities. Parking regulations on these streets should be strictly
                                          enforced to minimize bus lane obstructions. The City will require new
                                          development along major transit corridors to include features that
                                          support transit use, such as requiring building entrances that face the
                                          street rather than rear parking lots.
                                          The City is particularly interested in improving AC Transit feeder
                                          service to the BART Stations from San Leandro neighborhoods and
                                          business districts. This could include flexible routing for some of the bus
                                          lines and smaller buses to allow broader service coverage. The
                                          coordination of AC Transit and BART schedules is also critical, as quick
                                          transfers provide one of the best incentives for ridership.
4-22

                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                            T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Shuttles, Vanpools, Ridesharing, and Carsharing
San Leandro created the LINKS shuttle service in 2002 as a way to
provide convenient local transit between the San Leandro BART Stations
and the major employment districts of West and Central San Leandro.
Service was recently expanded from a single loop route to two lines, one
providing a loop through the northwestern part of the city and the other
providing a loop through the southwest. LINKS is funded by a special
purpose business improvement district encompassing benefitting
businesses, primarily in the industrial areas of West San Leandro. The
service also receives grants from regional agencies, including the Bay
Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD).
LINKS plays a crucial role in filling the gap created by AC Transit
service cuts, and is an important part of the City’s trip reduction
strategy. It is also an important economic development tool, providing a
resource for businesses and their employees. On non-holiday weekdays,
shuttles operate every 15 minutes along the north loop and every 20
minutes along the south loop from 5:45 AM to 9:45 AM and from 3:00
PM to 7:00 PM. Continued improvements to LINKS service will be
pursued as employment in the area grows. A number of large
employers, including Kaiser Permanente, also operate independent
private shuttle services to and from the San Leandro BART station.
Depending on financial feasibility, shuttles could also someday serve
residential and commercial areas—including Downtown San Leandro.
The concept of public-private partnerships could make shuttle service
more viable, with the City working with AC Transit and the private
sector to coordinate operations.
                                                                                                                   4-23

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          The City is also supportive of ridesharing and vanpooling programs by
                                          local employers and institutions. Several large employers—including the
                                          City itself—provide preferential parking for carpools. Through the
                                          City’s trip reduction efforts, local employers are encouraged to develop
                                          commuter benefit programs, such as transit vouchers, which encourage
                                          employees to seek alternatives to driving. Programs managed by the
                                          Alameda County Transportation Commission such as “guaranteed ride
                                          home” and 511 Rideshare also support carpooling at the local level.
                                          San Leandro is also committed to meeting the needs of elderly and
                                          disabled passengers. Although AC Transit buses are wheelchair
                                          equipped, there may still be obstacles to convenient use. The City
                                          provides FLEX shuttle service for persons unable to use conventional
                                          buses. The shuttle operates Monday through Friday between 9:00 AM
                                          and 5:00 PM, with a northern and southern route.
                                          Automobiles
                                          San Leandro’s road system consists of freeways, arterials, collectors, and
                                          local streets. As indicated below, these classifications are used to
                                          describe the different functions and design criteria for each type of street.
                                          Figure 4-3 shows San Leandro’s road system using these designations.
                                          Table 4-1 indicates the average daily traffic volumes on major San
                                          Leandro streets in the most recent year of record. Refinements to the
                                          classification system shown below may be implemented in the coming
                                          years. These refinements would recognize not only the function of the
                                          street, but also the priority mode of travel (e.g., bicycle, pedestrian,
                                          transit, multi-modal, etc.)
                                          Freeways
                                          Freeways are limited access multi-lane roadways that accommodate trips
                                          from one part of the region to another. All access is ramp controlled and
                                          grade-separated, allowing these roadways to carry large volumes of
                                          traffic at relatively high speeds. No direct access is provided to adjacent
                                          properties. Freeway design, operation, and maintenance is the
                                          responsibility of the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans).
                                          San Leandro’s freeways—Interstates 880, 580, and 238—provide the
                                          major road links between the City and the rest of the Bay Area. Current
                                          (2015) volumes range from 98,000 vehicles per day (vpd) on Interstate
                                          238 to 223,000 vpd on Interstate 880.
4-24

  S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                     T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                   Figure 4-3
Street Classification
                                            4-25
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L          P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
            TABLE 4-1: AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC VOLUMES (ADT) ON SAN LEANDRO STREETS
            Street         Segment                   ADT    Year Street     Segment                  ADT    Year
            Alvarado       Thornton to Marina        7,200  2014 Hesperian  East 14th to Halcyon     20,800 2014
                           Marina to Fremont         20,200 2014            Halcyon to Bayfair       25,500 2014
            Bancroft       Durant to Dutton          9,800  2014            Bayfair to I-238         30,200 2014
                           Dutton to Estudillo       13,100 2014 Lewelling  Wicks to Farnsworth      18,000 2014
                           Estudillo to 136th        9,200  2014            Farnsworth to Washington 20,100 2014
                           136th to East 14th        7,000  2014            Washington to Hesperian  22,600 2014
            Callan         East 14th to Bancroft     9,800  2014 MacArthur  Durant to Dutton          9,800 2013
            Da vis         West of Doolittle         7,100  2014            Dutton to Estudillo      10,500 2014
                           Doolittle to I-880        22,400 2014 Manor      Wicks to Kesterson        9,700 2014
                           I-880 to San Leandro Blvd 33,000 2014 Marina     Neptune to Doolittle      7,000 2014
            Doolittle      Adams to Davis            29,400 2014            Doolittle to Merced      17,900 2014
                           Davis to Marina           22,700 2014            Merced to I-880          47,500 1997
                           Marina to Fairway         17,700 2014            I-880 to Alvarado        21,900 2014
                           Fairway to Farallon       10,700 2014            Alvarado to San Leandro  18,900 2014
                                                                            Blvd
            Dutton         East 14th to MacArthur    11,000 2014 Merced     Republic to Fairway      19,200 2014
            East 14th      Durant to Davis           23,000 2014 San        Park to Davis            22,100 2014
                           Davis to San Leandro      16,600 2014 Leandro    Davis to Washington      19,500 2014
                           Blvd                                  Boulevard
                           San Leandro Blvd to       24,600 2014            Washington to East 14th  11,300 2014
                           Hesperian
                           Hesperian to Fairmont     18,900 2014 Sybil Av   Bancroft to Grand         7,300 2013
            Estudillo      East 14th to Bancroft     11,500 2014 Washington W. Juana to San Leandro   9,800 2014
                                                                            Blvd
                           Bancroft to MacArthur     15,100 2014            San Leandro Blvd. to     20,200 2012
                                                                            Halcyon
                           MacArthur to Lake         5,100  2014            Halcyon to Lewelling     22,500 2012
                           Chabot
            Fairmont       Hesperian to East 14th    21,700 2012 West Gate  Timothy and Shopping     13,300 2014
                                                                 Parkway    Center Driveway
            Fairway        Doolittle to Merced       11,400 2014 Wicks      Merced to Farallon       10,700 2014
                           Merced to I-880           12,800 2014            Farallon to Manor        21,600 2014
            Farnsworth     Lewelling to Manor        8,800  2014            Manor to Lewelling       13,700 2014
                           Manor to Corvallis        8,600  1997 Williams   Doolittle to Merced      10,800 2014
            Floresta       Corvallis to Fremont      11,100 2011            Merced to San Leandro    11,400 2014
                                                                            Blvd
                           Fremont to Washington     21,700 2014            San Leandro Blvd to       3,500 2014
                                                                            Washington
            Halcyon        Washington to Hesperian   20,800 2012 143rd Av   Washington to E. 14th     7,700 2014
                                                                 150th Av   East 14th to I-580       16,600 2014
            Source: City of San Leandro, 2015
4-26
                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Arterials
Arterials serve as the basic
network for through-traffic in
and around San Leandro. They
provide connections between
the    freeways       and    major
destinations in the city and for
cross-town travel, commercial
vehicle travel and access to
collector streets and local streets.
Arterial      streets     generally
provide direct access to adjacent
land uses, although access may
be restricted by medians and
dividers. Driveways are limited
to a few locations, and on-street
parking may be limited or
absent in order to provide the greatest travel capacity within the
available right-of-way. Depending on the intensity of adjacent land uses,
arterials may have two, four or six lanes. Intersections with arterials may
be signalized and may have dedicated left or right turn lanes.
Arterials may bisect residential neighborhoods as well as commercial
and industrial areas. Because homes and apartments tend to be more
susceptible to the negative impacts of traffic than business districts,
different design standards and traffic management strategies may apply
to residential arterials.
Caltrans is responsible for the design, operation and maintenance of
three arterials in San Leandro: East 14th Street (Route 185), Doolittle
Drive north of Davis Street (Route 61), and Davis Street from Doolittle to
East 14th Street (Route 112). The City of San Leandro is responsible for
the other arterials in the city, such as Bancroft Avenue, Hesperian
Boulevard, Washington Avenue, San Leandro Boulevard, MacArthur
Boulevard, and Marina Boulevard.
Collectors
Collectors are designed to connect neighborhoods with arterials. They
typically carry less than 10,000 vehicles per day, although somewhat
higher volumes are not unusual. As with arterials, collectors in
residential areas may be subject to different design standards and traffic
                                                                                                                      4-27
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          management strategies than those in commercial and industrial areas.
                                          Residential collectors are typically two lanes, with curb parking and
                                          traffic signals at major intersections. Intersections with lower volume
                                          streets may be controlled by two-way or four-way stops. Examples of
                                          collector streets include Springlake Drive, Teagarden Street, and
                                          Farnsworth Street.
                                          Local Streets
                                          Local streets are low-speed roadways that link individual parcels to
                                          collector or arterial streets. They typically accommodate one traffic lane
                                          and one curbside parking lane in each direction. Intersections are
                                          typically controlled by two-way or four-way stop signs. With the
                                          exception of a few private streets, the City of San Leandro is responsible
                                          for the design, operation, and maintenance of all local streets.
                                          Trucks
                                          Trucks comprise a small percentage of the vehicles on San Leandro
                                          streets, but have a major impact on traffic patterns and roadway needs.
                                          Many of San Leandro’s businesses depend on efficient and convenient
                                          truck access. To facilitate truck traffic and avoid neighborhood conflicts,
                                          the City has designated certain thoroughfares as truck routes. These are
                                          shown in Figure 4-4.
                                          Despite the designation of truck routes, problems with truck traffic on
                                          residential streets may still occur. The California Vehicle Code allows
                                          trucks to use virtually any street to make pick-ups and deliveries,
                                          making enforcement of truck routes more difficult. Problems such as
                                          noise, diesel fumes and dust, property damage, pavement deterioration,
                                          conflicts with auto traffic, and pedestrian and bicycle hazards occur on
                                          some streets, including those not designated as truck routes. Truck
                                          parking is also a problem in some areas. City ordinances prohibit truck
                                          parking along truck routes, on residential streets, and in locations where
                                          unsafe reductions in sight distances or travel lane widths result, but
                                          violations occasionally occur.
                                          Enforcement, permitting, coordination with adjacent jurisdictions, and
                                          education are all important parts of managing truck traffic. The City
                                          requires transportation permits for particular vehicle types in order to
                                          monitor heavy loads on its streets. San Leandro also works with the City
                                          of Oakland to manage truck traffic along border streets, and coordinate
                                          truck routing. Additional initiatives will be pursued in the future.
4-28

S A N   L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                     T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                           Figure 4-4
                                        Truck Routes
                                                       4-29
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          Ultimately, street design and signage changes may be needed to better
                                          accommodate trucks on designated truck routes and to discourage illegal
                                          truck “cut-through” traffic elsewhere. In industrial districts, this may
                                          require the upgrading of key intersections to accommodate the turning
                                          radius of larger trucks. In residential areas, this may require traffic
                                          calming measures, extension of curbs or medians, and additional signs in
                                          areas where truck parking and weight limits apply.
                                          Local businesses and truckers should also be kept informed of where
                                          truck routes are located and where truck parking is permitted. Other
                                          changes might include revisions to the City’s truck route map and
                                          revisions to weight limits on truck routes in residential neighborhoods.
                                          Key areas for future focus include the Washington Manor area and the
                                          northeast part of the city.
                                          Additional recommendations for trucks are included in a Goods
                                          Movement Plan adopted by Alameda County in February 2016. The
                                          County Plan includes infrastructure investments, strategies, and
                                          performance measures to support goods movement countywide.
                                          Railroads
                                          San Leandro is crossed by three major rail lines, generally running from
                                          northwest to southeast across the city. The rail lines link local industrial
                                          areas with the Port of Oakland, other West Coast markets, and the rest of
                                          the state and nation (see Figure 4-3). The rail lines were formerly
                                          independently operated but have been consolidated under the
4-30

                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                            T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
ownership of Union Pacific (UPRR). The lines are
generally referred to as the Oakland Subdivision, the
Niles Subdivision, and the Coastal Subdivision.
Spurs from each railroad provide service to
industrial developments in Central and West San
Leandro.
In 1996, the Oakland subdivision was relegated to
industrial spur status. Most of the line has been
abandoned, although a few industrial customers
remain on isolated portions of the line. As of 2016,
plans were moving forward to convert portions of
the Oakland Subdivision to a bicycle and pedestrian
path called the East Bay Greenway. The Greenway
Concept Plan includes a combination of Class I, II,
and III bicycle facilities extending from 18th Avenue
in Oakland to Downtown Hayward.
On the Coastal and Niles Subdivisions, trains still
cross arterial and collector streets several times a
day. Most rail crossings are equipped with warning
bells and crossing guards used to detain vehicles
when trains pass. Vehicle and pedestrian safety is an
ongoing issue for at-grade crossings. Continued
driver, bicyclist and pedestrian education is
necessary to reduce collision hazards. With increased freight activity
expected along the UP corridor from the Port of Oakland to the south,
circulation and access will be affected particularly at the at-grade
crossings in San Leandro.
Two rail crossings in San Leandro are grade-separated: the Maltester-
Polvorosa overpass on West Davis Street and the Washington Avenue
underpass just south of San Leandro Boulevard. The Washington
Avenue crossing is on the Oakland subdivision and is presently inactive.
New grade-separated crossings at Davis, Marina, Hesperian,
Washington (at Chapman), and other major thoroughfares would be
desirable but face significant design and funding constraints. Caltrans
provides grants for such projects through its Section 190 Grade
Separation Program, contingent on completion of a plan addressing the
design of the project, acquisition of right-of-way, relocation of
businesses, and resolution of any related issues.
                                                                                                                   4-31
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L   P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                                                                                              Source: KCBS Local.
                                              Amtrak
                                              Amtrak operates intercity and interstate passenger rail service. Its
                                              Capital Corridor and Coast Starlight routes run through San Leandro,
                                              but there are currently no Amtrak stops in the city. The Capitol Corridor
                                              route connects San Jose to the Sacramento area and uses the Niles
                                              Subdivision of the Union Pacific tracks, passing just west of the San
                                              Leandro BART station. The nearest station is about two miles northwest
                                              of the city limits adjacent to the Coliseum BART station in Oakland. The
                                              Coast Starlight is an interstate route connecting cities along the west
                                              coast. The nearest station is at Jack London Square, about seven miles
                                              north of San Leandro. The possibility of a Capitol Corridor stop in San
                                              Leandro should continue to be explored in the future, with the ideal
                                              location being in the transit oriented development area west of the BART
                                              station.
                                              Airports
                                              There are no airports or heliports in San Leandro listed by the Federal
                                              Aviation Administration (FAA). The nearest airports are Oakland
                                              International, located adjacent to the city to the northwest, and Hayward
                                              Executive Airport, located 1.5 miles to the south of the city limits.
                                              Despite the absence of an airport within the city limits, there is active air
                                              traffic over the City. The major commercial airline approaches to
                                              Oakland International Airport’s runways are located west of the San
                                              Leandro shoreline, while non-scheduled general flights to Oakland’s
                                              North Field fly over developed portions of San Leandro. Hazards and
4-32

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                 T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
noise associated with air traffic are discussed in the Environmental
Hazards Element of the General Plan.
Water Transportation
Ferries have long been regarded as a potential way to reduce congestion
on Bay Area highways and provide a public transit alternative to buses
and trains. Commuter ferries currently serve a number of Bay Area
communities, including San Francisco, Marin County, Vallejo, Oakland,
Alameda, and South San Francisco. A 1999 feasibility study identified
the San Leandro Marina as one of the most viable sites on the Bay for a
new ferry terminal.
Given the fiscal challenges associated with channel dredging and recent
decisions regarding the Marina, ferry service is considered infeasible in
San Leandro at the present time. However, such service could become
viable in the future in the event a long-term, stable, non-local funding
source for dredging and terminal maintenance is provided. The San
Francisco Bay Water Emergency Transportation Authority (WETA)
adopted a ferry system expansion policy in 2015 that includes criteria for
funding new ferry infrastructure and service projects. Ferry service
improvements are planned for Richmond and Hercules, and are being
studied in Redwood City, Martinez, and Antioch.
F.       TRAFFIC FORECASTS AND PLANNED
         IMPROVEMENTS
One of the criteria for developing the policies and actions in the
Transportation Element was an evaluation of existing and projected
traffic conditions for motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians, and public transit
users. Using a computerized traffic model, traffic forecasts for 2035 were
developed and evaluated. The forecasts consider the type and quantity
of development that will occur in the City during the next 20 years based
on the General Plan Map and General Plan policies. They also account
for increases in background traffic resulting from growth in nearby
cities, the diversion of car trips to other travel modes as a result of
transit, bicycle and pedestrian improvements, and changes in travel
patterns resulting from transit-oriented development. Additional detail
on the traffic analysis is included in the General Plan Environmental
Impact Report.
                                                                                                                        4-33
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          A number of different methods may be used to evaluate projected traffic
                                          conditions. From the 1950s until recently, the most common method has
                                          been to compare the volume of automobile traffic on a road to the road’s
                                          design capacity. This method considers factors such as average vehicle
                                          speed along a road segment and the number of seconds a motorist has to
                                          wait to pass through an intersection. Lettered grades (called “levels of
                                          service” or LOS) are assigned based on these factors, with “A”
                                          corresponding to no congestion and “F” corresponding to extreme
                                          congestion. Roads and intersections with “failing” grades (usually “E”
                                          and “F”) are targeted for capacity improvements, such as turning lanes,
                                          additional travel lanes, and upgraded signals.
                                          A number of problems with the LOS method have been observed. It
                                          evaluates the transportation network exclusively on its capacity to move
                                          cars, rather than its effectiveness serving adjacent land uses, or
                                          accommodating the greatest number of people or travel modes. It also
                                          evaluates roads and intersections without regard to context, so that roads
                                          serving Downtown, residential areas, and industrial areas are all treated
                                          the same. The focus on LOS has led to an auto-focused development
                                          pattern in many cities, with potential economic, safety, social, and urban
                                          design benefits traded for speed.          More recent approaches to
                                          transportation analysis consider “multi-modal” levels of service, taking
                                          into consideration the performance of other modes of travel, such as
                                          transit.
4-34

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                 T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
California adopted SB 743 in 2013, moving away from LOS entirely and
introducing a new metric for measuring transportation impacts. SB 743
shifts the focus to how much driving is expected to be generated by new
development rather than the vehicle speed and delay at nearby
intersections. Developments located near transit typically generate
fewer and shorter automobile trips, as occupants may rely on transit for
more of their daily travel. Similarly, a project that combines housing and
retail uses may generate fewer trips than two equivalent separate
housing and retail projects, since some of the trips are internally
captured. Most California cities are in the process of transitioning from
LOS to VMT, but there are still many questions to be answered about
how the new metric will work in practice.
For the purposes of this General Plan, an analysis of future LOS and
VMT were both performed. The findings are summarized below.
Level of Service (LOS)
As noted above, LOS is indicated by a lettered grade from "A" through
"F" (from best to worst), covering the range of traffic operations that
might occur. Table 4-2 provides a definition of each LOS grade.
Different standards are used for freeways than for intersections, since
freeways are designed to operate without stops.
For planning purposes, the City has created a tiered LOS system in this
General Plan as follows (see Action T-2.5.A):
    Outside of the designated “Priority Development Areas” (see Figure
     LU-1), LOS D is the minimum acceptable service level for
     intersections.
    Inside the PDAs, LOS E is the minimum acceptable service level for
     intersections.
The dual system recognizes that a greater level of auto congestion is
acceptable in areas where the emphasis is on public transit, pedestrian,
and bicycle trips. The PDAs include the areas around the San Leandro
and Bay Fair BART stations, and the East 14 th Street corridor. While the
City seeks efficient vehicle flow through these areas, it also seeks to shift
trips to other modes and focus on place making and economic vitality.
                                                                                                                        4-35

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L   P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
        TABLE LU-1     LEVEL OF SERVICE INTERPRETATION FOR INTERSECTIONS AND FREEWAYS
                                                                                                                   FREEWAY
                                                        INTERSECTIONS                                             SEGMENTS
                                                                                                  Unsignalized
                                                                                 Signalized                          Density
                                                                                                   Intersection    (passenger
                                                                                 Intersection
                                                                                                  Average Delay     vehicles
                                                                                 Average Delay
                                                                                                   Per Vehicle    per mile per
                                                                                 Per Vehicle                          lane)
                                                                                                    (Seconds)
                                                                                 (Seconds)
        LOS     Description of Traffic Conditions at Intersection
        A       Free flowing. Most vehicles do not have to stop.                    ≤10.0            ≤10.0            ≤11
        B       Minimal delays. Some vehicles have to stop, although waits       >10.0 and ≤      >10.0 and ≤
                                                                                                                     >11-18
                are not bothersome.                                                 20.0             15.0
        C       Acceptable delays. Significant numbers of vehicles have to
                stop because of steady, high traffic volumes. Still, many pass   >20.0 and ≤      >15.0 and ≤
                                                                                                                     >18-26
                without                                                             35.0             25.0
                stopping.
        D       Tolerable delays. Many vehicles have to stop. Drivers are
                aware of heavier traffic. Cars may have to wait through more     >35.0 and ≤      >25.0 and ≤
                                                                                                                     >26-35
                than one red light. Queues begin to form, often on more than        55.0             35.0
                one approach.
        E       Significant delays. Cars may have to wait through more than
                                                                                 >55.0 and ≤      >35.0 and ≤
                one red light. Long queues form, sometimes on several                                                >35-45
                                                                                    80.0             50.0
                approaches.
        F       Excessive delays. Intersection is jammed. Many cars have to
                wait through more than one red light, or more than 60               >80.0            >50.0            >45
                seconds. Traffic may back up into “up-stream” intersections.
        Source: Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual, Washington, D.C., 2000./ Transportation Research Board,
        Highway Capacity Manual Washington, D.C., 2010, 11-7.
                                                 Some of the City’s roadways (including Davis Street, Doolittle Drive, and
                                                 East 14th Street) are under Caltrans’ jurisdiction. Caltrans applies a
                                                 different standard to these facilities (the point where LOS “C” meets LOS
                                                 “D”). For the purposes of this General Plan and other transportation
                                                 plans, the City of San Leandro’s LOS “D” standard is applied to these
                                                 facilities. The City has not adopted LOS standards for the freeways since
                                                 they are not under local jurisdiction and are primarily carrying traffic
                                                 with origins and destinations outside San Leandro.
                                                 In 2015, most intersections in San Leandro were operating at LOS D or
                                                 better. Only one intersection—the southbound I-880 off-ramp at Marina
                                                 Boulevard—was found to be below LOS D. In fact, there were fewer
4-36

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
LOS E and F intersections in the city in 2015 than there were in 2000,
based on the General Plan traffic analysis completed for the prior Plan.
In addition, much of the congestion experienced in the city is limited in
duration, with operations becoming stable shortly after the peak hours.
Table 4-3 illustrates the existing (2015) and projected (2035) levels of
service at major intersections in San Leandro. Intersections operating
below the adopted service levels are shown in bold.
Table 4-3 indicates that several intersections may become very congested
by 2035, with longer delays at traffic signals. Ten of the 36 intersections
listed will not meet the adopted LOS criteria by 2035, with some
experiencing heavy congestion during the morning peak hour, some
experiencing heavy congestion during the evening peak hour, and some
experiencing congestion during both mornings and evenings. Three of
the congested intersections are within PDA areas and seven are not.
Delays will worsen along Davis Street, Hesperian Boulevard, Marina
Boulevard, San Leandro Boulevard, Washington Avenue, Doolittle
Drive, and East 14th Street, among others.
Interstates 880, 580, and 238 are also projected to experience increased
congestion in the future. Northbound I-880 and I-580 already operate at
LOS “F” during the morning peak hour, and are projected to continue to
operate at LOS “F” in 2035. Similarly, I-238 operates at LOS “E” or “F”
in both directions during the morning peak, and is projected to do the
same in 2035.
Much of the projected increase in traffic is due to continued growth in
the Bay Area, rather than growth occurring within San Leandro.
According to ABAG, the region is expected to add 1.1 million jobs, 2.1
million people, and 660,000 homes between 2010 and 2040. While
changes in technology may enable the freeways to operate more
efficiently, there are no plans to add lanes or increase freeway capacity
through San Leandro. As freeway congestion, drivers are more likely to
exit and search for alternative routes using local streets. In fact, much of
the projected increase in traffic on streets like Marina, Davis, and
Doolittle is expected to be due to motorists seeking alternate routes from
the freeways to destinations such as Oakland Airport.
                                                                                                                       4-37

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L        P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
              TABLE 4-3: LEVEL OF SERVICE AT MAJOR SAN LEANDRO INTERSECTIONS: 2015 AND 2035
                                                                                               2015                        2035 (*)
             Cross-Street 1                         Cross-Street 2                      AM            PM            AM             PM
             E 14th Street                          Durant Avenue                        A              B             A              B
             E 14th Street                          Dutton Avenue                        C              B             C              C
             E 14th Street                          Davis Street (SR-112)                C             C              F              D
             E 14th Street                          San Leandro Boulevard                C             C              E              C
             Hesperian Blvd/ Bancroft Ave           E 14th Street                        C             C              E              D
             MacArthur Boulevard                    Estudillo Avenue                      B             B             C              C
             Bancroft Avenue                        Dutton Avenue                        C             C              C              C
             Bancroft Avenue                        Estudillo Avenue                     C             C              C              C
             Hesperian Boulevard                    150th Avenue                          B             B             B              C
             Hesperian Boulevard                    Halcyon Drive/ Fairmont Dr           D             D              F              E
             Hesperian Boulevard                    Springlake Drive                      B             B             C              C
             Washington Avenue                      Lewelling Boulevard                  D             C              D              D
             Washington Avenue                      Springlake Drive                     C              B             D              C
             Washington Avenue                      Floresta Blvd/ Halcyon Dr            D             D              D              D
             Washington Avenue                      San Leandro Boulevard                C             C              F              C
             San Leandro Boulevard                  Marina Boulevard                     D             C              F              F
             San Leandro Boulevard                  Davis Street (SR-112)                C             C              F              E
             Alvarado Street                        Davis Street (SR-112)                C              B             C              C
             Alvarado Street                        Williams Street                       B             B             C              C
             Alvarado Street                        Marina Boulevard                     C             C              C              C
             Wayne Ave/ Teagarden St                Marina Boulevard                     C             C              C              C
             I-880 NB Ramps                         Davis Street (SR-112)                 B             B             B              D
             I-880 SB Ramps                         Davis Street (SR-112)                 B             B             B              D
             I-880 NB Ramps                         Marina Boulevard                     D             C              B              B
             I-880 SB Ramps                         Marina Boulevard                     D              E             D              D
             Washington Avenue                      I-880 NB Ramps                       C             C              C              C
             Washington Avenue                      I-880 SB Ramps/ Beatrice St          C             C              C              C
             Phillips Lane                          Davis Street (SR-112)                C             C              C              F
             Warden Ave/ Timothy Dr                 Davis Street (SR-112)                C             C              C              E
             Doolittle Drive (SR-61)                Davis Street (SR-112)                C             C              D              F
             Doolittle Drive (SR-61)                Marina Boulevard                     C             D              F              E
             Merced Street                          Marina Boulevard                     C             D              D              D
             Merced Street                          Fairway Drive                        D             C              D              D
             Doolittle Drive (SR-61)                Williams Street                      C             C              C              C
             Alvarado Street                        Fairway Dr/ Aladdin Ave              D             C              F              C
             Hesperian Boulevard                    Lewelling Boulevard                  D             D              D              D
             Source: Kittelson Associates, 2016.
             Notes: (1) Some of the intersections noted as deteriorating to “E” or “F” in 2035 could potentially be restored to acceptable
             levels of service through physical improvements or changes to signals and signal timing. The feasibility of such improvements
             will be determined as future development projects and Specific Plans are considered, and as transportation planning is
             conducted. Where feasible and applicable, the Development Fee for Street Improvements (DFSI) should be used to improve
             service at these locations. (2) Intersections operating at LOS “E” in 2035 are noted in bold, but this level of service has been
             deemed acceptable within designated Priority Development Areas (PDAs).
4-38

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Future increases in freeway congestion may trigger changes in how and
where businesses locate, where employees choose to live, and how and
when commuting occurs. As noted below, the City is expected to revise
its travel forecasting methods to focus on vehicle miles traveled (VMT) in
the coming years. One of the challenges in making this switch is to
determine how the cost of improvements will be fairly allocated to new
development. The current Development Fee for Street Improvements
(DFSI) will need to be revised to focus on new metrics and capital
projects that expand other travel modes.            The impacts of new
transportation modes such as driverless cars also will need to be
considered.
Vehicle Miles Traveled
The San Leandro 2035 General Plan Update included an estimate of the
total vehicle miles traveled in San Leandro in 2015 and a forecast of
projected VMT in 2035. The calculations include vehicle trips originating
in San Leandro but ending elsewhere, trips ending in San Leandro but
starting elsewhere, and trips both originating and ending within the city.
Theoretically, total VMT can be reduced if a community provides a
balanced mix of housing, shopping, services, and employment because
more of its trips can be self-contained. Many of the city’s air quality and
greenhouse gas reduction strategies are aimed at reducing VMT, since
transportation is the major local source of air pollutants and greenhouse
gas emissions.
VMT is often measured on a per capita basis, to
account for growth in the overall population and
workforce. Although increases in total VMT may
be inevitable in a growing city, reductions in per
capita VMT are a step in the right direction.
Table 4-4 shows total daily VMT and VMT per
capita in 2015 and the forecast for 2035. In this
particular table, the figures include the San
Leandro sphere of influence as well (e.g.,
Ashland and environs) as well as land within the
city limits. The analysis indicates a 17 percent
increase in total VMT in the next 20 years, but a
slight decrease in VMT per capita. The projected
decrease is largely due to local policies
emphasizing transit oriented development and
alternatives to driving.
                                                                                                                      4-39

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                            TABLE 4-4: VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED (VMT) IN 2015 AND 2035
                                                                                    2015          2035         Percent
                                                                                (existing)    (projected)      Change
                                            Daily VMT                         4,102,665      4,829,878        17.70%
                                            Households                        40,588         48,252           18.90%
                                            Population                        114,567        137,635          20.10%
                                            Jobs                              44,266         60,521           36.70%
                                            VMT Per Capita                    24.7           24.4             -1.30%
                                            Daily VMT                         4,102,665      4,829,878        17.70%
                                            Source: Association of Bay Area Government (ABAG) Projections 2013; Kittelson
                                            & Associates, Inc. 2015.
                                          Planned Improvements
                                          Maintaining satisfactory conditions on City streets will require a
                                          combination of capital improvements, land use strategies, and traffic
                                          management measures. Although road widening may still be proposed
                                          in a few locations, most planned improvements address the coordination
                                          and timing of signals and safety improvements.                      Additional
                                          improvements are aimed at making transit use and pedestrian and
                                          bicycle travel more viable in the City. A combination of sources will be
                                          used to fund future projects, including the Measure BB one-half cent
                                          sales tax approved by Alameda Voters in 2015, the Development Fee for
                                          Street Improvements (DFSI), and state and federal grants. Much of the
                                          Measure BB funding stream will be dedicated to local street maintenance
                                          and safety, BART and bus improvements, and bicycle and pedestrian
                                          improvements.
                                          Some of the key improvements planned during the next three years
                                          include:
                                              Reconstruction of the active Union Pacific crossing of Washington
                                               Avenue (at Chapman Road, just north of Halcyon-Floresta). This
                                               project will reduce collision hazards, reconstruct the median, add
                                               new sidewalks, and install fencing and warning lights.
                                              Signal improvements at the Bancroft and Sybil intersection.
4-40

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                 T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
    Lane adjustments and signal modifications at the East 14 th-
     Hesperian-150th Avenue intersection, including additional lanes and
     new signals.
    Widening of Marina Boulevard between Orchard Avenue and San
     Leandro Boulevard also may be pursued in the coming years.
An update of the Master Plan of City Streets will follow adoption of the
General Plan. This update may identify specific capital improvements
for funding in the coming years, as well as operational changes to
improve system efficiency. The City will also be updating its Pedestrian
and Bicycle Master Plan, and will identify additional capital
improvements and funding sources through that process.
Future road improvements include Caltrans projects and local (City of
San Leandro) projects. Caltrans recently completed the addition of a
southbound high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lane on I-880 from
Hegenberger Road in Oakland to Marina Boulevard, and is completing
the reconstruction of the Davis and Marina Boulevard interchanges. A
northbound I-880 HOV lane from Marina to Hegenberger also is
planned. Localized improvements are also planned as part of the
buildout of the Kaiser Permanente development (including the retail
project on the north parcel), and the Shoreline Development Project.
In the past, the City also has considered new roads and overcrossings to
improve east-west circulation. A proposed extension of Fairway
Drive/Aladdin Avenue across the Union Pacific Railroad to San Leandro
Boulevard has been part of the City’s Master Plan for City Streets for
many years, but the project is complicated by land use constraints and a
lack of available funding. Similarly, the realignment of Merced Street to
directly connect to Westgate Parkway (at Williams) was recommended
by the Next Generation Workplace Districts Study, but land ownership
and funding constraints are present there as well.
Additionally, the EIR for the 2035 General Plan identified a series of
improvements that if implemented could maintain the adopted levels of
service at congested intersections. At some of the intersections, the
improvements simply require optimizing the traffic signal cycle lengths
to reduce delays. Adaptive traffic control technology can result in
variable signal lengths that change based on the number of cars waiting
to turn. Elsewhere, the changes may involve the conversion of through-
lanes to turn lanes or the restriping of lanes to increase capacity. In a few
cases, acquisition of additional right-of-way would be required.
                                                                                                                        4-41

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          Since many of the congested intersections are operated by Caltrans, the
                                          City cannot implement these improvements independently. Moreover,
                                          those improvements that require additional right-of-way may be
                                          infeasible due to cost and property ownership patterns.            Such
                                          improvements could also be inconsistent with the City’s Complete
                                          Streets policy and its focus on other modes of travel. Improvements that
                                          are consistent with the Complete Streets principles and do not require
                                          additional right-of-way may be pursued through the City’s Capital
                                          Improvement Program. As development projects are proposed and
                                          specific plans are prepared, traffic analyses should be performed to
                                          determine the appropriate timing of improvements, and greater detail
                                          regarding design and operations.
                                          The City will also participate in regional transportation planning
                                          discussions to explore longer- term projects which could affect
                                          circulation in San Leandro, including those involving additional
                                          crossings of San Francisco Bay or BART extensions. As noted earlier, the
                                          need for a second BART tube between Oakland and San Francisco has
                                          already been regionally acknowledged. The possibility of a “Southern
                                          Crossing” bridge has been explored for decades, although there are no
                                          active proposals under consideration. Projects supported by the city
                                          should be consistent with the goals and objectives of this General Plan,
                                          including not only its transportation goals but also those addressing
                                          environmental      protection,     sustainability,  and    neighborhood
                                          conservation.
4-42

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                              T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
G.       TRANSPORTATION AND THE URBAN
         ENVIRONMENT
This section of the Transportation Element addresses important
transportation-related issues in San Leandro. These issues are addressed
by policies and actions later in this chapter.           An overarching
consideration throughout this chapter is the increased engagement of
residents and businesses in transportation planning. San Leandro is
committed to the participation of individuals, community groups, and
advocacy groups in citywide planning, as well as the design and
planning of specific transportation facilities.
Traffic Calming
Traffic calming refers to projects that make permanent physical changes
to streets to slow down traffic and/or reduce traffic volumes. Such
changes are particularly helpful in two settings; first, on local streets
which are used as short-cuts or bypasses to congested thoroughfares,
and second, on residential streets which also serve as major
thoroughfares. In the former case, speeding cars and excessive traffic
may be a major problem and safety concern. In the latter case, residents
may be exposed to noise, dust, and fumes which diminish the livability
and ambiance of their properties.
The City of San Leandro adopted a Traffic Calming Program Handbook
in 2003. The Handbook defines the process for installing traffic calming
devices, including project initiation, evaluation, and prioritization. It
also presents a “toolbox” of potential traffic calming measures. The City
also has an on-line application form that may be completed by residents
seeking traffic calming, and an on-line brochure identifying the criteria.
Speed humps are the most commonly requested traffic calming device,
but they are not appropriate in all locations.
                                                                                                                     4-43

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          Local streets are eligible for speed humps if they carry at least 1,000 cars
                                          per day and have an average measured speed of 32 MPH or greater.
                                          Collector streets are eligible if they carry at least 2,000 cars per day and
                                          have an average measured speed of 24 MPH or greater. Accident history
                                          and pedestrian activity also are considered. The current procedure for
                                          approving traffic calming measures includes mail-in ballots from the
                                          surrounding neighborhood. Specific requirements have been set for the
                                          percentage of ballots returned and the percentage of these ballots in
                                          support of the improvements. The City Council has the authority to
                                          revisit or modify these requirements in the future.
                                          On residential thoroughfares and in retail districts such as Downtown,
                                          speed humps may be infeasible due to the type and volume of traffic.
                                          Speed humps are also not permitted on designated primary emergency
                                          vehicle access routes and are discouraged on transit routes. In these
                                          cases, the major objective of traffic calming is not to reduce volume but
                                          rather to use visual cues such as street trees and wider sidewalks to slow
                                          drivers down. Examples of traffic calming tools in such settings include
                                          curb bulbouts, (e.g., narrowing of the pavement and widening of the
                                          sidewalks at intersections), speed platforms, medians, pavement material
                                          changes, directional signs, and roundabouts.
                                          Traffic calming measures should reflect the unique traffic patterns and
                                          issues at each location in which they are used. To this end, it is
                                          recommended that strategies be developed at the neighborhood level
                                          rather than on a street-by-street basis. Piecemeal solutions that simply
                                          displace traffic from one street to another should be avoided. Traffic
                                          calming should also be considered an integral part of urban design
                                          improvements, such as street tree planting and landscaping. The two go
4-44
                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
hand in hand and are important parts of the overall effort to make San
Leandro neighborhoods safer and more attractive.
Parking
Parking affects the quality of life in San Leandro neighborhoods and the
economic livelihood of the City’s business districts. Addressing this issue
requires reconciling competing, and not always compatible, objectives
such as the need for convenient parking for local businesses, and the
desire to reduce dependence on private cars and the dominance of
parking lots along major streets. Parking is allowed on most streets in the
City. The City itself operates a Downtown garage and a number of
surface parking lots, most of which are located Downtown.
Parking issues primarily occur in areas that were developed before the
Zoning Code was adopted, and on blocks adjacent to major attractors
such as BART or retail stores. Most parking strategies in the city address
these areas, particularly Downtown and the San Leandro BART station
area. Data from the most recent Downtown parking study indicates that
there are approximately 4,200 parking spaces Downtown, including
2,780 on-street spaces and 1,420 off-street spaces in seven parking
facilities, including the downtown garage.
The City is in the process of developing a Parking Management Plan to
identify additional locations for off-street parking Downtown and in the
BART station area, and potential new on-street
parking strategies. Current controls are the result
of uncoordinated efforts over time, and do not
fully recognize the potential for shared parking
and public-private partnerships. Current controls
also do not adequately address the unintended
impacts of parking regulations on neighborhood
streets in high-demand areas such as Downtown.
In the future, San Leandro will work with BART,
local businesses, and residents, to maximize on-
street parking supply and identify additional
opportunities for off-street parking. Parking time
limits, permit parking programs, and similar
measures may be explored. Technology (such as
real time data on the location of available spaces)
will also be used to improve parking
management and efficiency. New approaches
                                                                                                                      4-45

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          such as mechanized or stacked parking, requirements for car-share
                                          vehicles, and requirements for secure bike parking will be considered.
                                          In residential areas, parking requirements are governed by the San
                                          Leandro Zoning Code. Two non-tandem covered off-street spaces are
                                          required for most single family homes. Multi-family parking
                                          requirements vary depending on the number of bedrooms per unit.
                                          Variable requirements have been developed to recognize the lower
                                          parking needs for certain types of units (such as senior housing) and
                                          parking within walking distance of BART. Parking requirements should
                                          be periodically revisited as technology changes and new forms of vehicle
                                          ownership are introduced. The advent of ride-hailing services (Uber,
                                          Lyft, etc.), car-sharing, and autonomous vehicles could change parking
                                          demand and vehicle storage needs in the future.
                                          Parking requirements for most commercial and industrial uses are based
                                          on the square footage and specific type of activity in the building.
                                          Parking requirements for some activities may be determined on a case by
                                          case basis through conditional use permits. The City presently allows
                                          shared, or collective parking, as a way to reduce the parking
                                          requirements for adjacent uses which may have different peak demand
                                          characteristics. Further refinement of the City’s shared parking policies
                                          and regulations will take place in the future.
                                          The City’s parking requirements must be met when a new project is
                                          initially developed and when a structure undergoes a major alteration or
                                          enlargement. A simple change in occupancy of an existing structure only
                                          requires compliance with the parking standards when the use changes
                                          from one broad classification to another (such as from industrial to
                                          commercial). Other exemptions from parking standards will need to be
                                          examined closely as employment densities increase.
                                          Traffic Safety
                                          The safety of drivers, passengers, bicyclists, and pedestrians is a
                                          fundamental transportation goal. Increased traffic volumes and the
                                          increased presence of pedestrians and bicyclists on local streets create the
                                          potential for additional collisions and the need for new safety
                                          improvements and enforcement programs.
                                          Police data indicate there has been a downward trend in collisions, with
                                          459 collisions in 2010 and 280 in 2013. Based on five years of data (from
                                          July 2009 to June 2014), there were 77 collisions involving a person on a
4-46

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                 T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
bicycle, including one fatality and 68 injuries. There were also 112
collisions involving pedestrians, including four fatalities and 111 injuries.
The City reviews accident frequency data on a regular basis to identify
where changes to the roadway system are needed. In response to this
data, the City undertakes projects to improve intersection visibility, stop
or slow traffic, or warn drivers of potential dangers. Safety
improvements are balanced with the need to maintain traffic flow for
residents and businesses.
San Leandro also has a “Safe Routes to School” program, implemented
in partnership with Caltrans and the Alameda County Transportation
Commission.       Between 2012 and 2015, the program resulted in
educational and participatory initiatives to improve the safety of
children walking and bicycling to schools. Safe Routes to School has
promoted public health and fitness by making walking and bicycling a
safer alternative for students. This in turn provides the collateral benefit
of reducing vehicle trips by parents, which helps the City achieve its air
quality and greenhouse gas reduction targets. Future changes associated
with Safe Routes to School could include crosswalk improvements,
traffic calming, enforcement, and other measures that make walking and
bicycling more viable for students.
Traffic speed is another important aspect of roadway safety. Speed limits
are posted on all collector and arterial streets in the City, and on some
local streets. On those streets that receive federal funds (known as
Federal Aid Routes), the speed limits must be justified every five years
through an Engineering and
Traffic Survey. The California
Vehicle Code establishes specific
criteria for how speed limits are
set on Federal Aid Routes; the
City may not enforce the limits if
they do not meet these criteria.
Thus, reducing the speed limit
may not always be the most
feasible course of action on a
street.       Vigilant        police
enforcement,       posted      signs,
education programs, and traffic
calming strategies should be used
in conjunction with speed limits
to help maintain safe streets.
                                                                                                                        4-47

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          San Leandro is also taking steps to make its streets safer for persons with
                                          special needs, including seniors and persons with disabilities. These
                                          include the development of ramps and curb cuts for wheelchairs, the
                                          ongoing maintenance of sidewalks, accessible pedestrian signals, and the
                                          appropriate siting of bus shelters and street furniture to accommodate
                                          disabled persons. The use of larger lettering on City street signs also has
                                          been suggested and be further explored in the future.
                                          Pavement Maintenance
                                          San Leandro faces the ongoing task of keeping its roads in good
                                          operating condition. The City will continue to operate pavement
                                          management and street rehabilitation programs. These programs will be
                                          coordinated with other infrastructure projects, such as utility
                                          undergrounding and sewer/water repair, to minimize traffic disruption
                                          and ensure that maintenance funds are spent efficiently.
                                          Pedestrian-Oriented Design
                                          One of the Transportation Element’s goals is to promote development
                                          that is designed to meet the needs of pedestrians as well as automobiles.
                                          The goal is not to make it more difficult to drive, but rather to make
                                          highways, parking lots, and cars in general, a less dominant feature of
                                          the cityscape. For instance, the practice of siting large parking lots in
                                          front of commercial uses on many San Leandro thoroughfares has
                                          created an environment that is not very welcoming to pedestrians.
                                          Future standards for such areas should encourage the placement of
                                          parking to the rear of the lot, the siting of the storefront near the front
                                          setback line, and the orientation of the structure to the street and
                                          sidewalk.
4-48

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Urban design changes and tree planting should create an environment
that is conducive to walking. Along transit lines and around transit
stations, new development should be oriented in a way that encourages
access to BART and AC Transit. Parking lot design should emphasize
landscaping, attractive lighting, and screening from nearby residential
areas.
Interagency Coordination
The only way to effectively increase mobility in San Leandro is through
cooperative efforts with other jurisdictions. Regional strategies are also
essential to address the environmental effects of transportation,
particularly air quality and greenhouse gas emissions. Several agencies
in the Bay Area have been created to facilitate this process, including the
Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC), the Association of Bay
Area Governments (ABAG), the Bay Area Air Quality Management
District (BAAQMD) and the Alameda County Transportation
Commission (ACTC).
At the regional level, MTC is tasked with developing the Regional
Transportation Plan (RTP) and determining the allocation of funds to
capital projects and operations.          Plan Bay Area, developed
collaboratively by ABAG, MTC, and Bay Area local governments and
adopted in 2013, serves as the RTP for the region. Plan Bay Area
estimated that $292 billion would be available between 2012 and 2040 to
fund transportation facilities and services in the Bay Area. Some 55
percent of these funds are to be allocated to transit operations and
maintenance, while 32 percent will be allocated to road operations and
maintenance. Only 12 percent would be allocated to new facilities, with
transit receiving a larger share than roads. San Leandro will work with
MTC and ACTC to ensure that it receives its fair share of these funds.
Major RTP expenditures impacting San Leandro include pavement
maintenance and street rehabilitation programs, investments in bridges
and highways, signalization projects, subsidies for AC Transit and
BART, bus rapid transit, bicycle/pedestrian projects, transit-oriented
development projects, and transit system operational improvements.
Projects that increase mobility in Priority Development Areas (such as
Downtown San Leandro and Bayfair) are more likely to receive funding,
given the emphasis of Plan Bay Area on growth around transit facilities.
                                                                                                                      4-49
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          At the County level, ACTC is charged with adopting and implementing
                                          a Congestion Management Program (CMP), preparing and updating a 20
                                          to 25-year Countywide Transportation Plan, coordinating this Plan with
                                          local funding programs, and monitoring traffic and levels of service on
                                          designated CMP routes. The most recent CMP was adopted in 2012. It
                                          lays out a strategy for meeting transportation needs for all users in
                                          Alameda County and includes a variety of local street, freeway, transit,
                                          and active transportation projects.
                                          The City participates in development of the RTP and CMP and in the
                                          technical and strategic transportation initiatives organized by the MTC,
                                          ABAG, BAAQMD, and the ACTC. Continued involvement by local
                                          elected officials and staff will help position the City for future funding
                                          through grants, matching funds, and other types of support for
                                          transportation improvements.
4-50
                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                  T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
H.         GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
C OORDINATING L AND U SE AND T RANSPORTATION
GOAL T-1        Coordinate land use and transportation planning.
P OLICY T-1.1 Decision Making. Ensure that future land use and
              development decisions are in balance with the capacity
              of the City’s transportation system and consistent with
              the City's goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
P OLICY T-1.2  Keeping Pace With Growth. Improve transportation
              infrastructure at a rate that keeps pace with growth.
P OLICY T-1.3 Mitigation of Development Impacts.                     Require
              developers to address the impacts that their projects will
              have on the City’s transportation system. A variety of
              mitigation measures, including impact fees, street
              improvements,          traffic  signal     and      Intelligent
              Transportation          Systems     (ITS)     improvements,
              transportation demand management (TDM) measures,
              and improvement of non-automobile transportation
              modes, should be considered.
              Action T-1.3.A: Impact Fee Review
              Periodically review City transportation impact fees to ensure
              that they are competitive with the rest of the Bay Area,
              adequately address local street improvement costs, and are
              consistent with the policies, maps, and growth forecasts in the
              General Plan.
              Action T-1.3.B: Traffic Analysis Requirements
              Require traffic analyses for new development that will
              generate substantial volumes of traffic. Identify mitigation
              measures as appropriate to address impacts.
              Action T-1.3.C: Alternative Mitigation Measures
              Allow and encourage the use of mitigation measures which
              achieve outcomes other than increasing roadway capacity,
              such as the provision of car-sharing vehicles or bicycle lockers
              on-site, transportation demand management programs, and
              the incorporation of features to support active transportation
                                                                                                                         4-51

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                       modes. Such measures are particularly encouraged when
                                                       increases to roadway capacity would impede pedestrian or
                                                       bicycle movement, eliminate a bus stop, adversely affect
                                                       nearby structures, or increase traffic volumes on residential
                                                       streets.
                                                       See also Action T-5.2.A on Level of Service
                                          Policy T-1.4 Transit Oriented Development. Ensure that properties
                                                       adjacent to the City’s BART stations and along heavily
                                                       used public transit routes are developed in a way that
                                                       maximizes the potential for transit use and reduces
                                                       dependence on single-occupancy vehicles. Such
                                                       development should be of particularly high quality,
                                                       include open space and other amenities, and respect the
                                                       scale and character of nearby neighborhoods.
                                                       Action T-1.4.A: BART Station Area Recommendations
                                                       Implement the land use and transportation recommendations
                                                       identified in the Downtown Transit Oriented Development
                                                       (TOD) Strategy (as amended pursuant to Action 6.01-B of the
                                                       Land Use Element), the East 14th Street South Area
                                                       Development Strategy, and the Bay Fair TOD Specific Plan,
                                                       once it is adopted.
                                                       Action T-1.4.B: Minimum Density and Intensity Standards
                                                       Adopt and maintain minimum density and intensity zoning
                                                       provisions for sites near the Downtown and Bay Fair BART
                                                       stations, in Downtown San Leandro, and along the East 14th
                                                       Street transit corridor.
                                                       Action T-1.4.C: Evaluation of Transit Needs in New
                                                       Development
                                                       Evaluate the need for public transit as part of the development
                                                       review process, both for new projects and for re-use or
                                                       redevelopment projects.
4-52

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Policy T-1.5 Land Use Strategies. Promote land use concepts that
             reduce the necessity of driving, encourage public transit
             use, and reduce trip lengths. These concepts include
             live-work development, mixed use development, higher
             densities along public transit corridors, and the
             provision of commercial services close to residential
             areas and employment centers.
             Action T-1.5.A: Reducing Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT)
             Through Zoning
             Establish zoning densities and intensities that reinforce the
             city's desire to reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT) by
             focusing development near transit, and providing
             opportunities to live, work, and shop in close proximity.
             Action T-1.5.B: Subdivision and Engineering Standards
             Review the City's subdivision and engineering standards to
             ensure that they support the goal of being a more pedestrian-
             friendly city. This may include requirements for shorter block
             lengths and internal walkway systems in new development, as
             well as easements for mid-block paths, through-paths at the
             ends of cul-de-sacs, and other measures that increase
             walkability.
             Action T-1.5.C: Redesign of Commercial Strips
             Develop a strategy for “re-tooling” auto-oriented strip
             shopping centers into pedestrian-oriented neighborhood
             centers. The strategy should also address the need for safe,
             inviting pedestrian connections between these centers and
             nearby neighborhoods.
Policy T-1.6 Siting of Housing and Public Facilities. Consider
             access to public transportation to be a major factor in the
             location and siting of future housing and public
             facilities. Conversely, ensure that community facilities
             such as libraries, parks, schools, and community, civic,
             and recreation centers, are served by public transit.
Policy T-1.7 Off-Street Parking Standards. Implement variable
             parking standards that reflect such factors as proximity
             to transit, type of occupancy (seniors, etc.), number of
             bedrooms (for housing), and the expected level of
                                                                                                                      4-53

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                        parking demand. Parking requirements should reflect
                                                        the City's goal of reducing vehicle miles traveled.
                                                        Action T-1.7.A: Parking Reductions
                                                        Allow reduced parking requirements where specific conditions
                                                        are met. These conditions should include transportation
                                                        demand management measures, such as shuttle buses to
                                                        BART and other destinations, carpooling and vanpooling
                                                        programs, shared parking, provision of shared cars or bicycles,
                                                        and bicycle storage facilities.
                                                        Action T-1.7.B: Downtown Parking Management Plan
                                                        Implementation
                                                        Implement the recommendations of the 2016 Downtown
                                                        Parking Management Plan. In areas of highest parking
                                                        demand, strategies should be implemented to more efficiently
                                                        manage employee and customer parking, as well as parking for
                                                        nearby destinations such as BART.
                                          Policy T-1.8  Shared Parking. Promote the concept of parking areas
                                                        which are “shared” by multiple uses with different peak
                                                        demand periods as a means of reducing the total
                                                        amount of parking which must be provided.
                                          Policy T-1.9  Impacts of Transportation Facilities. Work with public
                                                        and private agencies to reduce the negative impacts
                                                        (noise, vibrations, fumes, etc.) of major transportation
                                                        facilities and transit vehicles on adjacent land uses.
                                          Policy T-1.10 Reduced Trip Generation. Encourage local employers
                                                        to develop programs that promote ridesharing, flextime
                                                        and telecommuting, bicycle use, and other modes of
                                                        transportation that reduce the number and distance of
                                                        vehicle trips generated.
                                          Policy T-1.11 Impacts of Demographic Change.                   Incorporate
                                                        demographic trends and forecasts into transportation
                                                        planning, particularly the projected increase in the
                                                        senior population and the potential for higher rates of
                                                        vehicle ownership in larger households.
4-54

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                 T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
C OMPLETE S TREETS
GOAL T-2       Design and operate streets to be safe, attractive, and
               accessible for all transportation users whether they
               are pedestrians, bicyclist, transit riders or motorists,
               regardless of age or ability.
Policy T-2.1 Complete Streets Serving All Users and Modes. Create
             and maintain "complete” streets that provide safe,
             comfortable, and convenient travel through a
             comprehensive, integrated transportation network that
             serves all users.
             Action T-2.1.A: Design Standards and Maintenance
             Implement the design standards and maintenance practices
             outlined in the San Leandro Bicycle and Pedestrian Master
             Plan, transit oriented development plans, and other
             documents that focus on balancing different transportation
             modes.
             Action T-2.1.B: Street Classification and Design Standards
             Incorporate Alameda County Transportation Commission
             guidelines for the classification of streets based on priority
             user groups, such as pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit users.
             This should include the adoption of Complete Streets Design
             Guidelines that, as appropriate, incorporate best practices such
             as National Association of City Transportation Officials
             (NACTO)         standards    and    the    Federal     Highway
             Administration’s Separated Bike Lane Planning and Design
             Guide.
             Action T-2.1.C: Narrower Streets
             Where aesthetic, safety and emergency access considerations
             can be adequately addressed, allow narrower streets in new
             development to create a more intimately-scaled street
             environment.
Policy T-2.2 Context Sensitive Design.            Be sensitive to local
             conditions when planning and implementing street
             improvement projects.           The City will work with
             residents, businesses, and other stakeholders to improve
             streets in a way that creates a stronger sense of place.
                                                                                                                        4-55

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                       Action T-2.2.A: East 14th Street Streetscape Improvements
                                                       Pursue public improvements to East 14th Street which make
                                                       the street more transit- and pedestrian-friendly, especially in
                                                       Downtown San Leandro. These improvements could include
                                                       wider sidewalks, specially designed pedestrian crossings at key
                                                       intersections, street trees, undergrounding of utilities,
                                                       improved transit waiting areas, and landscaping.
                                                       Neighborhood residents, businesses, and local motorists
                                                       should be involved in the planning and design of such
                                                       improvements. The ultimate objective should be to create a
                                                       safer, more welcoming, and attractive environment for
                                                       pedestrians.
                                                       Action T-2.2.B: Southeast Oakland-Northeast San Leandro
                                                       Complete Streets Initiative
                                                       Pursue funding to undertake a collaborative “complete
                                                       streets” initiative with the City of Oakland to address
                                                       transportation issues along the Oakland-San Leandro border
                                                       extending between East 14th Street and Interstate 580. The
                                                       study should address traffic calming, truck management,
                                                       traffic safety, parking, streetscape improvements, and other
                                                       issues, and should result in projects and procedures that
                                                       reduce vehicle conflicts and improve conditions for bicycle and
                                                       pedestrians.
                                          Policy T-2.3 Complete Streets Operating Procedures. Incorporate
                                                       "Complete Streets" practices as a routine part of
                                                       everyday operations, and a factor to be considered in
                                                       every project, program, and practice relating to the
                                                       transportation network.         The concept of Complete
                                                       Streets should be incorporated into the planning,
                                                       funding, design, approval, and implementation
                                                       processes for any construction, reconstruction, retrofit,
                                                       maintenance, operations, alteration, or repair of streets,
                                                       except where consistent with a formally adopted policy
                                                       indicating where exceptions may apply.
                                                       Action T-2.3.A: Maintenance, Planning, and Design
                                                       Practices
                                                       Continue to implement maintenance, planning, and design
                                                       practices that are consistent with the desire to promote
                                                       bicycling, walking, and public transit. This should include
                                                       project review and implementation checklists, and flow charts
4-56

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                 T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
             that provide a means to ensure that complete streets objectives
             and best practices are considered.
             Action T-2.3.B: Stakeholder Coordination
             Develop and/or clearly define a process to allow for stakeholder
             involvement on transportation projects and plans including,
             but not limited to, the City’s Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory
             Committee (BPAC) and/or other advisory groups.
             Action T-2.3.C: Performance Measures
             Collect and analyze baseline data that enables periodic
             evaluations of how well the transportation network of San
             Leandro is serving each category of users.
Policy T-2.4 Connectivity. Ensure that the design of streets and
             other transportation features helps to better connect the
             city’s circulation network and facilitate safer and more
             convenient travel between San Leandro and
             surrounding communities.
Policy T-2.5 Exceptions.        Maintain a process for approving
             exceptions to the City’s complete streets requirements,
             including written findings and sign-off requirements for
             the Engineering and Transportation Director or his/her
             designee.
Policy T-2.6 Building Design and Site Planning. Ensure that the
             site planning and design of new development promotes
             the use of non-auto modes of transportation by
             including amenities such as sidewalks, bike lockers, and
             bus shelters.
             Action T-2.6.A: Design Guidelines
              Update design guidelines and standards for the design of
             pedestrian and bicycle facilities to ensure compliance with
             state and federal (including American Disability Act)
             standards and best practices.
Policy T-2.7 Special Transportation Needs. Incorporate the special
             mobility needs of seniors, children, and persons with
             disabilities in planning for complete streets. The City
             recognizes that not all segments of the population can
             easily walk or bicycle to their destinations and will strive
             to reduce barriers to mobility through provisions such as
                                                                                                                        4-57

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                       disabled parking, larger street sign lettering, accessible
                                                       pedestrian signals (APS), well-illuminated streets and
                                                       well-maintained         sidewalks,      wheelchair       ramps,
                                                       improved para-transit, and other amenities to
                                                       accommodate those who are less mobile.
                                          Policy T-2.8 Car-Sharing and Bike-Sharing. Encourage car-sharing,
                                                       bike-sharing and other programs that reduce the need
                                                       for individual car ownership. Such programs should be
                                                       focused in the Downtown area and near the city’s two
                                                       BART stations.
                                          B ICYCLE AND P EDESTRIAN C IRCULATION
                                          GOAL T-3       Promote and accommodate alternative, environment-
                                                         ally-friendly methods of transportation, such as
                                                         walking and bicycling.
                                          Policy T-3.1 Citywide Bikeway System. Develop and maintain a
                                                       bikeway system that meets the needs of both utilitarian
                                                       and recreational users, reduces vehicle trips, and
                                                       connects residential neighborhoods to employment and
                                                       shopping areas, BART stations, schools, recreational
                                                       facilities and other destinations throughout San Leandro
                                                       and nearby communities.
                                                       Action T-3.1.A: Bikeway Plan Implementation
                                                       Maintain a Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan and update
                                                       that Plan every five years to identify existing and future needs
                                                       and provide specific recommendations for facility and program
                                                       improvements and phasing. The Plan Map should be
                                                       formatted for broad public distribution and should show key
                                                       bicycle facilities, destinations, connections to nearby
                                                       communities, and safety information. Any changes to the
                                                       Plan should maintain consistency with city, county, regional,
                                                       state, and federal policy documents.
4-58

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
             Action T-3.1.B: Capital Improvement Scheduling
             Include a prioritized list of bicycle and pedestrian
             improvements, along with cost estimates, in the City's Capital
             Improvements Program. The City should develop and apply
             ranking criteria for bicycle and pedestrian projects such as
             number of activity centers served, closure of critical gaps,
             elimination of safety hazards, level of existing use, and input
             from the public. Typical projects could include bikeway and
             bicycle parking installations and sidewalk and crosswalk
             improvements, as well as education programs and public
             awareness campaigns. A priority should be placed on buffered
             (Class IV) bike lane projects, providing a safe lane for
             bicyclists with a designated buffer space separating the bike
             lane from the vehicle travel lane.
             Action T-3.1.C: Pedestrian and Bicycle Surveys
             Periodically conduct bicycle and pedestrian counts and
             surveys to gauge the effectiveness of various bicycle
             improvements and programs.
             Action T-3.1.D: Maintenance Procedures
             Develop standard operating procedures for maintenance of
             bicycle facilities, including provisions for reporting and
             responding to maintenance problems.
Policy T-3.2 Funding. Maximize the City’s eligibility for funding for
             bicycle and pedestrian improvements, and aggressively
             pursue such funding to complete desired projects.
             Action T-3.2.A: Pursuit of All Eligible Funding Sources
             Identify governmental and non-governmental programs that
             fund bicycle and pedestrian capital improvements and
             programs, along with specific funding requirements and
             deadlines. Where the probability of funding is increased,
             pursue multi-jurisdictional applications with Alameda
             County, neighboring cities and other potential partners such
             as BART and the East Bay Regional Park District (EBRPD).
                                                                                                                       4-59

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                           Policy T-3.3 Designing for Multiple User Groups. Recognize the
                                                        dual needs of experienced cyclists relying on bicycles for
                                                        commute trips and daily travel and less experienced
                                                        cyclists using bicycles principally for recreation. Where
                                                        needed, develop facilities designed to serve each user
                                                        group, with recreational routes primarily using low-
                                                        volume streets and off street bike paths.
                                           Policy T-3.4 Future Trail Alignments. Encourage the use of existing
                                                        natural and man-made corridors such as creeks,
                                                        shorelines, railroad corridors, and other open space
                                                        corridors for future multi-use trail alignments.
                                                        Action T-3.4.A: East Bay Greenway
                                                        Collaborate with EBRPD and other agencies in the
                                                        development of the East Bay Greenway bicycle and pedestrian
                                                        trail between Oakland and Hayward. The Greenway should
                                                        enhance north-south travel across San Leandro by bicycles
                                                        and pedestrians. The preferred alignment of the Greenway
                                                        through San Leandro is the Union Pacific Railroad Oakland
                                                        Subdivision.
                                                        Action T-3.4.B: Crosstown Bicycle Access
                                                        Improve cross-town bicycle routes, with particular attention
                                                        on routes across Interstate 880, railroads, and other barriers
                                                        between Downtown and the Shoreline. Prioritization of cross-
                                                        town access improvements should be included in the next
                                                        update of the Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan.
                                          Policy T-3.5  Accommodation of Bicycles and Pedestrians. Require
                                                        new development to incorporate design features that
                                                        make walking, bicycling, and other forms of non-
                                                        motorized transportation more convenient and
                                                        attractive. Facilities for bicycles and pedestrians,
                                                        including secured bicycle parking, clearly marked
                                                        crosswalks, well-lit streets and sidewalks, landscaping,
                                                        and street furniture should be provided within new
                                                        employment areas, shopping destinations, multi-modal
                                                        transportation facilities, and community facilities.
4-60
                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
             Action T-3.5.A: Removing Obstacles to Bicycle Travel
             Address barriers to bicycling, such as lack of secure bicycle
             parking, signals which do not detect bicycles, difficulty of
             carrying significant baggage by bicycle, and limitations for
             bicycles on public transit.
             Action T-3.5.B: Bicycles and Public Transit
             Work with local and regional transit agencies to install bike
             racks and lockers (or expand existing installations) at transit
             stations and to expand opportunities to carry bicycles on buses
             and BART trains. Bicycle parking facilities should meet
             current best practices standards.
Policy T-3.6 Pedestrian Environment. Improve the walkability of all
             streets in San Leandro through the planning,
             implementing,        and    maintaining      of    pedestrian
             supportive infrastructure.
Policy T-3.7 Removing Barriers to Active Transportation. Reduce
             barriers to walking and other forms of active
             transportation such as incomplete or uneven sidewalks,
             lack of wheelchair ramps and curb cuts, sidewalk
             obstructions including cars parked on sidewalks, trail
             gaps, wide intersections, and poor sidewalk connections
             to transit stops.
             Action T-3.7.A: Wayfinding
             Develop a citywide bicycle and pedestrian wayfinding
             (directional signage) system.
             Action T-3.7.B: Priority Pedestrian Improvements
             Maintain and periodically update a list of priority areas for
             pedestrian improvements in the city, emphasizing those areas
             where existing and planned uses will support the highest
             volumes of pedestrian travel and those areas where safety
             improvements are needed to ensure safe pedestrian passage.
                                                                                                                       4-61
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                       Action T-3.7.C: Pedestrian and Bicycle Crossing
                                                       Improvements
                                                       Improve crossings for pedestrians and cyclists at intersections
                                                       in the City through the use of variable pavement materials,
                                                       small curb radii, bulb outs, street trees and landscaping near
                                                       corners, and other measures which shorten pedestrian
                                                       crossings or increase driver awareness of non-vehicle traffic.
                                                       Continue to ensure that sidewalks and other pedestrian
                                                       facilities meet the principles of universal design and meet
                                                       legally mandated and best practices requirements for
                                                       accessibility.
                                          Policy T-3.8 Education on Walking and Biking Benefits. Raise
                                                       awareness of the benefits of walking and biking, such as
                                                       reduced noise, energy consumption, congestion and
                                                       parking demand; improved air quality; and
                                                       opportunities for exercise and a healthy lifestyle.
                                                       Action T-3.8.A: Education Programs
                                                       Implement programs to educate bicyclists and pedestrians
                                                       about their rights and responsibilities, and reduce the potential
                                                       for conflicts with motor vehicles. A particular emphasis
                                                       should be placed on education programs for school children
                                                       and older adults.
                                                       Action T-3.8.B: Bicycle Events
                                                       Sponsor events such as "Bike to Work Day", “Walk to School
                                                       Day”, bicycle rodeos at schools, bike helmet programs, and
                                                       walking and bicycling safety courses for adults, families and
                                                       children.
                                                       Action T-3.8.C: Bike and Walk to Work Incentives
                                                       Develop an incentive program for City employees to walk and
                                                       bicycle to work. The program should serve as a model for
                                                       other employers in San Leandro to encourage walking and
                                                       bicycling to work.
                                                       Action T-3.8.D: Recognition for Bicycle Programs
                                                       Develop a program to recognize employers, organizations or
                                                       individuals that encourage walking and bicycling as an
                                                       alternative to driving.
4-62

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                              T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Policy T-3.9 Coordination with Bicycle Advocacy Groups.
             Coordinate local bicycle and pedestrian education
             efforts with interest groups and bicycle advocates such
             as Bike East Bay, the Cherry City Cyclists, and other
             relevant advocacy associations.
             Action T-3.9.A: Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory
             Committee (BPAC)
             Continue and strengthen the BPAC as a forum for ongoing
             discussions concerning bicycle and pedestrian issues. The
             BPAC should advise the City Council on the funding of
             bicycle and pedestrian improvements, including input on the
             City’s Capital Improvement Program. The BPAC should also
             review potential grant application opportunities and provide
             input on plans affecting walking and bicycling conditions,
             including roadway striping plans and updates of the Bicycle
             and Pedestrian Master Plan. A more formalized role for the
             BPAC, including regularly scheduled meetings, should be
             considered.
P UBLIC T RANSPORTATION
GOAL T-4     Ensure that public transportation is safe, convenient,
             and affordable and provides a viable alternative to
             driving.
Policy T-4.1 Coordination with Service Providers.                   Work
             collaboratively with AC Transit and BART to ensure that
             public transit service remains safe, reliable, and
             affordable, and to improve service frequency and
             coverage within San Leandro neighborhoods and
             employment centers.
             Action T-4.1.A: AC Transit Improvements
             On an ongoing basis, work with AC Transit to pursue the
             following:
             (a) Route improvements providing greater cross-town access,
             improved access to public facilities, and additional links to
             BART from San Leandro neighborhoods and employment
             centers;
                                                                                                                     4-63

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                          (b) Technological changes that improve the on-time
                                          performance of public transit vehicles and provide greater
                                          capacity and service frequency;
                                          (c) Improvements that eliminate barriers to public transit use
                                          for persons with disabilities;
                                          (d) Alternative ways to extend Bus Rapid Transit (BRT)
                                          service from the San Leandro BART station to the Bay Fair
                                          BART station;
                                          (e) Locating bus stops in a manner which minimizes the
                                          disruption of traffic and the development of bicycle lanes;
                                          (f) Representation by San Leandro residents, businesses, and
                                          officials on committees and task forces studying AC Transit
                                          service improvements in Central Alameda County.
                                          (g) Regular updates from the City’s transit district
                                          representatives to the City Council on service issues.
                                          Action T-4.1.B: BART Improvements
                                          On an ongoing basis, work with BART to pursue the
                                          following:
                                          (a) Improved intermodal connections from San Leandro's two
                                          stations to on-site buses, shuttles, and shared cars and
                                          bicycles, and to off-site destinations such as Kaiser
                                          Permanente Hospital and the Shoreline;
                                          (b) Parking management strategies around the Downtown
                                          and Bay Fair Stations which ensure that the stations remain
                                          available for use by the greatest number of persons possible,
                                          and that parking impacts on surrounding neighborhoods are
                                          minimized;
                                          (c) Urban design improvements that enhance access to both
                                          stations for pedestrians, persons with disabilities, bicycles, and
                                          public transit vehicles;
                                          (d) Transit-oriented development on land surrounding the
                                          BART Stations;
                                          (e) Strategies to reduce the noise associated with BART trains;
                                          and
                                          (f) Representation by San Leandro residents, businesses, and
                                          officials on committees and task forces studying service
                                          improvements, including the possibility of a second Transbay
                                          tube.
4-64

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Policy T-4.2 Integration of Schedules. Support efforts by BART and
             AC Transit to integrate their schedules to reduce the loss
             of time associated with intermodal connections.
Policy T-4.3 Shuttle Buses. Continue existing shuttle services and
             ensure they remain as a viable alternative to driving.
             Shuttles should connect the City's BART stations with
             major employment centers, residential areas, schools,
             shopping, health and other activity centers.
             Action T-4.3.A: Partnerships for Shuttle Service
             Continue to support LINKS shuttle bus service between
             BART and major workplaces in West San Leandro and pursue
             grants to sustain and expand this service as employment
             grows. Financial support for shuttle operations should
             continue to be provided through a special purpose business fee
             on benefitting properties.
Policy T-4.4 Coordination of Shuttle Services.             Promote the
             consolidation of private shuttle services to provide more
             efficient and comprehensive service between the City’s
             employment centers and major public transit facilities,
             and to make the expansion of such service more viable.
             Where shuttle service is provided, it should supplement
             rather than compete with conventional public transit
             service.
             Action T-4.4.A: Coordination of LINKS Scheduling and
             Routing
             Work with AC Transit and BART to synchronize LINKS
             shuttle service with BART and bus service. This should
             include routing of AC Transit bus lines to avoid redundancy
             with LINKS lines and minimize the number of transfers, and
             the timing of LINKS arrivals and departures to coincide with
             BART schedules.
Policy T-4.5 Passenger Amenities. Encourage amenities, such as
             shelters, lighting, and real-time information on bus
             arrivals and departures to increase rider safety, comfort
             and convenience.
                                                                                                                      4-65

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                       Action T-4.5.A: East 14th Street Transit Amenities
                                                       Continue to promote East 14th Street as the principal north-
                                                       south local transit route through the City, while recognizing
                                                       parallel routes such as Washington Street, Bancroft Avenue,
                                                       and San Leandro Boulevard as viable locations for enhanced
                                                       service.
                                                       Action T-4.5.B: Bus Rapid Transit
                                                       Complete improvements to facilitate Bus Rapid Transit
                                                       Service between the Oakland border and the San Leandro
                                                       BART station. The City will remain open to the possibility of
                                                       the BRT system eventually being replaced with fixed
                                                       guideway transit (e.g., light rail), if ridership justifies the
                                                       investment and significant non-local funding sources become
                                                       available. It will also continue to evaluate options for an
                                                       eventual extension to the Bay Fair BART Station.
                                          Policy T-4.6 Barrier Free Transit. Work with local public transit
                                                       providers and social service agencies to eliminate
                                                       barriers to personal mobility and more completely meet
                                                       the transportation needs of persons with disabilities.
                                          Policy T-4.7 Allocation of Regional Funds. Ensure that the City
                                                       receives its fair share of the public funds allocated for
                                                       transit services within the region.
                                          Policy T-4.8 Legislation and Pricing Strategies. Support legislation
                                                       and pricing strategies which make public transit more
                                                       economical and affordable than driving.
                                                       Action T-4.8.A: Employee Transit Incentives
                                                       Promote the use of transit vouchers, transit passes, and other
                                                       financial incentives by local businesses to encourage their
                                                       employees to use public transportation when traveling to and
                                                       from work. Promote similar incentives by local businesses to
                                                       encourage their customers to use public transportation when
                                                       shopping for goods and services. Such incentives may be
                                                       required as part of Transportation Demand Management
                                                       (TDM) programs, development agreements, or other
                                                       appropriate mechanisms.
4-66
                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                               T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Policy T-4.9 BART Station Provisions for Bicycles and Pedestrians.
             Ensure that all BART stations and major bus routes are
             served by the bicycle and pedestrian systems. Bicycle
             and pedestrian connections between the Downtown San
             Leandro and Bay Fair BART stations and the
             surrounding neighborhoods, business districts, and
             community institutions should be improved, with
             special attention to the at-grade railroad crossings and
             connections through the parking lots.
             Action T-4.9.A: Bike Sharing at BART
             Include the city's two BART stations in future phases of
             regional bike-sharing programs.
S TREETS AND H IGHWAYS
GOAL T-5     Improve major transportation arteries for circulation in
             and around the city.
Policy T-5.1 Street Hierarchy. Maintain a hierarchy of arterial,
             collector, and local streets which considers the different
             volume and function of each street type. Streets should
             be further classified based on the priority mode of travel,
             such as bicycles, pedestrians, transit, and motor vehicles.
Policy T-5.2 Evaluating Development Impacts. Use vehicle miles
             traveled (VMT) as the primary metric for evaluating the
             transportation impacts of new development proposals.
             Traffic impact studies may also consider the total
             number of trips generated and the resulting impact on
             traffic volumes and congestion (e..g., "Level of Service"),
             but VMT shall provide the primary basis for
             determining appropriate mitigation measures.
             Action T-5.2.A: New Evaluation Methodologies
             Consistent with SB 743, implement new methodologies for
             evaluating and mitigating transportation impacts which are
             based on VMT rather than level of service (LOS). Until such
             methodologies are developed and adopted, the City will use the
             following minimum acceptable peak hour service standards for
             streets and intersections:
                                                                                                                      4-67
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                              LOS "D" for streets and intersections located outside of
                                               the designated Priority Development Areas (PDAs) in
                                               Downtown, Bay Fair, and East 14th Street.
                                              LOS “E” for streets and intersections located within the
                                               designated Priority Development Areas (PDAs) for
                                               Downtown, Bay Fair, and East 14th Street.
                                          The LOS “E” standard for the PDAs recognizes the emphasis
                                          on other modes of travel in these areas, in particular public
                                          transit, bicycling, and walking. It also recognizes the desire
                                          for slower vehicle speeds to improve the safety of these other
                                          modes, as well as the character of these areas as places of
                                          concentrated economic activity and high-density housing.
                                          The standard does not preclude the City, developers, and
                                          private property owners from voluntarily implementing
                                          improvements and programs to improve levels of service.
                                          Action T-5.2.B: Capital Improvement Program
                                          Prepare and bi-annually update a capital improvement
                                          program for transportation facilities, including the projects
                                          identified in the General Plan. Pursue a variety of funding
                                          sources to construct these projects, including development
                                          fees, state and federal grants, voter approved sales tax
                                          measures, and other sources.
                                          Action T-5.2.C: Aladdin Extension
                                          Continue to explore the long-term feasibility of extending
                                          Aladdin or Montague Avenues eastward across the Union
                                          Pacific Railroad to San Leandro Boulevard or Washington
                                          Avenue, either as a multi-modal roadway or as an exclusive
                                          bicycle/pedestrian route.
                                          Action T-5.2.D: Eden Road
                                          As funding becomes available, complete the Eden Road
                                          improvement project, including paving and sidewalk
                                          improvements, and improved connectivity between Davis
                                          Street and Doolittle Drive.
4-68

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                 T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
             Action T-5.2.E: Improvements to Marina Boulevard and
             Merced Street
             Pursue funding for the widening of Marina Boulevard from
             four to six lanes from Orchard Avenue east to Alvarado
             Street. In addition, implement design improvements to
             Marina Boulevard between Merced Street and the Shoreline,
             and to Merced Street between Williams Street and Fairway
             Drive. These improvements should create a more attractive
             streetscape, better provisions for bicycles and pedestrians, and
             landscaping and lighting improvements which enhance these
             streets as major thoroughfares.
Policy T-5.3 Maintenance. Regularly maintain City streets and
             traffic control devices to ensure that streets operate
             safely and efficiently. The City will strive for an overall
             Pavement Condition Index of 76, which is the lower
             limit of industry best practices.
             Action T-5.3.A: Funding for Maintenance
             Ensure that sufficient funding is allocated to road
             maintenance and repair during the annual municipal
             budgeting process. Consider the use of voter-approved tax
             measures (such as Measure HH) and other financing tools to
             generate revenue.
Policy T-5.4 Traffic Flow Improvements.                Use a variety of
             technology-driven measures to improve traffic flow at
             congested intersections.
             Action T-5.4.A: Traffic Monitoring and Signal Timing
             Conduct traffic monitoring at key intersections in San
             Leandro. Based on the monitoring data, undertake signal
             timing, phasing projects, adaptive traffic signals, and
             Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) to improve traffic
             flow, safety, and roadway and intersection performance.
Policy T-5.5 East-West Circulation. Strive to improve east-west
             circulation across San Leandro without adversely
             impacting residential neighborhoods. Encourage signal
             timing, signage improvements, turn lanes, and other
             measures which improve circulation but do not involve
             major physical changes or traffic increases on residential
             streets.
                                                                                                                        4-69
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                           Policy T-5.6 Railroad Crossings. Periodically evaluate the need to
                                                        convert existing at-grade railroad crossings to grade-
                                                        separated crossings. Such considerations should be
                                                        based on the availability of state and federal funds and
                                                        the volume of train and auto traffic at the crossing
                                                        locations. Require any future railroad overpass or
                                                        underpass to be attractively landscaped, with provisions
                                                        for bicycles and pedestrians.
                                                        Action T-5.6.A: Washington Avenue Underpass
                                                        Consider alternatives to the Washington Avenue rail
                                                        underpass south of San Leandro Boulevard during the design
                                                        and planning of the East Bay Greenway. Alternatives should
                                                        include the redesign of Washington Avenue as a surface
                                                        boulevard, with a grade-level, signalized crossing of the
                                                        Greenway. Washington Avenue should be enhanced as a
                                                        southern gateway to Downtown San Leandro. Alternatively,
                                                        the underpass could be retained, with a grade-separated
                                                        greenway and trail above.
                                                        Action T-5.6.B: Hesperian Washington, and Halcyon
                                                        Crossings
                                                        Study the feasibility of grade separations and other traffic
                                                        safety and flow improvements at the Hesperian, Washington,
                                                        and Halcyon crossings of the Niles subdivision of the Union
                                                        Pacific tracks. These crossings are located on Hesperian just
                                                        north of Springlake Drive, Washington just north of Chapman
                                                        Road, and Halcyon just east of Washington.
                                          Policy T-5.7  Technology and Roadway Efficiency. Use technology,
                                                        including smartphone applications, roadway sensors,
                                                        and real time data on congestion, travel time, and
                                                        parking supply to create a more efficient transportation
                                                        system, and to maximize the benefits of the existing road
                                                        system before investing in its expansion.
                                          Policy T-5.8  Electric and Low Emission Vehicles. Plan for a
                                                        substantial increase in the number of electric vehicles
                                                        and other low-emission or zero-emission vehicles on city
                                                        streets. This should include the development of electric
                                                        vehicle charging stations at the BART stations, in large
                                                        parking structures and parking lots, at City facilities
4-70
                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                             T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
             (including City parking facilities), in high-employment
             workplaces, and at other destinations around the city.
Policy T-5.9 Autonomous (Driverless) Vehicles.              Monitor the
             development of autonomous vehicle technology, and
             actively take part in regional discussions regarding the
             potential effects of these vehicles on local and regional
             traffic flow.
N EIGHBORHOOD T RAFFIC M ANAGEMENT
GOAL T-6     Minimize the adverse effects of business, industrial,
             and through traffic on neighborhood streets.
Policy T-6.1 Traffic Calming Strategies. Use a variety of approaches
             to slow down or “calm” traffic on San Leandro streets,
             based on the specific conditions on each street.
             Emphasize approaches that improve conditions for
             pedestrians and bicyclists and enhance neighborhood
             aesthetics.
             See also Goal T-2 on Complete Streets
             Action 6.1.A: Traffic Calming Strategies
             Continue to implement a traffic calming program for
             residential streets. This program should include a menu of
             urban design improvements, pavement changes, and
             intersection modifications aimed at slowing motor vehicle
             traffic and improving pedestrian and bicycle safety. The
             approval procedure should ne periodically reviewed to ensure
             that General Plan goals are being achieved.
Policy T-6.2 Collector and Local Street Objectives. On collector
             streets, support traffic calming measures that reduce
             average travel speed but maintain roadway capacity and
             function as well as public transit capacity. On local
             streets, emphasize visual deterrents to through-traffic
             (such as street trees, planters, and narrower pavement
             width at intersections), rather than physical obstacles to
             traffic flow (such as street closures). Street closures
                                                                                                                    4-71

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                        should only be used as a last resort to address traffic
                                                        conflicts.
                                          Policy T-6.3  Neighborhood-wide Approach. Wherever practical,
                                                        require traffic calming projects to be done at a
                                                        neighborhood level, rather than on a piecemeal basis.
                                                        Street alterations that cause traffic to be displaced from
                                                        one residential street to another should generally be
                                                        discouraged. Street alterations that impede access by
                                                        emergency vehicles should be prohibited.
                                                         Action T-6.3.A Traffic Study Requirements for Road
                                                        Changes
                                                        Require a study of traffic impacts and a plan for
                                                        accommodating displaced traffic before making major changes
                                                        to street design or circulation patterns.
                                          Policy T-6.4  Coordination with Urban Design Improvements.
                                                        Integrate traffic calming objectives into major urban
                                                        design projects and streetscape improvement plans.
                                          Policy T-6.5  Truck Routes. Designate appropriate San Leandro
                                                        streets as truck routes so that industrial traffic is
                                                        channeled away from residential areas. The selection of
                                                        truck routes should consider neighborhood impacts,
                                                        freeway access, truck parking needs, turning radii
                                                        requirements, and the locations of businesses generating
                                                        the largest volumes of truck traffic.
                                                        Action T-6.5.A: Truck Route Modifications
                                                        Following adoption of the General Plan, evaluate potential
                                                        changes to the City’s truck route map to further protect
                                                        residential areas from truck traffic, particularly in the
                                                        Washington Manor area and in Northeast San Leandro.
                                                        Where appropriate, undertake roadway and intersection
                                                        improvements to designated truck routes to ensure the safe
                                                        transportation of goods through the city.
                                           Policy T-6.6 Truck Traffic on Residential Streets. Consider road
                                                        design improvements, changes to truck route
                                                        designations, signage, and other tools to discourage
                                                        truck traffic from using residential streets.
4-72

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                             T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
             Action T-6.6.A: West San Leandro Road Improvements
             As part of an update to the West San Leandro Plan, consider
             additional measures to minimize truck traffic on residential
             streets, including the installation of a traffic signal at
             Polvorosa Street and Doolittle Drive.
             Action T-6.6.B: Enforcement of Truck Regulations
             Enforce truck traffic restrictions on non-designated truck
             routes, and regulations for truck parking on City streets.
             Identify locations where signs prohibiting truck parking and
             truck traffic may be required.
             Action T-6.6.C: Truck Route Signage and Information
             Update citywide truck route signage and provide information
             on truck routes to local businesses, drivers, and business
             organizations.
Policy T-6.7 Siting of Businesses with Truck Traffic. To the extent
             feasible, locate businesses projected to generate large
             amounts of truck traffic away from residential areas.
             Ingress and egress for such businesses should be
             designed to minimize the possibility of truck traffic
             impacting residential streets.
T RAFFIC S AFETY
GOAL T-7     Improve traffic safety and reduce the potential for
             collisions on San Leandro streets.
Policy T-7.1 Law Enforcement. Aggressively enforce traffic safety
             laws on San Leandro streets, including speed limits, red
             light violations, and pedestrian and bicycle lane right-of-
             way violations.
Policy T-7.2 Capital Improvements. Identify capital improvements
             and other measures which improve the safety of
             bicyclists, pedestrians, and motor vehicles on San
             Leandro streets.
                                                                                                                    4-73
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                        Action T-7.2.A: Collision Data Collection and Remediation
                                                        Collect and evaluate data on the top collision locations in San
                                                        Leandro, including separate tracking of collisions involving
                                                        bicycles and pedestrians. Develop measures to reduce the
                                                        number of collisions at these locations.
                                                        Action T-7.2.B: Pedestrian Safety Improvements
                                                        Develop programs to improve pedestrian safety at both
                                                        controlled and uncontrolled intersections throughout the City.
                                                        Programs that use features such as countdown crosswalks,
                                                        lighted crosswalks, rectangular rapidly flashing beacons,
                                                        accessible pedestrian signals, and similar features should be
                                                        explored.
                                          Policy T-7.3  Street Lighting. Improve street lighting in a way that
                                                        addresses public safety and security concerns and
                                                        provides adequate night-time visibility while still
                                                        achieving energy conservation goals and protecting the
                                                        privacy of adjacent properties. A priority should be
                                                        placed on improvements in higher density housing areas
                                                        and in areas where growth is expected under this
                                                        General Plan, such as Downtown San Leandro. Street
                                                        light improvements also should be required as new infill
                                                        development takes place.
                                          Policy T-7.4  Public Education. Increase public awareness of laws
                                                        relating to parking, circulation, speed limits, right-of-
                                                        way, pedestrian crossings, and other aspects of
                                                        transportation safety in the City.
                                           Policy T-7.5 Coordination with Schools. Work collaboratively with
                                                        local school districts and school administrators to
                                                        address pick-up, drop-off, parking, safety, and other
                                                        traffic-related issues around school campuses.
                                                        Action T-7.5.A: Safe Route to School Program
                                                        Continue to implement Safe Routes to School programs,
                                                        prepare Suggested Routes to School maps, and construct
                                                        improvements at schools throughout the City to improve
                                                        pedestrian and bicycle safety.
4-74
                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                  T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
Policy T-7.6 Safe Visibility. Maintain site design, engineering, and
             zoning standards which ensure that adequate visibility
             is maintained along streets and driveways.
              Action T-7.6.A: Arterial and Collector Intersection Sign
             Improvements
             Develop and implement a signing program along the arterial
             and collector streets to more clearly identify intersections for
             all users and to improve the visibility of street signs and
             directional signs.
Policy T-7.7 Funding.        Pursue grants for the improvement of
             pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicle safety, including a
             greater focus on traffic law and speed enforcement.
Policy T-7.8 Staff Education. Ensure that City Staff is up to date and
             educated on the latest technology and/or methods of
             improving safety for all modes of transportation.
             Action T-7.8.A: Staff Education
             Facilitate the continuing education of City staff in state of the
             art transportation techniques, including traffic flow
             improvements,       adaptive   traffic   signals,     Intelligent
             Transportation Systems (ITS), traffic calming, bicycle and
             pedestrian improvements, and safety and public education.
I NTERAGENCY C OORDINATION
GOAL T-8     Coordinate local transportation planning with other
             agencies and jurisdictions.
Policy T-8.1 Coordination with Regional Agencies. Work closely
             with the Metropolitan Transportation Commission, the
             Alameda County Transportation Commission, AC
             Transit, BART, and other agencies to address regional
             transportation issues affecting San Leandro.
             Action T-8.1.A: Oakland Development Impacts
             Monitor expansion plans for Oakland International Airport
             and Oakland's Coliseum City project and advocate measures
             requiring mitigation of potential traffic impacts on San
             Leandro streets.
                                                                                                                         4-75
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
                                                          Action T-8.1.B: Emergency Preparedness
                                                          Coordinate with highway and public transit agencies to
                                                          develop contingency plans in the event that road or transit
                                                          service is disrupted by accident or disaster.
                                          Policy    T-8.2 Representation on Commissions. Promote City
                                                          representation on regional commissions and task forces
                                                          addressing transportation issues.
                                                          Action T-8.2A: Commission Representation
                                                          Seek representation by San Leandro’s elected officials on the
                                                          Metropolitan Transportation Commission and other regional
                                                          commissions and agencies addressing transportation issues.
                                                          Action T-8.2.B: Transbay Crossings
                                                          Remain an active participant in discussions about additional
                                                          bridge or tunnel crossings between the East Bay and the
                                                          Peninsula/ San Francisco, including a potential second BART
                                                          tube.
                                          Policy T-8.3    Special Needs Groups. Work with social service
                                                          agencies, advocacy groups, non-profit organizations,
                                                          school districts, and the private sector to better respond
                                                          to the transportation needs of all segments of the
                                                          community including seniors, children, persons with
                                                          disabilities, and lower income households.
                                          Policy T-8.4    Community Input. Actively seek community and
                                                          neighborhood input in the transportation planning
                                                          process.
                                                           Action T-8.4.A: Neighborhood Liaison
                                                          Maintain an ongoing dialogue with neighborhood groups
                                                          about traffic congestion, road condition, trucks, and
                                                          ingress/egress issues on San Leandro streets. Community
                                                          groups should be periodically consulted to evaluate the
                                                          performance of traffic control devices and measures, and to
                                                          identify potential areas for improvement.
                                          Policy T-8.5    Coordination with Caltrans.                 Coordinate local
                                                          transportation planning programs and improvement
                                                          projects with Caltrans. Integrate East 14th Street, Davis
                                                          Street, and Doolittle Drive into the local transportation
                                                          system to the maximum extent feasible.
4-76

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                 T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
             Action T-8.5.A: Caltrans Arterials
             Periodically evaluate the feasibility of transferring
             responsibility for East 14th Street, Davis Street, and Doolittle
             Drive from Caltrans to the City of San Leandro. Transfer
             should only be pursued in the event that:
             (a) the roads are brought up to a state of good repair;
             (b) there is not an adverse fiscal impact on the city; and
             (c) sufficient funding sources for maintenance and operation
                  of the roadway has been identified.
             As long as these facilities remain under State control, the City
             will coordinate with Caltrans on signal phasing, road and
             streetscape improvements, bicycle and pedestrian facilities,
             and similar projects.
Policy T-8.6 Railroads. Work with the Union Pacific Railroad and
             AMTRAK to minimize the impacts of their facilities on
             the City and to better educate the public about railroad
             crossing safety and the materials transported by rail
             through the city. Collaborate with California Public
             Utilities Commission (CPUC) to explore potential
             railroad improvement projects and funding sources in
             San Leandro.
Policy T-8.7 Coordination of Public Works Projects. Coordinate
             road, infrastructure, utility, and telecommunication
             construction and maintenance projects to minimize
             disruption of local traffic patterns.
Policy T-8.8 Adjacent Cities.         Coordinate the planning of the
             roadway, bicycle, and pedestrian systems with adjacent
             jurisdictions, particularly the cities of Oakland,
             Alameda, and Hayward, and the County of Alameda.
             The City should maximize regional connectivity by
             creating seamless connections to adjacent transportation
             systems at the city borders.
                                                                                                                        4-77
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
T R A N S P O R T A T I O N
4-78
                                                                                  5
A.      OVERVIEW
                                                                             ECONOMIC
The Economic Development Element strives to increase economic
opportunity and prosperity for all San Leandro residents and businesses.
Its policies address economic resilience and diversification, local
business growth and success, and the quality of the city’s shopping
districts. The Element aims to place San Leandro on the leading edge of
the Bay Area’s innovation economy. It builds on San Leandro’s heritage
as a manufacturing center while reinventing the city as a 21 st Century
workplace. The Economic Development Element also seeks to create
career pathways for youth and adults in the San Leandro labor force.
San Leandro has rebounded from the Great Recession of 2007-2010 and
is currently enjoying robust economic growth. Between 2010 and 2016,
the city’s unemployment rate dropped from 12 percent to under 5
percent. Its rental vacancy rates dropped from 10 percent to just one
                                                                             DEVELOPMENT
percent in some sectors. More than 6,500 new jobs have been created in
just six years, an increase of over 15 percent. Other economic indicators,
from business licenses to building permits, are moving in a positive
direction. The Economic Development Element aspires to sustain this
momentum in the future. It also reflects a commitment to grow
inclusively and equitably. Not only does San Leandro aim to create jobs
and generate revenue, it aims to help all residents achieve their full
economic and creative potential.
Although Economic Development is presented as an independent
chapter of this General Plan, it is also a thread that runs through other
Plan elements. The Land Use Element defines the spatial organization of
economic activities (such as manufacturing and retail) and describes the
vision for employment districts such as Downtown, Bay Fair, and the
                                                                                           5-1

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              Shoreline. The Transportation Element addresses access to and from
                                              local workplaces, as well as issues associated with trucks, rail freight,
                                              and parking. The Open Space, Parks, and Conservation Element
                                              addresses business issues such as sustainability, energy efficiency, and
                                              water conservation. Even Elements like Community Services are
                                              relevant, as they address the amenities needed to attract and retain
                                              employers and employees. The reality is that economic development—
                                              and more specifically, investment in the community and its residents---is
                                              a consideration in all aspects of planning and administration in San
                                              Leandro and is a unifying principle of the General Plan.
                                              During recent years, the city has achieved the following economic
                                              development milestones:
                                                  More than 2,500 jobs have been created at the new Kaiser
                                                   Permanente Hospital.
                                                  The first phase of the 500,000 square feet San Leandro Tech Campus
                                                   (SLTC) is nearing completion.
                                                  The Lit San Leandro fiber optic network has spurred the renovation
                                                   of millions of square feet of industrial space, and created a “buzz”
                                                   among Bay Area technology companies and start-ups.
                                                  A significant public art installation—repurposed from the eclectic
                                                   Burning Man festival—is about to rise at the San Leandro BART
                                                   station, heralding a new image for the city.
                                                  The San Leandro Shoreline is poised to become a regional
                                                   destination, with new housing, hospitality, entertainment,
                                                   restaurant, and retail businesses in a scenic waterfront setting.
                                                  The City’s reputation for craft beer production is growing, with
                                                   several new breweries and pubs, and an “ale trail” in the works.
                                                  Downtown San Leandro has attracted new retail activity such as The
                                                   Village, while new development sites are coming on line at Davis
                                                   and East 14th Streets.
                                              The media is taking notice, with dozens of stories about the city’s
                                              creative edge, emerging cluster of technology businesses, and
                                              receptiveness to new ideas. San Leandro is outperforming its peer cities
                                              in the East Bay and becoming a destination city for a growing number of
                                              employers.
5-2

                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                       E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
B.        ECONOMIC PROFILE
This section of the Economic Development Element profiles San
Leandro’s employment base; its industrial, office, and retail real estate
markets; and local sales tax trends. Data is drawn from a number of
sources, including an Economic Baseline report prepared by Strategic
Economics in April 2015, and data compiled by the City’s Community
Development Department in March 2016.1
As noted throughout the General Plan, the city’s location, affordability,
and diversity create significant economic potential. The Downtown and
Bay Fair BART stations present an opportunity for San Leandro to offer a
walkable, less car dependent lifestyle, in line with regional trends and
demographic changes. Market pressure for housing and office space
near the stations will eventually result in higher rents and property
values, which will in turn justify additional housing construction and
reinvestment in the city’s historic Downtown.
          1 Both the staff data and the Strategic Economics data is drawn from
private and public sources, such as Muni Services, CoStar, the California
Economic Development Department, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the
City’s Finance Department. The findings also reflect feedback from local real
estate brokers, developers, and businesses.
                                                                                                                         5-3

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              Beyond the BART Station areas, the City can leverage its considerable
                                              supply of industrial floor space, easy rail and airport access, and
                                              proximity to San Francisco and Silicon Valley, to evolve into a “next
                                              generation” workplace. At the same time, San Leandro’s retail areas will
                                              continue to reposition themselves to reflect the diversity of the
                                              population, emerging retail trends, and the growing demand for
                                              walkable neighborhood centers.
                                              Employment Base
                                              There is no one authoritative source for the total number of jobs in San
                                              Leandro—factors such as the classification of part-time workers and
                                              independent contractors make the statistic difficult to quantify. In
                                              addition, workers from unincorporated areas with San Leandro ZIP
                                              codes (such as Ashland) are sometimes attributed to the city itself. The
                                              2015 employment figure used in the General Plan is 43,400 jobs, based on
                                              ABAG data. However, the City’s Community Development Department
                                              reports 41,500 jobs.2 San Leandro currently accounts for roughly 9
                                              percent of the total jobs in Alameda County.
                                              As indicated in Chart 5-1, local jobs are spread across a number of major
                                              industries. This diverse employment base contributes to economic
                                              resilience and helps the city weather downturns in the economy. The
                                              recent relocation of Kaiser Permanente from Hayward to San Leandro
                                              has shifted the employment base to the point where health care is now
                                              the largest single sector in San Leandro’s economy. As recently as 2010,
                                              the largest sector was retail trade, followed by manufacturing.
                                              The Manufacturing, Wholesale/Warehouse, and Construction sectors are
                                              sometimes lumped together into a single category called Production,
                                              Distribution, and Repair (PDR). In 2015, the PDR sectors represented
                                              about 35 percent of the city’s jobs. San Leandro has a higher percentage
                                              of PDR jobs than Oakland (22%) and Alameda County as a whole (28%),
                                              but its percentage is lower than Hayward (45%). PDR jobs have
                                              historically been the cornerstone of the local economy, providing good
                                              living wages to persons with a diversity of skill and education levels.
                                                       2 California EDD, 2015 2nd Quarter data.
5-4

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                   E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
CHART 5-1: EMPLOYMENT BY INDUSTRY SAN LEANDRO, 2015
                                    Services
                                       7%
                          Construction          Health Care
                               10%                  19%
                       Wholesale/
                       Warehouse                            Retail
                         12%                                 15%
                        Professional
                            12%                Manufacturing
                                                     13%
                                        Other
                                        12%
Source: California Economic Development Department Q2 2015
Approximately 45 percent of San Leandro’s jobs are located in the
industrial districts. Geographic data on employment indicates that the
total number of jobs in the industrial areas was about the same in 2014 as
it was in 2004. However, there were significant job losses between 2006
and 2011, followed by a roughly equivalent job gain between 2012 and
2016. Since 2004, the greatest gains have been in the Marina Boulevard
corridor (associated with Kaiser Permanente), in the Fairway/Catalina
area, and in the Adams Tract (the far northern part of the industrial
area). Other areas experiencing gains in employment since 2004 include
Downtown and the Bay Fair area.
Based on business license data, most employers in San Leandro are small
businesses. About 60 percent of the city’s businesses have fewer than 20
employees, 26 percent are home-based businesses, and only 12 percent
have 20 employees or more. On the other hand, most of the jobs in the
city are associated with the larger businesses. There were 350 companies
with more than 20 employees, representing about 23,600 jobs. The 20
largest employers in the city, each of whom has over 200 employees, are
shown in the text box on Page 5-6. These employers include hospitals
                                                                                                                     5-5

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L      P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                               (Kaiser, San Leandro, and Kindred), large retailers (Wal-Mart, Target,
                                               Costco), public agencies (the City and the School District), and private
        San Leandro’s Top 20                   industry (OSIsoft, Ghirardelli Chocolate, Coca Cola, Wells Fargo, and
        Employers*                             others).
             ACCO Engineered Systems
                                               The total number of jobs in San Leandro’s manufacturing sector has
             Alameda Co Industries            declined since 1998. However, the number of manufacturing businesses
             City of San Leandro              has declined at a much slower rate. The average manufacturing business
                                               size in the city dropped from 39 employees in 1998 to 28 employees in
             Coca Cola                        2012. Manufacturing output per employee increased during the same
             Enterprise Rent-A-Car            period. This suggests that the city’s businesses are becoming leaner and
                                               more nimble, with a larger number of start-ups and entrepreneurs.
             Ghirardelli Chocolates
                                               As noted in Chapter 2 of the General Plan, San Leandro has
             Kaiser Permanente
                                               approximately the same number of employees as employed residents.
             Kindred Hospital                 However, the nature of the regional economy and housing market is
             MV Public Transportation         such that most San Leandro residents commute to other cities for work,
                                               while most San Leandro workers commute in from other cities. Census
             OSIsoft                          estimates indicate that only 12 to 15 percent of the non-home based
             Paramedics Plus                  business jobs in the city are filled by persons living in San Leandro.
                                               About 12 percent of the city’s workers live in Oakland, 5 percent live in
             San Leandro School District      Hayward, and 4 percent live in San Francisco. Conversely, about 21
             San Leandro Hospital             percent of the city’s residents work in Oakland, 15 percent work in San
                                               Francisco, and 7 percent work in Hayward.
             Splay
             Target
             ThredUp
             Wal-Mart
             Wells Fargo Bank
        * listed in alphabetical order
5-6

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                   E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
Industrial Market Trends
Warehouses represent the single largest component of San Leandro’s
non-residential building stock. As noted in the Land Use Element (P. 3-
70), there was an estimated 16.5 million square feet of warehouse space
in the city in 2015. Vacancy rates stood at 7 percent as recently as 2010,
but declined to just one percent in 2015. As supply has become tighter,
prices have increased. The average annual cost per square foot increased
from about $6.00 in 2010 to $9.00 in 2015.
Square footage estimates for manufacturing space vary from 4 million to
about 6 million, depending on the source (some manufacturing space is
classified as warehouse or flex space by some sources). As with
warehousing, the vacancy rate has declined dramatically while the cost
has increased. The annual rent per square foot of manufacturing space
increased from $5.00 in 2010 to $8.00 in 2015. Nearby cities have
experienced similar price run-ups. In 2015, vacancy rates for
manufacturing space were less than 3 percent in Oakland, Berkeley,
Hayward, and Union City. Prices per square foot were slightly higher in
San Leandro than they were in Oakland, Richmond, and Hayward, but
were lower than in Berkeley, Newark, and Fremont.
It is anticipated that jobs in the Production, Distribution, and Repair
(PDR) sectors will continue to be the backbone of the city’s economy.
                                                                                                                     5-7

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              However, the character of PDR activities will change as land values rise
                                              and amenities like high-speed internet attract value-added businesses.
                                              Advanced manufacturing in sectors such as food processing, metals and
                                              machining, and instrument and process controls may lead the transition
                                              to a more technology-focused economy.
                                              The city has a large stock of flexible industrial spaces which can be
                                              repurposed according to tenant needs. These buildings offer a strong
                                              value proposition, since they combine flexibility with relatively low costs
                                              and excellent regional access. In addition, the absence of conflicting uses
                                              such as housing within general industrial zones is one of the city’s
                                              strengths. Widespread conversion of industrial uses to housing and
                                              other uses could diminish the city’s competitive edge and should be
                                              avoided. The Land Use Element provides guidance on where such
                                              changes may be acceptable in order to achieve other General Plan goals.
                                              Office Market Trends
                                              San Leandro has historically been a local-serving office market, with
                                              most tenants engaged in activities such as real estate, legal services,
                                              insurance, banking, engineering, construction, medical and dental
                                              practices, and other consumer-oriented services. During the 1950s and
                                              60s, a substantial inventory of offices with such tenants emerged on the
                                              east side of Downtown. There has also been a secondary office market in
                                              the industrial area, with many tenants associated with industrial support
                                              activities and employee services such as labor unions. The real estate
                                              service Co-Star indicated that the City had 2.5 million square feet of
                                              office space in 2015, compared to 4.2 million square feet in Hayward, 4.2
                                              million square feet in Alameda, and about 28 million square feet in
                                              Oakland.
                                              During the last 15 years, San Leandro has been gaining momentum as a
                                              regional and corporate office market. There is considerable potential for
                                              this sector to expand in the future, particularly around the Downtown
                                              San Leandro and Bay Fair BART stations. Census data indicates that
                                              employment in the “office sectors” represents about 15 percent of San
                                              Leandro’s employment today—a percentage that will grow in the future
                                              based on ABAG’s forecasts.
                                              As in the other commercial real estate sectors, office lease rates are
                                              increasing while vacancy rates are decreasing. San Leandro is feeling the
                                              impacts of rapid price inflation in Downtown San Francisco, Downtown
                                              Oakland, and the Silicon Valley. For example, the vacancy rate in the
5-8

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                     E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
Downtown Oakland office market dropped from 12.2 percent in the 4 th
Quarter of 2014 to 4.6 percent in the 4 th quarter of 2015. These trends are
driving businesses to seek lower-cost alternatives---San Leandro’s
location, transit, lifestyle amenities, and internet speed are strong
attractors.
The City also has an opportunity to capture some of the demand for
companies that might otherwise locate in suburban office parks such as
Bishop Ranch in San Ramon or Hacienda in Pleasanton. Meanwhile,
Creekside Plaza and the new San Leandro Tech Campus (SLTC) are
upgrading the quality of the city’s office inventory, while OSIsoft serves
as an information technology anchor and bellweather. Demand for
medical office space is also rising, a reflection of Kaiser Permanente’s
investment in the city, as well as the growing demand for services
among retiring baby boomers. As noted earlier, health care has been the
fastest growing industry in San Leandro during the past decade. ABAG
forecasts for 2035 indicate that nearly two-thirds of the city’s job growth
is expected to occur in financial and professional services, health care,
education, and recreational services.
Additional office development in the city can help diversify the economy
and capture a greater share of the Bay Area’s professional and
technology-focused growth industries. The City has cultivated future
office growth by investing in Lit San Leandro and establishing a core
supply of Class A office space adjacent to BART. The future focus will
continue to be around the city’s BART stations since these locations
provide excellent access for workers across the region and adjoin a
growing base of employee amenities.
                                                                                                                       5-9

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              Retail Market Trends
                                              San Leandro has approximately 6 million square feet of retail space.
                                              Historically, vacancy rates have been below 5 percent, with even lower
                                              rates observed during recent years. Private industry (Costar) data
                                              indicates a vacancy rate of 2.2 percent in 2015. The average cost per
                                              square foot of retail space was about $18 per square foot (per year) in
                                              2015. This represents an increase from $16 per square foot in 2010 but is
                                              below the pre-recession level of $24 per square foot. The lower cost
                                              inventory is typically in older neighborhood shopping centers and along
                                              commercial corridors. Newer retail space is renting at rates significantly
                                              higher than the average.
                                              As noted in the Land Use Element, the City’s retail areas include
                                              neighborhood shopping centers, community shopping centers, regional
                                              centers, and general commercial uses along arterial streets. The
                                              condition of these centers varies. However, they successfully place day-
                                              to-day goods and services within easy access of the city’s neighborhoods.
                                              The City’s four regional centers---Bayfair, Westgate/Costco, Greenhouse,
                                              and Marina Square are successfully repositioning to remain competitive
                                              and respond to evolving demand. These centers contain a mix of mid-
                                              scale and discount retailers that serve the wide range of incomes in San
                                              Leandro and the surrounding areas. Likewise, the Marina Boulevard
                                              Auto Mall draws shoppers from a market that extends well beyond San
                                              Leandro and provides a positive fiscal impact.
5-10

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                   E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
The East 14th Street corridor continues to have a large number of
automobile-related uses, but its retail uses are becoming more food-
oriented and ethnically focused. Taxable sales on the corridor are
primarily generated by uses such as auto sales, auto parts, and fuel,
although taxable restaurant and food sales are increasing. Likewise, the
tenant mix in neighborhood shopping centers is evolving to meet more
diverse preferences based on income level and ethnicity. These centers
are also adapting to the consolidation of retail stores in larger centers.
Retail trends suggest a transition toward eating and drinking
establishments in the neighborhood centers, coupled with smaller
independent retailers. The City will regularly examine its development
regulations to ensure that they accommodate such trends.
Chain retailers and sellers of non-convenience goods are increasingly
likely to consolidate in the larger centers as online sales increase. This
has also led to “experience-oriented” storefronts which draw patrons
through specialized activities such as cafes, and unique smaller shops.
The 25-acre vacant parcel north of the Kaiser Permanente Hospital is
well-located to capture and accommodate future retail sales, but San
Leandro’s other regional retail centers may need to adjust their tenant
mixes in response to such a center.
Sales Activity
Sales activity influences the local economy in many ways. It impacts the
number of available jobs, the demand for retail space, and the quality of
shopping, services, restaurants, and entertainment options in the
community. Sales tax is an important source of revenue for local
government, and can affect the quality of services provided by the city to
its residents and businesses. An important part of San Leandro’s
economic development strategy has been to increase local sales activity.
This includes reducing retail “leakage” (the loss of local sales to other
cities) and diversifying the range of goods and services available to
residents.
Sales activity in the city has increased dramatically between 2010 and
2015, growing 50 percent from $1.8 billion to $2.7 billion. This is a more
rapid rate of increase than was experienced by nearby cities and in the
County as a whole. As Chart 2-2 indicates, sales tax per capita in San
Leandro was more than double the per capita rate for the State of
California and more than 50 percent higher than Alameda County. As
sales activity and taxes have increased, the total share of local jobs in
retail, restaurant sectors, and hospitality also has increased.
                                                                                                                   5-11

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                        CHART 5-2: SALES TAX PER CAPITA IN SAN LEANDRO, ALAMEDA COUNTY, AND CALIFORNIA
                         $300
                         $250
                                          $73
                         $200
                                                                                                    General Retail
                                          $27
                                                                                                    Food Products
                         $150
                                          $63                   $39                                 Transportation
                                                                                                    Construction
                         $100                                   $29                 $35
                                                                                                    Business to Business
                                          $34
                                                                $41                 $25
                          $50                                                       $30
                                                                $15
                                          $70
                                                                                    $11
                                                                $34
                                                                                    $21
                            $-
                                      San Leandro        Alameda County          California
                         Source: Muni Services Benchmark Year 2015-Q2
                                                   The data suggests that the city is capturing spending from residents of
                                                   other communities, including East Oakland, which has historically been
                                                   underserved by retail. San Leandro serves as a regional retail hub,
                                                   drawing shoppers to its automobile dealerships, Bayfair Center, Marina
                                                   Square, Westgate, and local big box stores. This retail also serves San
                                                   Leandro residents, complementing the smaller shopping centers that fill
                                                   residents’ day-to-day needs. Chart 5-3 indicates sales tax capture and
                                                   leakage based on per capita data—the data provides an indication of
                                                   where the City’s retail sales exceed expectations relative to resident
                                                   buying power, and where the city may be losing sales to other cities. The
                                                   analysis shows a surplus in all retail categories with the exception of
                                                   furniture and appliance stores.
5-12

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
CHART 5-3: SALES TAX CAPTURE AND LEAKAGE        SAN LEANDRO, 2015
Source: MuniServices Benchmark Year 2015 Q-2
Some of the City’s sales strength lies in business to business
transactions—approximately 26 percent of the sales tax revenue
generated in 2015 was from such transactions. The city also outperforms
nearby cities in auto sales, auto repair, department stores, building
materials, and clothing stores.
While sales in the restaurant and food market sectors indicate a positive
balance relative to population, the potential for growth exists in these
sectors. During the General Plan Update, many participants expressed
the sentiment that the City needed more sit down restaurants, more
specialty and higher end supermarkets, and more entertainment options.
Although the City may draw patrons from Oakland, Castro Valley,
Ashland, and San Lorenzo to its own restaurants and supermarkets, San
Leandro residents themselves indicated they often traveled to Pleasanton
and Dublin to shop, and to Oakland neighborhoods such as Jack London
Square and Uptown to dine. In the past, the City’s ability to attract
higher-end retail has been limited by median household income levels
that were below the County median. This may change in the future, as
new residential development increases local buying power.
                                                                                                                  5-13

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              Looking ahead to 2035, the City is particularly interested in supporting
                                              the growth of retail centers to serve employment districts. The Next
                                              Generation Workplace Districts Study (2013) recognized a need for such
                                              parcels in the Davis-Doolittle and Fairway-Catalina areas. The
                                              Marina/Merced area, including the Kaiser North parcel, is well situated
                                              to meet this need. It features freeway access, visibility, a central location
                                              between employment districts, and a connection to future development
                                              at the Shoreline. Marina Boulevard is also well positioned for additional
                                              restaurants and national retailers.
                                              Careful scrutiny should be applied before introducing such uses
                                              elsewhere in the industrial districts. Dining options which primarily
                                              serve employees may struggle due to the limited weekday lunch
                                              schedules of surrounding workers. Outlets which establish themselves
                                              as regional destinations – such as tasting rooms/ cafes at 21st Amendment
                                              Brewery and Drake’s Brewing Company – are more likely to succeed
                                              since they attract customers from throughout the region. Such uses still
                                              must be carefully vetted to ensure their parking and operational needs
                                              will not constrain nearby industrial operations.
5-14

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                     E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
C.       KEY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ISSUES
Business Attraction and Diversification
San Leandro is leveraging its assets—location, affordability, accessibility,
communication infrastructure, and land—to generate significant private
investment.      Developments such as the San Leandro Tech Campus
(SLTC) and the Gate have generated positive press and are redefining
the image of the city in the commercial real estate market. Marketing
and branding campaigns are reinforcing San Leandro’s reputation as a
city of makers and innovators. The City has prepared printed and digital
marketing materials, including brochures, press releases, websites, social
media, and video which tell the San Leandro story.
One of the objectives of these initiatives is to encourage more productive
use of the city’s industrial land. Some industrial properties contain only
a few employees per acre and are characterized by large indoor and
outdoor storage areas. Repurposing of such space for incubators, start-
ups, and manufacturing can create jobs and revenue, while also creating
a more dynamic workplace.
                                                                                                                     5-15

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              The City also directly outreaches to retailers and has successfully
                                              attracted a number of high-profile tenants to new and refurbished
                                              commercial space. It maintains a data base of opportunity sites for
                                              prospective businesses, and facilitates real estate transactions between
                                              property owners, brokers, and businesses. It also facilitates access to
                                              capital and provides financial incentives to stimulate investment in the
                                              city. San Leandro is particularly well positioned to attract foreign
                                              investment and international businesses, and should see additional
                                              growth in this sector. Cultural diversity is one of the city’s strengths.
                                              Personal and professional ties between local residents and those in
                                              overseas markets can provide the foundation for future investment.
                                              Opportunities to further expand Oakland’s Foreign Trade Zone into
                                              parts of San Leandro are being explored.
                                              San Leandro also participates in initiatives aimed at elevating the city’s
                                              profile on a regional, statewide, and global level. These include the East
                                              Bay Economic Development Alliance, which promotes investment in the
                                              East Bay and growth of the local economy, as well as initiatives such as
                                              the East Bay Green Corridor and the East Bay Broadband Consortium.
                                              The City is particularly interested in expanding its position in the East
                                              Bay office market, with a focus on areas near the Downtown San
                                              Leandro and Bay Fair BART stations.
                                              Business Support and Retention
                                              The City’s highest economic development priority is to support existing
                                              businesses so that they can succeed and prosper in San Leandro. San
                                              Leandro takes pride in being a “business friendly” city. The City helps
                                              businesses with expansion and renovation by providing an efficient,
                                              streamlined building permit process for tenant improvements and the
                                              construction of new commercial and industrial space. A number of
                                              financial assistance programs have been developed to assist local
                                              businesses. The Commercial Rehabilitation Program and the Awning,
                                              Sign, and Paint Program both provide forgivable loans and help small
                                              businesses improve their properties. Loan programs have also been
                                              created to help businesses connect to the Lit San Leandro fiber optic
                                              network and to facilitate energy efficiency improvements. The City also
                                              offers design assistance and professional architectural services to help
                                              businesses redesign older commercial spaces.
5-16

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
The City also supports local businesses through transportation
investments. Most San Leandro employers are more than a mile from
BART, and public transit service between BART and these areas is
limited. More than a decade ago, the City facilitated the creation of a
Business Improvement District that funds a free shuttle bus (LINKS)
connecting local workplaces to BART. LINKS service was significantly
expanded in 2015. San Leandro is also investing in streetscape
improvements, bike lanes, sidewalks, and other features that make
walking and cycling easier in the industrial area and that improve
connections to BART and nearby shopping areas.
One of the most important ways the City supports existing businesses is
through communication. This is done both directly, through outreach to
the business community to determine needs and challenges, and
indirectly, by encouraging businesses to communicate with each other.
The City facilitates an Industrial Founders Circle to promote
collaborative problem-solving among its major industrial employers. It
participates in forums, regular meetings, and task forces sponsored by
private industry organizations and non-profits serving local businesses,
such as the Chamber of Commerce, the Downtown Association, and the
San Leandro Improvement Association. City staff also includes points of
contact speaking 14 different languages, creating a resource for business
owners with limited English proficiency.
                                                                                                                  5-17
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              Innovation
                                              For most of the 20th Century, San Leandro’s economy was based on
                                              manufacturing—even in 2016, more than 20 percent of the city’s land
                                              area is zoned for industry. During the last two decades, the city has been
                                              repositioning itself as an innovation center. Industry remains the focus,
                                              but the methods of production, distribution, and communication are
                                              being transformed through technology.
                                              In 2011, the City launched a public-private partnership to develop the Lit
                                              San Leandro fiber optic network, offering internet speeds of up to 10
                                              gigabytes per second. As properties have connected to this network, the
                                              city has seen the conversion of former manufacturing space to tech
                                              space, and a rising number of start-ups and new businesses choosing San
                                              Leandro to launch and grow their businesses.
                                              San Leandro’s policies support immediate optimization of local fiber
                                              optic capacity, recognizing that other cities may make similar
                                              investments and compete with the city for tech investment in the future.
                                              Expansion of Lit San Leandro to include schools, libraries, hospitals, city
                                              facilities, and other businesses is being pursued. The City will also
                                              develop a marketing strategy to identify potential broadband customers,
                                              and prepare advertising, public relations, and other promotional
                                              materials that fully leverage the fiber network. The strategy should
                                              include measures to grow and sustain the city’s emerging “innovation
                                              ecosystem.”
5-18

                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                        E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
Technology can also be used to advance other aspects of the quality of
life in the city, including transportation, cultural arts, health care, energy,
public safety, and education. In the coming years, San Leandro will
explore and promote “smart city” applications which use Lit San
Leandro to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of quality-of-life
related systems and networks. The City’s industrial areas present
opportunities for energy independence and innovative forms of
renewable energy such as microgrids (localized power grids that can
operate independently, off the main grid). San Leandro is already home
to the Zero Net Energy Center, and will attract other green businesses
and service providers in the future. Clean tech is a growing sector of the
regional economy, and San Leandro is well positioned to capture a
substantial share of this growth.
The 2013 Next Generation Workplace Districts Study highlighted the
importance of good design as a factor in growing the innovation and
creative economies. Successful 21st Century workplace districts have a
strong sense of identity, are walkable and attractive, and provide
appealing places to bring clients, partners, and collaborators. These
attributes are absent in many parts of San Leandro’s industrial districts,
but the potential to create them exists. In particular, Marina Boulevard
(west of I-880) and Merced Street have been identified as areas for
streetscape improvements and new business support uses. The “Next
Generation” study also suggested activating the industrial areas through
pop-up food pods, public art, open spaces, and a network of “back
streets” or paseos to improve connectivity. Since completion of the Next
Generation Study, initiatives such as San Leandro by Design (affiliated
with the Chamber of Commerce) have facilitated a continuing dialogue
about humanizing and modernizing the city’s industrial district.
Vibrant Retail Centers
Although San Leandro’s retail sector is robust, there is still a perception
that the city is underserved in certain sectors. Even with a high retail
capture rate, there are opportunities for improvement in the city’s
shopping districts. Such improvements can create jobs, provide sales tax
revenue to support City services, introduce new goods and services to
the community, and elevate San Leandro’s profile as a shopping, dining,
and entertainment destination. There are also opportunities to
implement promotional campaigns that encourage residents and
employees to “shop San Leandro” and purchase products made in the
                                                                                                                        5-19

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              city. The General Plan recommends that the City develop a Retail Action
                                              Strategy to determine the most effective path to retail success.
                                                                                        Downtown         San     Leandro
                                                                                        presents     opportunities    for
                                                                                        expanding       retail    success
                                                                                        through place making. On the
                                                                                        Downtown blocks along East
                                                                                        14th Street and Washington
                                                                                        Avenue, older buildings, wide
                                                                                        sidewalks, mature trees, and
                                                                                        public spaces combine to create
                                                                                        a walkable scale and strong
                                                                                        sense of place. Shoppers are
                                                                                        drawn to such destinations for
                                                                                        their ambiance, pedestrian–
                                                                                        friendly streets, and social
                                                                                        nature. Art installations, live
                                                                                        performances, outdoor dining,
                                                                                        and other improvements can
                                              create the critical mass needed to promote Downtown’s success as a
                                              shopping, dining, and entertainment destination. Events such as the
                                              Farmers Market, the Cherry Festival, and the Sausage and Suds Music
                                              Festival can “activate” local streets and make Downtown a first-choice
                                              destination.
                                              Development of Downtown housing is an important part of the retail
                                              strategy, as it increases the customer base for local retailers and creates
                                              an evening pedestrian presence. Parking is also critical—the City
                                              recently conducted a study to better manage the limited supply of
                                              parking spaces and make visiting Downtown more convenient for
                                              business patrons. The City also supports the efforts of the San Leandro
                                              Improvement Association (Community Benefit District) to create a safe,
                                              clean, inviting environment for shoppers and restaurant patrons.
                                              Retail centers such as Bayfair Center and Westgate present opportunities
                                              to completely reinvent traditional retailing. The Bay Fair TOD Specific
                                              Plan process now underway will include implementation measures to
                                              sustain regional shopping and introduce new uses that enhance the retail
                                              experience. Westgate has already evolved into a unique blend of ground
                                              floor shops and upper floor tech businesses. The Kaiser North site
                                              presents an opportunity for something similarly innovative and
                                              different.
5-20

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
Along the city’s corridors, smaller shopping centers and free-standing
retail establishments are adapting to demographic changes and
providing affordable space for ethnic and international businesses. San
Leandro also has opportunities to take advantage of its established or
emerging retail clusters, including construction materials (tile, stone,
ceramics, etc.), auto sales, food processing, and even craft beer
production. The City is also exploring concepts such as “pop-up” retail
and food trucks to activate dormant spaces and provide hipper and more
contemporary options for residents and employees.
Business Amenities
The decision by a business to locate in a particular community is driven
in part by the availability of amenities and services to support
employees. Businesses seek to locate in communities where their
workers can find suitable housing, good schools, low crime, a healthful
environment, great parks, and quality restaurants and retail choices.
They also seek to locate in communities with the necessary infrastructure
to support their businesses. This includes “hard” infrastructure such as
streets and utilities, and “soft” infrastructure such as business support
networks and the supply chains associated with production and
distribution.
                                                                                                                  5-21

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              Participants in the 2035 General Plan Update expressed their hope that
                                              San Leandro would attract better restaurants, higher quality shopping,
                                              more entertainment venues, and business-class hotels. These attributes
                                              can improve the quality of life for local residents, while at the same time
                                              making San Leandro a location of choice for future employers and their
                                              employees. Developing these amenities locally can also help the city
                                              achieve its goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions associated with
                                              driving long distances for shopping, dining, and work commutes. The
                                              City also recognizes the significant economic development benefits of
                                              having higher performing schools, better transportation options, and
                                              more diverse housing choices for the workforce. There is particularly
                                              strong interest in providing housing choices for those priced out of San
                                              Francisco and Oakland, including millennials who may be seeking
                                              smaller market-rate rental units near BART and families seeking larger
                                              single family homes and townhomes.
                                              Some of the desired amenities have been provided through recent
                                              developments. For example, the city now has a billion dollar state-of-
                                              the-art medical center at Kaiser Permanente Hospital. It has attracted
                                              new retail investment such as Living Spaces, with more retail in the
                                              pipeline. Efforts are also underway to beautify San Leandro through
                                              streetscape improvements on Marina Boulevard and East 14 th Street, and
                                              through investments in public art. Some of the most significant
                                              amenities will be provided through projects now in the planning stages,
                                              such as the Shoreline Mixed Use Development. In addition to providing
                                              a hotel and market-rate housing, the Shoreline project will create a
5-22
                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                   E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
gathering place for San Leandro residents and workers, with waterfront
dining, entertainment, trails, and open space.
Workforce Development
San Leandro is taking steps to equip its future workforce with the tools
to succeed in the local and regional economies. This is important both to
improve the economic well-being and potential of its residents, and to
achieve the City’s goal of reducing out-commuting and enabling those
who live locally to also work locally. Workforce development strategies
include those aimed at youth and the city’s education system, and those
aimed at lifelong learning and skill development for adults. As the city
moves towards a knowledge-based economy, the demand for highly
skilled and educated workers will increase. A well-trained, well-
prepared workforce will be needed to fill anticipated jobs. Even for entry
level and lower wage jobs, soft skills (e.g., work ethics, teamwork, etc.)
and vocational training may be needed to expand opportunities.
Chart 5-4 shows educational attainment in San Leandro relative to
Alameda County and the Bay Area as of 2015. Relative to the County
and the region, San Leandro has a lower percentage of residents with
bachelor’s degrees or higher and a higher percentage of residents who
did not finish high school. The city also has a higher percentage of
residents with a high school degree only. The data suggests significant
opportunities for vocational and workforce development programs,
providing a pathway to employment or better jobs for those who did not
pursue higher education.
                                                                                                                   5-23

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                                   The City is also committed to working with its school districts to increase
                                                   educational quality and to produce graduates who can fill the more than
                                                   12,000 jobs expected to be created in San Leandro over the next 20 years.
                                                   Programs that help low-wage workers move up career ladders and
                                                   encourage the growth and retention of skilled workers also are strongly
                                                   encouraged. Such efforts can improve the quality of life for residents and
                                                   reduce the need for local employers to retain graduates from outside the
                                                   region to fill jobs that could be filled instead by talented, well-educated
                                                   San Leandro workers.
                                                   San Leandro will also continue to work with the business community,
                                                   community colleges, local universities, and employment development
                                                   organizations to address shortages in the local labor market. The City is
                                                   already a lead participant in partnerships to provide careers for local
                                                   students and will continue to play that role. Other barriers to
                                                   achievement, including access to the internet, can be addressed through
                                                   new programs to provide public access to technology through the
                                                   schools, public libraries, and other community institutions.
                                        CHART 5-4: EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT IN SAN LEANDRO, ALAMEDA COUNTY, AND
                                                       THE BAY AREA
                                                       29.9%
                                                                                   44.1%                       42.6%
                                                       29.2%
                                                                                   26.0%                       28.0%
                                                       25.1%
                                                                                   18.1%                       17.1%
                                                       15.8%                       11.8%                       12.3%
                                                   San Leandro                  Alameda Co                   Bay Area
                                                Less than HS HS Graduate     Some College/Associates Degree Bachelors or Higher
                                          Source: US Census American Community Survey, 2010-2014
5-24
                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                     E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
D.       GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
B USINESS A TTRACTION AND D IVERSIFICATION
GOAL ED-1       Attract jobs and investment across all economic
                sectors.
Policy ED-1.1 Leveraging San Leandro’s Assets.              Build on San
              Leandro’s strengths, including its central location,
              transportation infrastructure, affordability, industrial
              land supply, and business-friendly reputation to
              leverage economic growth and private investment in the
              city.
Policy ED-1.2 Maintaining San Leandro’s Competitive Advantage.
              Maintain and protect San Leandro’s inventory of larger-
              scale industrial sites and buildings with easy access to
              freeways, rail, airports, and seaports. Discourage the
              conversion of industrial uses to commercial and
              residential uses except where part of a carefully targeted
              citywide strategy.
              See also Land Use Element Policy LU-3.11 on industrial land
              conversion
              Action ED-1.2.A: Tracking of Development Opportunities
              Provide site location assistance to businesses seeking to move
              to San Leandro. Digital mapping and database software
              should be used to track and publicize local development
              opportunities, including vacant and underutilized sites and
              properties for sale or for lease.
Policy ED-1.3 Industrial Land Use Efficiency.             Encourage more
              efficient use of the City’s industrial land supply, creating
              higher employment densities and high quality jobs,
              while discouraging the use of large sites and buildings
              for storage and other low intensity uses. Ensure that
              zoning and other development regulations support
              higher utilization of sites zoned for commercial and
              industrial activities.
                                                                                                                     5-25

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              Policy ED-1.4  Emerging Industries. Promote and support the growth
                                                             of new and emerging industries, especially industries
                                                             requiring work space that is consistent with San
                                                             Leandro’s building stock and industries with the
                                                             potential to provide quality jobs at all skill levels and
                                                             wage levels for San Leandro residents.
                                              Policy ED-1.5  Core Industries. Make San Leandro the Bay Area’s
                                                             location of choice for advanced manufacturing, food and
                                                             beverage production, and entrepreneurs in the “maker”
                                                             economy.
                                              Policy ED-1.6  Increasing Supply Chains for Core Industries.
                                                             Implement economic development and marketing
                                                             programs to attract businesses that reinforce supply
                                                             chains for core industries in the city, thereby
                                                             strengthening San Leandro’s economic base.
                                               Policy ED-1.7 International Trade. Create a favorable environment
                                                             for companies seeking to establish or expand
                                                             international trade operations, taking particular
                                                             advantage of the city’s proximity to San Francisco,
                                                             Silicon Valley, two international airports and the Port of
                                                             Oakland.
                                                              Action ED-1.7.A: Overseas Investment
                                                             Implement economic development strategies aimed at the
                                                             international business community, including sister city
                                                             agreements and leveraging of relationships between local
                                                             residents/businesses and potential investors overseas.
                                                             Action ED-1.7.B: Foreign Trade Zone
                                                             Continue to work with the City of Oakland to continue
                                                             expansion of the Foreign Trade Zone near Oakland Airport,
                                                             potentially including properties within San Leandro’s
                                                             industrial area. Properties within FTZs are subject to lower
                                                             tax rates or tax exemptions as a means of incentivizing
                                                             international investment.
5-26

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                   E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
Policy ED-1.8  Expanding the Local Office Market. Expand San
               Leandro’s position as a regional office market,
               leveraging the city’s accessibility, amenities, fiber optic
               network, and relatively low lease rates. Focus office
               demand in areas within walking distance of the BART
               stations, particularly the Downtown San Leandro
               station.
Policy ED-1.9  Marketing and Branding. Promote positive media
               coverage, branding, and marketing campaigns that build
               civic pride and create a favorable image of San Leandro
               on a regional, national, and global scale.
               Action ED-1.9.A: Made in San Leandro
               Continue marketing, branding, and public relations efforts
               which promote San Leandro’s unique business assets and
               amenities, legacy as a manufacturing center, and commitment
               to ingenuity and innovation. San Leandro should be
               promoted as a city of "makers" (“Made in San Leandro,” "We
               Make Things," etc.)
               Action ED-1.9.B: Business and Social Media
               Continue to maintain a robust social media presence
               promoting the City’s economic opportunities through San
               Leandro Next, Facebook, Twitter, and similar forums.
               Action ED-1.9.C: Promoting Food and Beverage Operations
               Capitalize on the concentration of food producers and craft
               breweries to create jobs, entertainment venues, and
               destinations that help brand the city.
Policy ED-1.10 Tax Revenues. Encourage development that generates
               sales tax, property tax, and other revenues that sustain
               municipal services.
Policy ED-1.11 Data and Planning. Regularly collect and analyze data
               on San Leandro’s economy, tax base, and role within the
               region. Utilize this data to maintain effective, responsive
               Economic Development programs.
               Action ED-1.11.A: Economic Development Strategy Updates
               Periodically update and revise the City’s Economic
               Development Strategy in response to changing market
               conditions and economic trends.
                                                                                                                   5-27

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                                            Action ED-1.11.B: East Bay EDA
                                                            Actively participate in the East Bay Economic
                                                            Development Alliance (EDA) and work with businesses
                                                            and officials in other cities for the improvement of the
                                                            East Bay region.
                                              E CONOMIC P ROSPERITY
                                              GOAL ED-2       Create an environment in which local business can
                                                              prosper.
                                              Policy ED-2.1 Business-Friendly City. Maintain a collaborative and
                                                            supportive relationship between the City and the private
                                                            sector that emphasizes the ease of doing business in San
                                                            Leandro.
                                                            Action ED-2.1.A: Business Outreach
                                                            Provide City Staff assistance and outreach to existing
                                                            businesses, potential new businesses, real estate brokers, and
                                                            business organizations in the City. This could include a
                                                            Business Concierge program in which the City periodically
                                                            checks in with local employers to identify their business needs,
                                                            satisfaction with City services, and potential areas for
                                                            improvement.
                                              Policy ED-2.2 Open Communication. Engage the business community
                                                            on a regular basis to ensure that City programs are
                                                            responsive to their needs and concerns. San Leandro
                                                            should continue to be a place where business can easily
                                                            communicate with City staff.
                                                            Action     ED-2.2.A:    Representation         on     Business
                                                            Organizations
                                                            Maintain frequent communication with the San Leandro
                                                            Chamber of Commerce, the Downtown Association, ethnic
                                                            Chambers of Commerce, the San Leandro Improvement
                                                            Association, and other business advocacy groups. Seek
                                                            representation on these organizations and regularly attend
                                                            their meetings.
5-28
                                                                                 S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                         E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
              Action ED-2.2.B: Industry Roundtable
              Support the efforts of an industry roundtable (or “founders
              circle”) to foster a dialogue on the needs of local industries and
              to promote the continued health of the industrial sector in San
              Leandro.
              Action ED-2.2.C: Communication and Networking
              Promote communication and networking among local
              businesses organizations through focus groups, special events,
              newsletters, and other methods of discussing business needs
              and priorities.
Policy ED-2.3 Development Review and Permitting. Maintain clear
              and predictable development review and zoning
              regulations.
Policy ED-2.4 Business Assistance. Maintain programs that provide a
              supportive environment for local businesses, including
              expedited permitting, incentives for renovating and
              improving buildings, site location assistance, land
              assembly, loans, and other business development
              incentives.
              Action ED-2.4.A: One-Stop Permitting
              Continue to provide and enhance “one-stop” permitting and
              rapid review of permit applications. When appropriate, have
              business development staff serve as a concierge to help
              businesses navigate the permitting process.
              Action ED-2.4.B: Real Estate Transactions
              Facilitate transactions between real estate professionals,
              property owners, and businesses, and assist these parties in
              navigating City codes and permitting processes to help
              properties achieve their highest and best uses.
Policy ED-2.5 Business to Business Relationships
              Facilitate the formation of business relationships
              between San Leandro companies. Measures that create a
              sense of community among local businesses should be
              encouraged.
              Action ED-2.5.A: Internet Links
              Continue to provide links between the City of San Leandro’s
              websites and the websites of local business advocacy groups.
                                                                                                                         5-29

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                                            Action ED-2.5.B: Business Directory
                                                            Work with the Chamber of Commerce and other business
                                                            organizations to prepare a web-based directory of San Leandro
                                                            firms and the products or services they provide. The directory
                                                            should be used to promote business-to-business sales, connect
                                                            local businesses to one another, and close gaps in the supply
                                                            and distribution chains for local industry.
                                              Policy ED-2.6 Business Diversity. Respond to the increasing cultural
                                                            and language diversity of San Leandro business owners,
                                                            including providing multi-lingual resources and
                                                            translation services to reach local businesses.
                                              Policy ED-2.7 Small Businesses. Creative a supportive environment
                                                            for small businesses, particularly locally-owned retail
                                                            and service businesses Downtown and in the city’s
                                                            neighborhood centers.
                                                            Action ED-2.7.A: Small Business Development Center
                                                            Explore the feasibility of creating a small business
                                                            development center that provides a resource for persons
                                                            operating or considering operating a business in San Leandro.
                                                            Action ED-2.7.B: Technology Education
                                                            Expand technology education for small businesses, enabling
                                                            greater use of high-speed broadband for business development
                                                            and marketing.
                                              Policy ED-2.8 Access to Capital. Facilitate access to capital for local
                                                            businesses, including crowdfunding, micro-lending,
                                                            venture capital investment, City-sponsored business
                                                            incentive programs, and traditional lending resources.
                                                            Action ED-2.8.A: Public Funding
                                                            Pursue new public funding sources for infrastructure and
                                                            business assistance programs to replace the losses experienced
                                                            by the termination of the Redevelopment Agency.
                                                            Action ED-2.8.B: Encouraging Entrepreneurship
                                                            Maintain programs to assist start-ups, entrepreneurs,
                                                            incubators and other firms with high growth potential.
                                                            Coordinate with private and non-profit organizations that
                                                            provide financial assistance to such enterprises, and facilitate
                                                            connections to local businesses.
5-30

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                      E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
I NNOVATION
GOAL ED-3        Adapt, reimagine, and reinvent traditional business
                 models to put San Leandro on the leading edge of
                 the innovation economy.
Policy ED-3.1  Innovation Ecosystem.          Foster the creation of an
               “innovation ecosystem” in San Leandro’s employment
               districts, where businesses collaborate with one another
               to improve their products, workplace performance, and
               the quality of the work environment.
Policy ED-3.2  Business Infrastructure. Develop the infrastructure
               necessary to transform San Leandro into a center for
               innovation and creativity, including high-speed
               communications, sustainable energy systems, high
               performing utilities, and convenient access to business
               networks and support services.
               Action ED-3.2.A: Technology Initiatives
               Pursue public funding through programs such as the federal
               Smart Cities Initiative to improve the efficiency and
               performance of local transportation, energy, and
               infrastructure systems through high-speed information and
               communications.
 Policy ED-3.3 Leading Edge Economic Sectors. Continue efforts to
               attract businesses on the leading edge of the Bay Area
               economy, including advanced fabrication, clean tech,
               information services, advanced transportation, and
               maker businesses.
               Action ED-3.3.A: Adaptive Reuse of Industrial Buildings
               Explore the feasibility of converting former industrial
               buildings into “maker spaces,” offices, incubators, co-working
               facilities, and other spaces that support collaboration and
               provide a more affordable alternative to equivalent workplaces
               in San Francisco, Oakland-Berkeley-Emeryville, and Silicon
               Valley.
                                                                                                                      5-31

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              Policy ED-3.4 Lit San Leandro. Leverage the competitive advantage
                                                            provided by Lit San Leandro, a public-private
                                                            partnership that is providing ultra-high speed fiber optic
                                                            communications to businesses in the city. Lit San
                                                            Leandro should be used to add value to local real estate,
                                                            modernize traditional industrial activities, retain and
                                                            grow existing San Leandro businesses, and recruit
                                                            innovative high-tech businesses.
                                                            Action ED-3.4.A: Lit San Leandro Expansion
                                                            Evaluate opportunities for further expansion of the Lit San
                                                            Leandro fiber optic network to those parts of the city that are
                                                            currently not served, including schools, public facilities,
                                                            neighborhood business districts, residences, and hospitals.
                                                            Implement programs which assist local businesses and
                                                            institutions with connections to the network.
                                                            Action ED-3.4.B: Smart City Action Strategy
                                                            Develop a “Smart City Action Strategy” or similar strategic
                                                            planning document which identifies opportunities to use the
                                                            Lit San Leandro fiber network to improve local utility,
                                                            transportation, safety, environmental, educational, health
                                                            care, and governance systems. The Strategy should include:
                                                            (a) A marketing strategy for Lit San Leandro, including
                                                                 identification of target markets, key messages, and specific
                                                                 activities to reach potential customers;
                                                            (b) Guidance for license agreements, Memorandums of
                                                                 Understanding (MOUs), and operating procedures
                                                                 governing the delivery of fiber optic services to San
                                                                 Leandro properties to ensure maximum operating
                                                                 efficiency;
                                                            (c) An update of the City’s Commercial Broadband Strategy,
                                                                 including further exploration of extension requirements
                                                                 linked to new development approvals and an open trench
                                                                 policy which calls for installing conduit when a street cut
                                                                 is made; and
                                                            (d) Further consideration of the potential to use Lit San
                                                                 Leandro for “Internet of Things” and “Smart City”
                                                                 applications that benefit both the public and private
                                                                 sectors.
5-32

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                      E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
              Action ED-3.4.C: Broadband Consortium
              Continue the City’s participation in the East Bay Broadband
              Consortium, assisting and supporting expansion of the East
              Bay’s broadband capacity in order to grow the local economy.
Policy ED-3.5 Sustainable Manufacturing. Promote environmentally
              sustainable manufacturing practices by San Leandro
              businesses. Focus business attraction efforts on green,
              environmentally-friendly businesses.
              Action ED-3.5.A: Certified Green Businesses
              Promote the concept of “certified” green businesses as a way
              to encourage sustainable business practices and more
              environmentally friendly operations in San Leandro.
Policy ED-3.6  Energy Innovation.         Support new and innovative
              energy technology, with the objective of reducing
              dependence on fossil fuels, reducing greenhouse gas
              emissions, and using energy more efficiently.
              Action ED-3.6.A: Energy Efficiency Programs
              As funds allow, maintain a City-sponsored energy efficiency
              program that facilitates energy efficiency and renewable
              energy improvements at industrial buildings, thereby
              reducing business energy costs.
              Action ED-3.6.B: Net Zero Energy
              Promote the concept of net zero energy in new industrial
              construction and leverage the San Leandro Zero Net Energy
              Center to promote the city’s reputation for green construction.
              The City will strongly support property upgrades which
              increase energy efficiency and independence.
              See the Conservation Element for additional policies and
              actions on energy conservation and efficiency
              Action ED-3.6.C: Industrial Micro-Grids
              Work with property owners in San Leandro’s industrial areas
              to explore incentives and regulatory options for establishing a
              localized micro-grid energy system comprised primarily of
              rooftop solar panels. Public-private partnerships to support
              micro-grid development should be explored.
                                                                                                                      5-33

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                                            Action ED-3.6.D: Energy Education and Outreach
                                                            Support education and outreach to business owners on the
                                                            financial and environmental benefits of renewable energy
                                                            alternatives.
                                              Policy ED-3.7 Youth Engagement. Bring local students, faculty and
                                                            school administrators into the discussion of San
                                                            Leandro’s emergence as a center for innovation, creative
                                                            thinking, and the hub of a maker economy.
                                              Policy ED-3.8 Sharing Economy. Explore ways in which new San
                                                            Leandro businesses and start-ups can benefit from the
                                                            sharing economy, including the sharing of business and
                                                            industrial space, vehicles, and services that are more
                                                            affordable when shared by multiple users.
                                              V IBRANT R ETAIL C ENTERS
                                              GOAL ED-4        Create attractive, economically vibrant commercial
                                                               areas that are easily accessible to San Leandro
                                                               residents and employees.
                                              Policy ED-4.1 Retail Diversity.        Encourage a diverse range of
                                                            commercial uses, offering goods and services that fully
                                                            meet the needs of San Leandro residents and businesses.
                                                            The City should recruit new businesses that: (a) fill gaps
                                                            in the range of goods and services currently available;
                                                            and (b) act as catalysts for attracting other retailers to the
                                                            City.
                                                            Action ED-4.1.A: Retail Action Strategy
                                                            Develop a Retail Action Strategy, including evaluations      of
                                                            retail shopping patterns and leakage to other communities   in
                                                            particular sectors. The Strategy should include programs    to
                                                            retain San Leandro’s retailers, and attract new retailers   in
                                                            under-represented sectors.
                                                            Action ED-4.1.B: Retail Prospectus
                                                            Continue retail recruitment efforts through the City’s Office
                                                            of Business Development, including preparation of a retail
5-34

                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                       E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
              real estate prospectus and updated demographic and market
              information for prospective businesses.
Policy ED-4.2  Improving the Retail Mix. Achieve a retail mix that
              includes small, locally-owned businesses as well as large
              national retailers. A particular effort should be made to
              attract higher-quality retailers, such as brand name
              clothing stores, home furnishing stores, and high-quality
              supermarkets.
              Action ED-4.2.A: Commercial Zoning
              Review zoning regulations for the City’s commercial districts,
              including parking standards, to ensure that they support the
              City’s retail goals.
Policy ED-4.3 Promotion of Local Businesses. Work with local
              retailers and service providers to foster success through
              marketing and branding strategies.
              Action ED-4.3.A: Business Advocacy
              Encourage and support partnerships between the City of San
              Leandro and the Chamber of Commerce, the Downtown
              Association, the San Leandro Improvement Association,
              Advisory Boards and Citizen Committees, and other groups to
              promote retail development in the city.
              Action ED-4.3.B: Shop San Leandro
              Work with local business groups to implement a “Shop San
              Leandro” campaign that promotes local merchants and
              reduces retail leakage to other cities.
              Action ED-4.3.C: Home Improvement Center
              Promote San Leandro’s reputation as a retail design center for
              home improvements and the Bay Area’s first stop for those
              seeking construction and building supplies, such as tile, stone,
              ceramics, flooring, and interior finishings.
Policy ED-4.4 Business District Improvements. Encourage upgrades
              to the appearance of businesses and the condition of
              properties in the city’s business districts.
                                                                                                                       5-35

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                                            Action ED-4.4.A: Façade Improvement Programs
                                                            Maintain City programs that provide forgivable loans to
                                                            businesses undertaking façade improvements and awning,
                                                            sign, and painting upgrades.
                                                            Action ED-4.4.B: Design Assistance Programs
                                                            Provide design assistance to businesses and property owners
                                                            seeking to improve their properties and make commercial
                                                            spaces more attractive.
                                                            Action ED-4.4.C: Community Benefit Districts
                                                            Support the creation of community benefit districts and other
                                                            organizations funded by businesses and property owners
                                                            which augment City services in the City’s major business
                                                            districts.
                                              Policy ED-4.5 Downtown San Leandro. Continue efforts to transform
                                                            Downtown into a successful, pedestrian-oriented,
                                                            mixed-use district with services and amenities for
                                                            workers, residents, and visitors. Downtown should be
                                                            the gathering place for the city, providing restaurants,
                                                            cafes, and a wide range of retail stores and services in a
                                                            walkable setting.
                                                            Action ED-4.5.A: Activating Downtown Spaces
                                                            Support Downtown community events such as farmers
                                                            markets, food and music festivals, and street fairs. Such
                                                            events can reinforce a sense of community, provide unique
                                                            shopping and dining experiences, and contribute to San
                                                            Leandro’s identity.
                                                            Action ED-4.5.B: Downtown Streetscapes
                                                            Implement lighting, streetscape, and public art improvements
                                                            to make Downtown a safer, more pedestrian-friendly place.
                                                            Action ED-4.5.C: Downtown Parking
                                                            Implement parking management strategies that ensure that
                                                            convenient parking is available for shoppers and restaurant
                                                            patrons in Downtown San Leandro.
                                                            See Land Use Element Goal 6 for additional Downtown
                                                            policies and actions
5-36

                                                                                   S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                           E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
Policy ED-4.6   Shopping Centers and Neighborhood Business
                Districts. Support and encourage the repositioning of
                San Leandro’s shopping centers and neighborhood
                business districts to remain competitive and meet the
                changing needs of the community, including the
                provision of merchandise and services for an
                increasingly diverse population.
                Action ED-4.6.A: Retail Recruitment
                Implement retail recruitment strategies, including direct
                communication with property owners and major national
                retailers, to find desirable tenants for vacant retail spaces, and
                to encourage new retailers to locate within San Leandro.
                Action ED-4.6.B: International Retailing
                Develop and implement a strategy to attract clusters of ethnic
                and international businesses.
                See also Land Use Policy LU-8.4 on Neighborhood Shopping
                Centers
 Policy ED-4.7: Employee-Serving Retail. Encourage the growth of
                new retail centers and retail businesses serving San
                Leandro’s employment districts, especially along Marina
                Boulevard west of I-880.
 Policy ED-4.8: Bayfair Center. Support continued reinvestment in
                Bayfair Center, restoring the center’s role as a regional
                destination while reinventing it to reflect modern retail
                trends and incorporate a more pedestrian-oriented,
                mixed use format.
                                                                                                                           5-37

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              B USINESS A MENITIES
                                              GOAL ED-5        Provide amenities that attract and retain businesses
                                                               and encourage those working in San Leandro to also
                                                               live in San Leandro..
                                              Policy ED-5.1 Key Amenities.           Support amenities that attract
                                                            businesses and employees to the city, including a more
                                                            vibrant downtown, walkable neighborhoods, better
                                                            dining and entertainment options, quality education and
                                                            public safety, and more diverse housing choices.
                                                            Action ED-5.1.A: Work Local, Live Local
                                                            Explore a “Work Local, Live Local” campaign designed to
                                                            encourage persons working in San Leandro to seek out local
                                                            housing opportunities. The campaign would promote the
                                                            benefits of living in the city, the environmental and personal
                                                            benefits of reduced commute times, and links to local real
                                                            estate and housing opportunities.
                                                            Action ED-5.1.B: Research on Commute Patterns
                                                            Conduct additional research on the characteristics of worker
                                                            commute patterns, including surveys of where local employees
                                                            live and what changes would encourage them to relocate to
                                                            San Leandro. Research should also include periodic surveys of
                                                            employer needs and an analysis of the occupations and skills of
                                                            San Leandro residents versus the job skills required for San
                                                            Leandro’s primary industries.
                                              Policy ED-5.2 Housing Production.              Substantially increase the
                                                            production of a variety of housing types meeting the
                                                            needs of persons at all income levels.
                                              Policy ED-5.3 Educational Quality. Strive for increased academic
                                                            performance in the San Leandro and San Lorenzo
                                                            Unified School Districts.          The City recognizes the
                                                            potential for great schools to attract families to the City.
                                                            It stands by the idea that every student deserves a safe
                                                            and productive learning environment that promotes
                                                            academic and personal achievement. San Leandro will
                                                            support efforts by its school districts to improve the
                                                            quality of education, reduce drop-out rates, and improve
                                                            skill levels among students.
5-38

                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                       E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
Policy ED-5.4 Public Safety.        Continue efforts to reduce crime,
              maintain neighborhood safety, and promptly address
              blight and nuisances in the city.
Policy ED-5.5 Quality Services and Accessible Government.
              Maintain and promote the high quality of City services
              and the accessibility and responsiveness of City
              government to prospective businesses and new
              employees.        Amenities such as the San Leandro
              shoreline and parklands, the golf courses, the Public
              Library, and Recreation and Community Services
              programs should be recognized and celebrated as
              community assets.
Policy ED-5.6 Cultural and Historic Resources. Preserve the City’s
              cultural and historic resources, and encourage their
              contribution to the City’s economic development. The
              potential for heritage tourism based on San Leandro's
              history should be further explored.
Policy ED-5.7 Diversity as an Asset.           Recognize San Leandro’s
              cultural, ethnic, and income diversity as one of the City’s
              great strengths, and leverage this strength when
              marketing the city to prospective residents and
              employers.
Policy ED-5.8 Arts, Food, and Entertainment. Promote investment
              and expansion of San Leandro’s arts, entertainment, and
              dining sector, including venues for theater, music and
              the visual arts, as well as dining and night-life
              establishments. The arts should be viewed as a way to
              connect people and attract investment while expressing
              the creative energy of the city.
              Action ED-5.8.A: Temporary Urbanism
              Pursue temporary and pop up art installations projects and
              special arts events which draw creative talent and visitors.
              Action ED-5.8.B: Culinary Tourism
              Consider the potential for culinary tourism (attracting visitors
              based on local food choices and destination restaurants). Food
              should serve as a means of uniting diverse cultures and
              creating memorable places. The City should consider a
                                                                                                                       5-39

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                                              potential Downtown location for a “restaurant row” or
                                                              similar defined geographic area to which multiple restaurants
                                                              may be attracted.
                                               Policy ED-5.9  Hospitality. Expand the hospitality sector in San
                                                              Leandro, including hotels and visitor services such as
                                                              conference and meeting facilities.
                                               Policy ED-5.10 Healthy Environment for Youth and Families. Create a
                                                              positive, healthy environment for youth and families in
                                                              San Leandro, including additional youth activities, and
                                                              businesses and entertainment venues serving families,
                                                              children, and teens.
                                              Policy ED-5.11  Civic Beautification. Undertake streetscape improve-
                                                              ments and place-making efforts near BART, along major
                                                              arterial streets, and in established business districts.
                                                              Such improvements should maximize the potential for
                                                              increasing business activity.
                                                              Action ED-5.11.A: San Leandro by Design
                                                              In partnership with business leaders and the Chamber of
                                                              Commerce, continue the San Leandro by Design initiative to
                                                              foster a dialogue about the city’s future, with a particular
                                                              emphasis on placemaking and improving the visual quality
                                                              and identity of the city’s business districts.
                                              Policy ED-5.12  Workplace Accessibility. Improve access to and from
                                                              workplaces through sustained investment in the
                                                              transportation system, with a particular focus on
                                                              connecting local employees to BART by transit, non-
                                                              profit shuttles such as LINKS, bicycle lanes, and
                                                              sidewalks.
                                                              See the Transportation Element for additional policies and
                                                              actions on LINKS and other transportation improvements
                                                              between BART and employment districts.
5-40

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                    E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
W ORKFORCE D EVELOPMENT
GOAL ED-6       Increase access to quality jobs, stable employment,
                and career advancement for all San Leandro
                residents.
Policy ED-6.1 Career Pathways. Coordinate with the San Leandro and
              San Lorenzo Unified School Districts to create career
              pathways for San Leandro students, and to align school
              curricula with emerging job opportunities in the Bay
              Area economy.
              Action ED-6.1.A: Vocational Training
              Support the expanded vocational training in the public high
              school system, particularly in the advanced manufacturing
              and technology sectors and in other emerging sectors of the
              local economy.
              Action ED-6.1.B: Language Diversity
              Support School District efforts to increase language skills
              among all residents, including immersion programs which
              provide students with the opportunity to become fluent in
              multiple languages.
              Action ED-6.1.C: After-School Programs
              Encourage after-school programs that focus on educational
              enrichment and skills training.
Policy ED-6.2 Educational Partnerships
              Promote mentorships, internships, job training
              programs, and other partnerships between the City,
              school districts, and business community to enhance and
              complement local educational resources and provide job
              training for San Leandro youth.
              Action ED-6.2.A: Apprenticeships
              Continue and expand local apprenticeship programs which
              enable San Leandro students to gain the skills needed to find
              well-paying jobs upon graduation.
                                                                                                                    5-41
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
                                              Policy ED-6.3 Engaging Youth. Encourage School District and youth
                                                            participation in City advisory groups that address issues
                                                            relating to workforce development and emerging
                                                            technology.
                                              Policy ED-6.4 Community Colleges. Recognize the importance of
                                                            local community colleges in helping San Leandro’s
                                                            young adults to advance in the local workforce.
                                                            Partnerships between the City and local community
                                                            colleges are encouraged.
                                              Policy ED-6.5 Adult Education. Encourage opportunities for life-long
                                                            learning and skill development among San Leandro’s
                                                            adults, including adult education programs.
                                              Policy ED-6.6 Job Training, Support job training initiatives which
                                                            prepare local residents for local jobs.
                                              Policy ED-6.7 Job Opportunities for Residents. Support programs
                                                            that encourage San Leandro employers to hire local
                                                            residents.
                                                            Action ED-6.7.A: Job Fairs and Employee Recruitment
                                                            Promote local job fairs, job boards, and other special events or
                                                            programs that help place local residents in positions with local
                                                            employers, and provide assistance to employers in employee
                                                            recruitment.
                                                            Action ED-6.7.B: Local Hiring Incentives
                                                            Consider the feasibility of local hiring incentives for employers
                                                            and businesses relocating to San Leandro.
                                              Policy ED-6.8 Labor. Engage organized labor, labor unions, and labor
                                                            advocates in the economic development process.
                                              Policy ED-6.9 Investing in Libraries. Continue to invest in the San
                                                            Leandro Library system through the addition of
                                                            technology, modernized facilities, and activities such as
                                                            career workshops.
5-42

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
Policy ED-6.10 Child Care and Employment.                   Recognize the
               importance of affordable, convenient child care to
               securing and maintaining employment for working
               parents.
Policy ED-6.11 Career Ladders.          Encourage career advancement
               programs to provide opportunities for upward mobility
               among the city’s workforce. Support the growth of
               businesses that provide career advancement or “ladder”
               opportunities for employees.
               See the Community Services and Facilities Element for
               additional policies on the topics covered under this goal,
               including education, libraries, and human services.
                                                                                                                  5-43

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
E C O N O M I C D E V E L O P M E N T
5-44
                                                                                  6
                                                                            AND CONSERVATION   OPEN SPACE, PARKS,
A.      OVERVIEW
This chapter incorporates the state-mandated “open space” and
“conservation” elements. It addresses the management of San Leandro’s
park and open space areas, the conservation of natural resources such as
soil, water, and natural habitat, and the reduction of greenhouse gases
associated with climate change. Its goals and policies address a broad
range of issues, with the common purpose of improving recreational
opportunities, protecting the city’s natural environment, and growing
more sustainably.
San Leandro’s parks are a source of pride and enjoyment for the entire
community and accommodate recreational activities for all segments of
the population. The city is home to a world-class golf course, a scenic
shoreline trail system, a large regional park, and numerous smaller
neighborhood and community parks. These parks offer a range of leisure
time experiences, from the quiet contemplation of nature to active sports
like swimming and soccer.
While parks are recognized as essential to San Leandro’s quality of life,
there are also deficiencies that must be addressed. Some of the parks
need rehabilitation and updating. Others require design changes to
address safety issues and use conflicts. Some neighborhoods lack
convenient access to parks and would benefit from additional open
space and recreational facilities.
                                                                                                            6-1

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                                      Changing demographics have led to the
                                                                                      demand for new recreational programs,
                                                                                      while population growth has placed
                                                                                      greater demands on existing facilities.
                                                                                      The ability to fund park improvements,
                                                                                      and even meet basic maintenance needs,
                                                                                      remains a challenge. The General Plan
                                                                                      includes policies and programs to
                                                                                      address this challenge and others to
                                                                                      ensure that the city’s parks remain an
                                                                                      asset for years to come.
                                                                                      In addition to the parks, San Leandro
                                                                                      contains other significant open spaces.
                                                                                      These areas contain diverse ecosystems,
                                                                                      including wetlands near the shoreline,
                                                                                      riparian woodlands along San Leandro
                                                                                      Creek, and grasslands in the hills and at
                                                                                      Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline. Even the
                                                                                      city’s residential neighborhoods provide
                                                                                      an “urban forest,” with trees and shrubs
                                                                                      providing habitat for birds and small
                                                    mammals. These ecosystems must be managed to avoid their
                                                    degradation and ensure the long-term sustenance of plant and animal
                                                    life. Ultimately, a healthy natural environment can enhance public
                                                    health, local aesthetics, and civic pride.
                                                    Another mission of this Element is to promote conservation practices
                                                    among San Leandro residents and businesses. Three areas are
                                                    emphasized: water conservation, recycling, and energy conservation. A
                                                    number of programs are presented to reduce the consumption of non-
                                                    renewable resources and promote more sustainable alternatives. In each
                                                    case, there is a need for greater awareness of why conservation is needed
                                                    and the contributions that each San Leandro resident or business can
                                                    make toward achieving conservation goals.
                                                    Finally, this Element provides a framework for responding to the
                                                    challenge of global climate change at the local level, including a variety
                                                    of land use, transportation, and energy-related measures. The City has
                                                    adopted a Climate Action Plan which identifies more specific strategies
                                                    for meeting state goals. Measures to improve resilience in response to
                                                    rising sea levels, drought, and severe weather, are addressed in the
                                                    Environmental Hazards Element.
6-2

                                                                                    S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
B.        OPEN SPACE
State guidelines require that four types of open space be identified and
analyzed in the General Plan:
    Open Space for Recreation. This category includes the city’s park
     system, as well as schoolyards, athletic fields, the regional parks, and
     other areas used for recreation. The management of these areas is
     covered by Goals OSC-1 through OSC-4.
    Open Space for the Protection of Natural Resources. In San
     Leandro, this category includes the Shoreline Marshlands, the
     riparian areas along San Leandro Creek, and the offshore waters of
     San Francisco Bay. These areas will remain undeveloped in the
     future to protect natural habitat, including se veral endangered or
     threatened species. These areas are covered by Goals OSC-5 and
     OSC-6.
    Open Space for the Managed Production of
     Resources. This category includes agricultural
     land, commercial fishing grounds, timber harvest
     areas, quarries, and other areas used for resource
     production. At one time, such open spaces were
     abundant in San Leandro, consisting primarily of
     farms and orchards. Virtually all of these areas
     have been converted to urban uses. The soil and
     mineral resources which support resource
     production in San Leandro are addressed later in
     this chapter.
    Open Space for Public Health and Safety. This
     includes the “no build” zone along the Hayward
     Fault, unstable slopes in the San Leandro Hills,
     and the floodways along local creeks and flood
     control channels. These areas are addressed in
     detail in Chapter 7.
Open space areas are shown on Figure 3-3 (Land Use
Diagram). Two of the categories on the map—(1)
Parks and Recreation and (2) Resource Conservation
Areas—have been used to delineate open space in the
city.
                                                                                                                               6-3

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    C.        PARKS
                                                    City Parks
                                                    Park Classification
                                                    San Leandro has 104 acres of City-owned parks, including three
                                                    community parks, 12 neighborhood parks, seven mini-parks, and four
                                                    special use recreation areas. The City also operates a 178-acre municipal
                                                    golf course and a 462-berth public marina. The location of these parks is
                                                    shown on Figure 6-1. Table 6-1 includes the acreage of each park, along
                                                    with the acreage of other open space areas in the city. The other open
                                                    space areas include 19 acres of improved open space at Oyster Bay
                                                    Regional Shoreline and 82 acres of school athletic fields and
                                                    playgrounds.
                                                    Most of the city’s parks were developed in the two decades following
                                                    World War II. The post-war population boom brought about a great
                                                    increase in recreational needs and large parks such as Washington
                                                    Manor, Stenzel, Halcyon, Bonaire were incorporated in the subdivisions
                                                    developed at that time. Several of the post-war era parks were developed
                                                    collaboratively with schools, supplementing the city’s park system and
                                                    providing access to special facilities such as swimming pools and
                                                    running tracks. In the early 1960s, the Marina Park, boat basin, and golf
                                                    courses were developed through a major land reclamation and
                                                    redevelopment program. The Shoreline area soon became the city’s
                                                    flagship park. Most of the parks created since 1970 have been small
                                                    “pocket” parks under an acre in size, developed on vacant parcels or
                                                    within subdivisions.
6-4

               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                Figure 6-1
  San Leandro Park System
                                                          6-5
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L      P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D  C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                           San Leandro’s Parks
                Regional Parks are typically larger than 30 acres and include a mix of conservation areas and
                 active recreation areas. They draw visitors from beyond the city limits and may feature unique
                 natural features or regional attractions. Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline, which is operated by
                 East Bay Regional Park District, is the only regional park within San Leandro.
                Community Parks range in size from 5 to 30 acres. Each park serves multiple neighborhoods and
                 contains a wide variety of active and passive recreational facilities. The City’s three community
                 parks are Marina, Washington Manor, and Chabot.
                Neighborhood Parks are typically 2 to 10 acres in size and provide for the daily recreational
                 needs of area residents. They often have large lawn areas for informal sports and play activities.
                 They may include facilities such as tennis courts and tot lots, but usually do not include major
                 facilities such as lighted ballfields. Examples include Bonaire and Memorial.
                Mini-Parks or “pocket parks” are usually less than an acre in size and accommodate small
                 recreational facilities such as picnic tables and tot lots. Such parks are often included in new
                 developments, in accordance with the City’s Subdivision Ordinance and parkland dedication
                 requirements.
                Special Use Parks include facilities which serve a specific need or population group. Examples
                 include the Heath Tennis Courts, the San Leandro Ball Park, and Farelly Pool.
                Golf Courses include the 178-acre Monarch Bay public golf complex. This complex consists of
                 the 18-hole Tony Lema and 9-hole Marina Golf Courses, and a driving range, pro-shop, and
                 clubhouse.
                School Facilities include sports fields, hard court areas, lawns, and other facilities at 14 school
                 campuses in San Leandro. These facilities are owned by the San Leandro and San Lorenzo Unified
                 School District. Joint use agreements have been developed for some of these facilities which
                 allow access by the general public when school is not in session.
6-6

                                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                              O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
TABLE 6-1        PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES IN SAN LEANDRO
PARKS                                                Acres           SCHOOL FACILITIES                                Acres
Regional Parks                                        19.0           School Facilities                                  81.7
Oyster Bay (*)                                        19.0           Bancroft                                            4.2
                                                                     Corvallis                                           6.0
Community Parks                                       36.7
                                                                     Dayton                                              0.5
Chabot                                                 4.8           Garfield                                            4.3
Marina                                                17.9           Jefferson                                           5.6
Washington Manor                                      14.0           Lewelling                                           5.2
Neighborhood Parks                                    42.2           Madison                                             6.4
                                                                     McKinley                                            3.2
Bonaire                                                5.4
                                                                     Monroe                                              2.8
Cherry Grove                                           7.0
                                                                     Muir                                               11.1
Floresta                                               0.8
                                                                     Roosevelt                                           3.9
Grover Cleveland                                       1.0
                                                                     San Leandro HS                                     15.6
Halcyon                                                4.9
                                                                     Washington                                          1.3
McCartney                                              1.6
                                                                     Washington Manor                                    4.9
Memorial                                               2.7
                                                                     Wilson                                              6.7
Mulford                                                1.4
Siempre Verde                                          1.8
Stenzel                                                9.3
Thrasher                                               4.2
Toyon                                                  2.1
Mini-Parks                                             4.7           CALCULATION OF OPEN SPACE STANDARD
Halcyon Dr Linear                                      0.7           Total Active Park Acreage                         123.1
Heron Bay (private)                                    1.4           Total Golf Course Acreage                         178.0
Root                                                   0.8           Total School Recreation Acreage                    81.7
Victoria Circle                                        0.3           Total Acreage Eligible for Inclusion in
Warden                                                 0.3                                                             382.8
                                                                     Park Standard
Cherrywood                                             0.9
                                                                     Population (2015)                                88,400
Cherry Glen                                            0.3
                                                                     Acres per 1,000 residents (2015)                   4.33
Special Use Parks                                     20.5           OTHER OPEN SPACES
Farrelly                                               0.5           Oyster Bay (unimproved)                            175
Heath                                                  0.7           Shoreline Marshlands                               172
Burrell/ Pacific Sports                               13.7           Citation Marsh                                     100
San Leandro Ball Park                                  5.6           Dredge Materials Mgmt Site                         114
TOTAL ACTIVE PARKS                                   123.1           TOTAL OTHER OPEN SPACES                            561
Monarch Bay Golf Club                                178.0
TOTAL GOLF COURSES                                   178.0
Source: Barry Miller Consulting, City of San Leandro, 2016
Note: (*) Oyster Bay acreage is based on the area improved for recreation as of 2015.
                                                                                                                                        6-7
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    Rehabilitation and Maintenance Needs
                                                    Re-investment in the city’s parks is one of San Leandro’s highest
                                                    priorities. Some of the parks contain outdated equipment and facilities,
                                                    worn out turf, aging buildings and restrooms, and deteriorating
                                                    irrigation systems. All of the parks have faced increasing demand as the
                                                    city’s population has grown. Recreational needs are also becoming more
                                                    diverse due to demographic changes and trends in recreation and
                                                    human service delivery. The city has also had to adapt to the challenges
                                                    of a prolonged drought, which has impacted its trees as well as the
                                                    condition of lawns and landscaped areas.
                                                    The emphasis in the General Plan is on updating and improving existing
                                                    City parks before new parks are developed. Opportunities for new
                                                    neighborhood and community parks are limited, so it is imperative that
                                                    existing facilities are maintained and enhanced to meet existing and
                                                    future community needs. Policies and programs in this General Plan
                                                    urge the City to increase General Fund allocations for this purpose, and
                                                    to explore possible new funding sources such as grants, assessment
                                                    districts, parcel taxes, bond measures, and naming rights.
                                                    Additional public input should be solicited as park rehabilitation
                                                    strategies are refined and implemented. In fact, public input should be
                                                    solicited in all aspects of park planning and care. Greater park
                                                    stewardship can provide an effective way to build neighborhood pride,
                                                    improve park safety, reduce vandalism, and ultimately make the parks
                                                                                           more useful for all residents.
                                                                                           One of the most important
                                                                                           recommendations of this General
                                                                                           Plan is that the City develop a
                                                                                           Parks Master Plan. The Master
                                                                                           Plan     would       comprehensively
                                                                                           address     rehabilitation      needs,
                                                                                           operating practices procedures,
                                                                                           and potential funding sources. It
                                                                                           would also include an assessment
                                                                                           of recreational needs, the adequacy
                                                                                           of existing facilities, and principles
                                                                                           for future park planning and
                                                                                           design. These principles would be
                                                                                           applied to provide a road map for
                                                                                           future improvements and the
                                                                                           restoration of infrastructure.
6-8

                                                                                    S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
Level of Service Standards
The following Level of Service standards have been established for the
city’s park system:
    At least 5.0 acres of improved parkland should be provided for every
     1,000 residents.
    A park should be accessible within one-half mile of each San
     Leandro resident.
In 2015, there were 88,400 residents in San Leandro and 383 acres of
active parkland, equating to a ratio of 4.33 acres per 1,000 residents. The
city’s park inventory has not increased significantly in the past 15 years,
despite an increase of 9,000 residents. This is partially because the
population increase has been fueled by increases in household size
rather than new housing development, so there have been few
opportunities to collect park impact fee funds or require dedication of
parkland in new development.
Based on a projected 2035 population of 102,300, the city would need a
total of 511 acres of parkland to meet the 5 acre per 1,000 standard. This
is an increase of 128 acres over the existing inventory. In addition, joint
use agreements will need to be maintained for each of the city’s public
schools, to ensure that these facilities remain available for public use.
                                                                                                                               6-9

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    The City intends to achieve its targeted level of service standard through
                                                    four strategies:
                                                         First, by working with East Bay Regional Park District (EBPRPD) on
                                                          the continued improvement of Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline. As
                                                          noted later in this chapter, EBRPD has designated 133 acres of Oyster
                                                          Bay as a “Recreation” Unit. Additional facilities and usable open
                                                          space is planned in this area.
                                                         Second, by working with EBRPD and other agencies in the
                                                          development of the East Bay Greenway, a planned linear trail
                                                          extending from Oakland to Hayward.1
                                                         Third, by collecting a park in-lieu fee or requiring on-site parkland
                                                          dedication within new development. New parks will be essential to
                                                          adequately meet the needs of all San Leandro residents.
                                                              1 The acreage of the East Bay Greenway will be determined as detailed design
                                                    studies are conducted. The alignment is approximately 17,500 linear feet through San
                                                    Leandro. An average width of 50 feet would equate to about 20 acres of land. However,
                                                    the open space area could be wider in some areas and narrower in others. Segments of the
                                                    Greenway located within street rights-of-way would not be counted as park acreage.
6-10

                                                                                  S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
   Fourth, by supplementing the traditional system of parks with new
    types of parks, such as promenades at the Shoreline Development,
    urban plazas, creekside parks, community gardens, and
    enhancements to utility rights-of-way.
Achieving the per capita acreage standard is only part of the City’s open
space goal. The other part is to ensure that all San Leandro residents can
access a park within one-half mile of their homes. Those areas that
currently do not meet the distance standard include the southern part of
Washington Manor (south of Lewelling), the Springlake/ Huntington
Park area, the Timothy Drive area, the northern MacArthur corridor, the
southern part of Downtown, and the southern part of Bay-O-Vista.
While the improvement of Oyster Bay will help the City meet its acreage
standard, it will not address the need for additional neighborhood and
community open space in these areas. Opportunities for additional
parkland should be pursued through neighborhood plans and specific
plans such as the Bay Fair TOD Strategy currently underway.
Potential New Parks
Goal OSC-2 of the General Plan presents policies and programs to
increase park acreage. Because San Leandro is almost fully developed,
opportunities for new parks may not be immediately apparent. There are
few vacant sites left in the city and those that exist are expensive or not
conveniently situated for recreation. In the future, the City will need to
consider less conventional sites, such as utility and railroad rights-of-
way, and redeveloping industrial areas. With the implementation of
complete streets policies, there may also be opportunities to convert
existing public right-of-way into recreational or passive open space.
                                                                                                                            6-11

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                                                 As noted above, the City has
                                                                                                 park impact fee and/or
                                                                                                 dedication requirements to
                                                                                                 ensure that park acreage is
                                                                                                 increased as the city grows.
                                                                                                 On-site parkland dedication
                                                                                                 is most effective in larger
                                                                                                 single family developments
                                                                                                 where sufficient land can be
                                                                                                 set aside to create a useable
                                                                                                 neighborhood park.         Since
                                                                                                 there are very few such sites
                                                                                                 available         for       such
                                                                                                 development, it is expected
                                                                                                 that most future development
                                                                                                 will pay an impact fee. Such
                                                                                                 fees may be pooled and
                                                    combined with funds from other sources to acquire larger and more
                                                    usable open spaces. Impact fees alone will not be sufficient to address
                                                    the backlog of deficiencies, or the need for larger facilities such as soccer
                                                    fields. Bond measures and other initiatives may be needed to develop
                                                    larger, more substantial facilities.
                                                    Since much of the city’s future development will occur in high-density
                                                    transit oriented development areas, open space serving future residents
                                                    of these areas will be critical. Such spaces could include plazas,
                                                    courtyards, pocket parks, rooftop spaces, and linear open spaces, as well
                                                    as more traditional parks. In the Downtown area, San Leandro Creek
                                                    presents a unique opportunity, with the potential for expansion of Root
                                                    Park and a linear park between San Leandro Boulevard and the Fire
                                                    Department Training Facility. Efforts to create more civic open space in
                                                    the San Leandro Plaza area also should be pursued.
                                                    Elsewhere in San Leandro, opportunities for new mini-parks,
                                                    community gardens, and other public spaces should continue to be
                                                    explored. These could range from pockets of surplus land that are
                                                    “adopted” and landscaped by neighborhood groups to enhancement of
                                                    flood control channels or PG&E right-of-way adjacent to San Leandro
                                                    High School. Greening of parking lots, school yards and other paved
                                                    surfaces also is encouraged. Even where such improvements do not
                                                    increase the city’s parkland inventory, they can enhance the quality of
                                                    life and access to open space for San Leandro residents.
6-12

                                                                                  S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
Opportunities to include private open space areas in new commercial
and industrial development also should be encouraged. Such areas
might include landscaped “commons” or outdoor seating areas,
courtyards, plazas, parklets, and employee recreational facilities. The
City will also encourage the development of private recreational facilities
that are open to the public, such as health clubs and skating rinks.
Regional Parks and Trails
The East Bay Regional Park District (EBRPD) was formed in 1934 with
the mission of preserving open space in the East Bay Hills. This mission
has expanded as the District’s service area, and the population of that
service area, have expanded. The District currently manages more than
120,000 acres of land in 65 parks in Alameda and Contra Costa Counties.
Its landholdings in the San Leandro Area include Oyster Bay Regional
Shoreline, located on the former Oakland Scavenger landfill at the west
end of Davis Street, and Anthony Chabot Regional Park east of the city
limits.
Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline has significant potential for improvement.
The 194-acre site was acquired by EBRPD in 1977 and remained largely
undeveloped for several decades. The District’s attention was focused
on site preparation and resolution of access issues. At the present time,
improvements are limited to group picnic facilities and the Bay Trail
along the shoreline. A trail bridge to Oakland was completed in 2010.
                                                                                                                            6-13

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    An updated Land Use Plan for the site was prepared in 2013. It
                                                    identifies locations for future support facilities such as parking areas,
                                                    roads and trails, picnic areas, and restrooms. Capital projects to
                                                    implement this plan will be pursued as part of the EBRPD budgeting
                                                    process in the future. The Plan designates Davis Street as the park
                                                    entrance and calls for a new entry road and a parking area with the
                                                    capacity for 700 vehicles. The Plan also calls for the construction of new
                                                    group picnic areas along the park access road, turf lawn areas for passive
                                                    recreational use, public art installation sites, a 2-5 acre bicycle skills park,
                                                    a Frisbee “golf course,” an off-leash dog play area, and a special events
                                                    area for performances and other events. Infrastructure and service yard
                                                    facilities also are planned. For programming purposes, the EBRPD Plan
                                                    designates 133 acres of the site as a “Recreation” unit and 61 acres as a
                                                    “Natural” unit.
                                                    On the other side of the city, Anthony Chabot Regional Park provides a
                                                    semi-wilderness experience in close proximity to San Leandro, with an
                                                    extensive network of hiking, equestrian, and mountain biking trails
                                                    crossing more than 5,000 acres of scenic hillside open space. The park is
                                                    entirely outside the city limits but is immediately adjacent. Lake Chabot,
                                                    a 315-acre reservoir, is the centerpiece of the park. Facilities for fishing,
                                                    boating, picknicking and camping are located along the shoreline.
                                                    Improved trail connections between Lake Chabot and San Leandro
                                                    continue to be explored, both along Lake Chabot Road, along San
                                                    Leandro Creek, and across Fairmont Ridge. Chabot Park serves a
                                                    gateway to hundreds of miles of wildland trails extending across the
                                                    entire Bay Area.
                                                    EBRPD is also working in partnership with the Alameda County
                                                    Transportation Commission to develop the East Bay Greenway, a rails-
                                                    to-trails project crossing Central San Leandro. While the primary
                                                    function of the greenway is transportation, development of this facility
                                                    provides opportunities for greening and parkland acquisition along the
                                                    alignment. The railroad right-of-way is generally 80 feet wide through
                                                    San Leandro, although it widens to as much as 160 feet in some
                                                    locations. The elevated BART tracks run along the corridor for much of
                                                    the length, creating the opportunity for a linear park similar to the
                                                    Ohlone Greenway in Berkeley and Albany. The new San Leandro Tech
                                                    Campus will include dedicated open space connected to the Greenway.
                                                    Opportunities for similar partnerships should be explored in the future.
6-14

                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                 O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
San Leandro also contains approximately four miles of the San Francisco
Bay Trail. Bicyclists can travel south from the San Leandro Shoreline
Park to the San Mateo Bridge—a distance of eight miles—without
crossing a single roadway. Bicyclists can also travel north to the
Metropolitan Oakland Golf Course and Martin Luther King Junior
Regional Shoreline.      Spur trails from the Bay Trail have been
incorporated into the San Leandro Pedestrian and Bicycle Master Plan to
connect the waterfront to nearby neighborhoods.
Joint Use Agreements
School campuses are an essential recreational asset in San Leandro. The
athletic fields, gymnasiums, swimming pools, and other facilities owned
by the San Leandro and San Lorenzo Unified School District supplement
City-owned facilities to create a more complete and well-balanced park
system. Much of the funding provided by SLUSD’s most recent bond
measure (Measure M) was dedicated to expanding and improving
recreational and sports facilities.
Public access to school recreation facilities is governed by joint use
agreements between the City and each school district. The City and
schools also collaborate on recreational programming and capital facility
development. A Committee on City/School Relations comprised of San
Leandro City Council members and Board members from the two school
districts meets periodically to address issues of mutual concern,
including joint use agreements.
                                                                                                                          6-15

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    In some cases, there may be a need to revise existing joint use
                                                    agreements to clarify responsibilities and terms. There may also be
                                                    opportunities to create new agreements covering additional school or
                                                    City facilities. The City also encourages the School Districts to consider
                                                    opportunities for school greening, including community gardens and
                                                    demonstration gardens. Since school grounds provide the only open
                                                    spaces in some San Leandro neighborhoods, it is important that they be
                                                    viewed as aesthetic and recreational resources as well as educational
                                                    resources for the community
                                                    The City also works cooperatively with non-profit agencies such as the
                                                    Boys and Girls Club and Girls Inc., to coordinate the delivery of
                                                    recreational services. Some of these agencies receive financial assistance
                                                    from the City to operate facilities that provide a public benefit.
                                                    Collaboration with these groups further expands local recreational
                                                    opportunities and reaches groups who might not otherwise participate
                                                    in City programs.
                                                    D.        NATURAL RESOURCES
                                                    San Leandro’s natural resources contribute to its ecological health and
                                                    scenic beauty. The city’s urban character masks a rich mosaic of natural
                                                    and manmade ecosystems. Within the city limits, there are over two
                                                    square miles of offshore waters and mudflats, a 370-acre wetland,
                                                    riparian woodlands along one of the East Bay’s longest creeks, and
                                                    hillside grasslands and brushlands. All of the city’s natural resources,
                                                    from air to soil, are susceptible to damage by urban activities. Policies in
                                                    this Element provide long-term strategies to protect natural resources
                                                    and ensure their responsible management. These strategies are
                                                    supplemented by air and water quality policies and hazard reduction
                                                    policies in the Environmental Hazards Element.
                                                    San Leandro Creek
                                                    San Leandro Creek is one of the city’s most important natural resources.
                                                    The 22-mile long creek drains 49 square miles in Alameda and Contra
                                                    Costa Counties, including much of the regional watershed and open
                                                    space lands in the Central East Bay. It flows through two major
                                                    reservoirs before entering San Leandro, then continues for about four
                                                    miles into Oakland where it enters San Leandro Bay.
6-16

                                                                                   S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                    O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
While other urban creeks in the East Bay have
been channelized or buried, most of San Leandro
Creek has been preserved in its natural state. The
creek provides a rich riparian habitat in the heart
of the city. The trees, shrubs, and wildflowers
along its banks support abundant wildlife. Where
channelization has occurred, the grades and
adjacent land uses are very different and provide
varying opportunities for restoration.
Within the San Leandro city limits, the creek’s
upper reaches are generally in private ownership.
Property lines run to the centerline of the creek
and individual owners are responsible for basic
maintenance and erosion control activities. The
lower portions of the creek are under the
jurisdiction of the Alameda County Flood Control
and Water Conservation District (ACFCWCD).
ACFCWCD maintains these sections, and is also
responsible for keeping the upper (private)
portions free of obstructions which could
potentially cause flooding.
San Leandro has been a leader in regional creek
restoration initiatives and will continue to play
this role in the future. Several non-profit groups, including the Friends of
San Leandro Creek, advocate for watershed management, pollution
prevention, vegetation management, and creek restoration. San Leandro
volunteers monitor water quality, bird population, habitat changes, and
water temperature in the creek. Storm drain stenciling, classes,
workshops, and educational programs have raised public awareness of
the creek’s importance.
A 1999 Watershed Management Plan provided the foundation for much
of the planning and restoration work that has taken place over the last 15
years. The Plan’s mission was to foster a diverse, healthy watershed and
ensure that the creek continued to be valued as a natural and community
resource. Best management practices have been implemented, including
bank stabilization and public access improvements. Alameda County
Flood Control has been implementing a vegetation management
program, including the removal of hazardous trees and invasive
vegetation.
                                                                                                                             6-17

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    The City will continue to support projects that enhance the creek
                                                    environment, while respecting private property rights and the privacy
                                                    and security of persons living nearby. San Leandro Creek should be
                                                    viewed not only as an important natural resource, but as an iconic part of
                                                    San Leandro’s identity, an organizing element of the city’s form, and an
                                                    east-west ribbon of open space that unites neighborhoods and connects
                                                    the hills to the shoreline. In this spirit, the City is conducting feasibility
                                                    studies for a new Creek trail that would use a combination of on-street
                                                    rights-of-way and creekside alignments between Lake Chabot and the
                                                    Martin Luther King Junior Regional Shoreline in Oakland.
                                                    The Creek Trail study is also identifying opportunities for new park and
                                                    open space areas. The Creek abuts major development sites near the
                                                    BART station and Downtown San Leandro, including Town Hall Square,
                                                    the former CVS site (Davis and East 14th), and the north end of Alvarado
                                                    Street. Future projects on these sites should preserve public access along
                                                    the top of the bank and include linear creek paths and access points.
                                                    Public facilities such as Bancroft Middle School and the Fire Department
                                                    Training facility also create opportunities for creek access and
                                                    enhancement, including locations for a possible Environmental
                                                    Education Center. It is expected that the Creek Trail Study will include a
                                                    detailed strategy for enhancing the creek as a community asset.
                                                    Figure 6-2 identifies watersheds and waterways in San Leandro.
                                                    Although San Leandro Creek is the city’s best known waterway, San
                                                    Leandro is also crossed by several Alameda County Flood Control
                                                    channels. Some of these channels follow the original courses of creeks,
                                                    including San Lorenzo Creek along the city’s southern boundary.
                                                    Environmental resources along the channels have been greatly reduced
                                                    by the replacement of the natural creekbeds with concrete lining and the
                                                    removal of riparian vegetation. However, some of the channels have the
                                                    potential for recreational trails along the tops of the banks.
6-18

                S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
 O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                               Figure 6-2
Creeks, Drainageways, and
                         Watersheds
                                                          6-19
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    Plant and Animal Resources
                                                    Habitat Types
                                                    Prior to San Leandro’s development, the land between the shoreline and
                                                    the base of the hills was covered with native grasses. Herds of deer and
                                                    elk roamed these grasslands, while rabbits, foxes, racoons, skunks, mice,
                                                    and many other animals flourished. The shoreline mudflats and salt
                                                    marshes teemed with shorebirds and shellfish. Meandering creeks, lined
                                                    with native trees and shrubs, supported Central California steelhead and
                                                    other aquatic and amphibious life.
                                                    Most of the area’s native habitat was replaced by agricultural uses in the
                                                    late 1800s, and then by urban development in the 1900s. Non-native
                                                    grasses became dominant on undeveloped lands, while a variety of
                                                    temperate and semi-tropical trees and shrubs were planted in urban
                                                    areas.
                                                    Today, the city still contains grasslands, woodlands, and wetlands,
                                                    although their extent has been greatly diminished by development. A
                                                    variety of federal and state agencies, including the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
                                                    Service, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the California
                                                    Department of Fish and Wildlife, now closely monitor changes to the
                                                    remaining ecosystems in the city. State and federal laws such as the
                                                    California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) help to ensure that the
                                                    impacts of new development on plant and animal life are adequately
                                                    assessed and mitigated.
6-20

                 S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
O P E N   S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                        Figure 6-3
                                                     Habitat Cover Types
                                                                           6-21
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    Particularly rigorous requirements have been established for wetlands,
                                                    in part because of the dramatic decline in wetland acreage that took
                                                    place during the 1900s. Only about a quarter of the 300 square miles of
                                                    wetlands that once surrounded San Francisco Bay remain intact. Large-
                                                    scale filling and diking of the Bay has been curtailed dramatically since
                                                    the 1960s, and wetlands restoration projects are now underway in some
                                                    areas, including San Leandro. The Bay Conservation and Development
                                                    Commission, a State agency, now oversees most development activities
                                                    within 100 feet of the Bay’s shoreline.
                                                    Figure 6-3 shows habitat types in the city at the present time.
                                                    Approximately 91 percent of the city is urbanized, and the remaining
                                                    nine percent is comprised of grasslands, marshes, and woodlands. The
                                                    urbanized areas also play a role in sustaining plant and animal life.
                                                    Native and ornamental trees and shrubs provide nesting sites for birds
                                                    and support species such as mice, opossum, squirrel, and raccoon.
                                                    San Leandro Shoreline Marshlands
                                                    The San Leandro Shoreline Marshlands are located west of Heron
                                                    Bay/Marina Vista and south and east of the Monarch Bay Golf Club. The
                                                    370-acre wetland comprises one of the largest salt marshes in the Central
                                                    East Bay. In the early 1900s, the wetlands were diked and the area was
                                                    developed with the Trojan Powder Works explosives factory. After the
                                                    factory closed in 1964, the fate of the property was debated for more than
                                                    three decades. Early proposals called for its development with over 2,000
                                                    homes. Ultimately, only a small portion of the site was approved for
                                                    development, and the remainder was dedicated as permanent open
                                                    space.
6-22

                                                                                  S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
A tidal marsh restoration project was launched on the site in the mid-
1990s. A series of culverts was cut through the shoreline levees, restoring
tidal action to the wetlands. Ditches were enlarged to improve
circulation and islands were created to sustain wildlife. A unique sand
dune community within the marsh was preserved to provide a roosting
area for shorebirds and habitat for a number of endangered animals.
Regulator monitoring, vegetation management, and predator control
programs are implemented to evaluate wetland conditions.
Today, the marshlands are dominated by native species such as
pickleweed and cordgrass. This habitat supports a variety of shorebirds,
raptors, songbirds, waterfowl, fish, crustaceans, and mammals, some of
which are classified as threatened or endangered. Activities in the
marshlands are subject to complex permitting requirements by state and
federal agencies. Detailed wetland delineation studies are typically
required before any alterations can be made.
San Francisco Bay
San Francisco Bay is the most important water resource in the region. It
provides habitat for marine and terrestrial life, offers great scenic,
recreational and commercial value, and even provides beneficial climatic
and air quality effects. Land reclamation projects have dramatically
changed the shoreline over the last 150 years. Today, approximately
1,390 acres of the Bay are contained within San Leandro’s city limits.
The waters off of San Leandro are relatively shallow, averaging less than
five feet in depth. Despite the urban character of the shoreline, these
waters are still rich in marine life. Oyster harvesting in this area was
                                                                                                                            6-23

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    once an important part of San Leandro’s economy, with several
                                                    businesses in operation in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The City
                                                    no longer has any commercial fishing or shellfish harvesting operations.
                                                    Today, the primary activity on the Bay waters off of San Leandro is
                                                    recreational boating.
                                                    Mudflats along the shoreline provide habitat for a wide variety of crabs,
                                                    snails, clams, mussels, sea squirts, tubeworms, and similar species. The
                                                    mudflats provide rich feeding ground for resident and migratory
                                                    shorebirds that travel from as far as Alaska along the Pacific flyway. At
                                                    higher tides, larger marine species such as leopard sharks, starry
                                                    flounder, and bat rays may be found in the open waters of the Bay.
                                                    San Leandro is one of the few cities in the region where the shoreline
                                                    was publicly acquired for recreation and conservation in the early stages
                                                    of its development. Acquisition by the City took place in 1958, long
                                                    before the creation of the Bay Conservation and Development
                                                    Commission (BCDC). As a result of this foresight, the City now enjoys
                                                    1,800 acres of land and water along four miles of San Francisco Bay’s
                                                    easterly shoreline. This area includes a boat basin and lagoon, a fishing
                                                    pier, two golf courses, extensive park facilities, a dredge material
                                                    management site (DMMS), and the Shoreline Marshlands.
6-24

                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                               In A Nutshell:
                                         San Leandro Habitat
San Leandro contains the following six major habitat types:
   Riparian Woodlands. Riparian woodlands occur along San Leandro Creek. These areas include
    bay, eucalyptus, willows, cottonwoods, elderberry, big leaf maples, and other large trees that do
    well in moist, sandy soils. Wildflowers, thistle, blackberry, and other shrubs form dense ground
    cover in many areas. Because riparian areas follow creeks, they may provide migratory corridors
    for wildlife.
   Grassland. These plant communities occur at Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline and in a limited
    number of locations in the San Leandro Hills. They are present to a much greater extent east of
    the city limits on Fairmont Ridge and around Lake Chabot. They include a variety of oat and rye
    grasses, forbs, herbs, and bromes and provide habitat for mice, gophers, ground squirrels,
    rabbits, lizards, snakes, and a variety of birds.
   Wetlands. Wetlands are areas that are periodically or permanently saturated with water. They
    include salt marshes and mudflats. Although many of San Leandro’s wetlands have been altered
    by development and landfill, they remain one of the city’s most significant natural communities.
    State and federal regulations discourage the filling of wetlands and specify mitigation
    requirements for projects with wetland impacts.
   Aquatic. Aquatic habitat includes the waters of San Francisco Bay, San Leandro Creek, and the
    local flood control channels. The Bay includes oysters, shrimp, crab, and other benthic
    inverterbrates, as well as anchovies, flounder, turbot, topsmelt, and other fish. Poor water quality
    limits the extent of aquatic life in the creeks and flood control channels.
   Barren/Ruderal. Barren areas include undeveloped areas without significant vegetation. Ruderal
    areas include vacant lots, railroad rights-of-way, roadsides, former landfills, and other areas
    characterized by non-native grasses and weeds. Both habitats provide foraging areas for birds and
    support mice and other small animals.
   Urban. These areas include City parks, schools, landscaped areas, and private lawns and
    backyards throughout the community. This is the single largest habitat type in San Leandro,
    accounting for about 90 percent of the city’s land area. Although not traditionally regarded for its
    wildlife value, the vegetation in this community actually provides extensive habitat. The planting
    and preservation of trees is encouraged to further enhance this habitat. In addition to its wildlife
    value, urban vegetation absorbs air pollutants, filters noise, provides shade, and significantly
    enhances the visual beauty of the city.
                                                                                                                         6-25

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    Special Status Species
                                                    Some of the plants and animals in the San Leandro area are classified as
                                                    rare, threatened, or endangered by the state and/or federal governments.
                                                    Others are classified as proposed or candidate species, meaning they are
                                                    being considered for addition to the rare, threatened, and endangered
                                                    list. The State also maintains “watch” lists for Species of Special Concern,
                                                    while the California Native Plant Society has developed a list of rare and
                                                    endangered plants. State and federal laws prohibit the approval of any
                                                    project that would impact federally listed species without first
                                                    identifying mitigation measures
                                                    Much of the habitat restoration in the San Leandro Marshlands has
                                                    focused on the salt marsh harvest mouse. The mouse is listed as
                                                    endangered by state and federal agencies and occurs primarily in
                                                    marshes dominated by pickleweed, as well as adjacent upland areas.
                                                    Most of the other special status species in the city are birds. Clapper Rail
                                                    (also called Ridgway’s Rail) is state and federally listed as endangered
                                                    and has been observed in the coastal marshes and tidal flats in southwest
                                                    San Leandro. Burrowing owls have been reported in San Lorenzo, just
                                                    south of San Leandro, and San Leandro’s marshlands provide potentially
                                                    suitable local habitat. Other protected birds that may be found in local
                                                    marshlands and grasslands include northern harrier, salt marsh common
                                                    yellowthroat, and Alameda song sparrow.
                                                    A number of other special status species are present in the San Leandro
                                                    area. Steelhead (a form of rainbow trout) migrate from the ocean to
                                                                         freshwater streams to spawn. San Leandro Creek
                                                                         supported a robust steelhead population at one time,
                                                                         but conditions have been severely compromised by
                                                                         urbanization. Steelhead may continue to migrate up
                                                                         to the dam at Lake Chabot. Western pond turtles
                                                                         also may inhabit this area, and other aquatic
                                                                         vegetated areas in and around the city.            San
                                                                         Leandro’s Monarch Bay Golf Course is home to a
                                                                         roosting colony of monarch butterflies. Although the
                                                                         species is not legally designated as endangered,
                                                                         roosting colonies are recognized as important
                                                                         biological resources. From 2005 to 2009, an estimated
                                                                         5,000 butterflies wintered in the rows of blue gum
                                                                         eucalyptus at the golf course.
6-26

                                                                                    S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
Any future development which could impact special status species
habitat must assess the potential for adverse effects and include
appropriate mitigation measures. Through its enforcement of CEQA and
ongoing coordination with state and federal agencies, the City will work
proactively to ensure the long-term conservation of prime habitat within
San Leandro.
Other Resource Issues
Soil Conservation
Soil is one of San Leandro’s most valuable natural resources. It affects the
capability of land to support various human activities, including
agriculture, development, and groundwater recharge. Although
commercial agriculture in the City has largely ceased, soil still provides a
resource for local gardens, lawns, and trees. Soil properties are also
important in determining appropriate construction methods for new
buildings, roads, and utilities.
San Leandro contains three major soil types:
    Bay mud is located along the shoreline and consists of soft,
     expansive clay, mixed with sand and silt. Much of the Bay mud in
     San Leandro has been covered by landfill and reshaped to support
     recreational uses, including the golf course. Bay mud tends to be
     somewhat unstable and is usually not well suited for intensive
     development.
    Alluvial deposits extend from the foothills to the original shoreline
     and constitute most of the soil in the City. These soils were deposited
     by years of erosion from the East Bay Hills and are characterized by
     layers of silt and clay. Most of these soils can support development,
     but special construction techniques may be needed to compensate
     for the shrinking and swelling caused by high clay content.
    Sandstone and shale soils occur in the hills. These soils tend to be
     more prone to erosion and may be less stable than those on the
     flatter lands. The soils are relatively shallow, with bedrock not far
     beneath the surface.
The City has adopted grading and erosion control ordinances to ensure
that soil resources are conserved. Its development review processes
ensure that new buildings and infrastructure are engineered to take soil
properties into consideration.
                                                                                                                              6-27

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    Mineral Resources
                                                    San Leandro’s principal mineral resources are volcanic rocks, such as
                                                    basalt, andesite, and rhyolite. Rhyolite deposits in the East Bay Hills
                                                    have been used for construction and development for more than a
                                                    century. San Leandro’s only quarry—located east of the City limits on
                                                    Lake Chabot Road—ceased operation in the 1980s. That quarry began
                                                    operation in 1886 and was used to produce aggregate and fill for many
                                                    East Bay construction projects. Although additional rock resources
                                                    remain on the site, future quarrying activity is unlikely due to potential
                                                    environmental impacts and stringent permitting requirements. The
                                                    quarry is currently under the jurisdiction of Alameda County and is
                                                    outside the Urban Growth Boundary approved by Alameda County
                                                    voters in 2000.
                                                    Groundwater Management
                                                    San Leandro is underlain by an aquifer, a permeable layer of rock and
                                                    soil which stores water that has percolated into the ground. The aquifer
                                                    actually consists of two layers, one ranging from 5 to 50 feet below the
                                                    ground, and a deep aquifer that is typically more than 150 feet below the
                                                    ground. The two layers are separated by a layer of clay and silt known
                                                    as an aquitard.
                                                    Until the early 1900s, most San Leandro residents relied on the shallow
                                                    layers of the aquifer for drinking water and irrigation. As the city grew,
                                                    this supply became inadequate and a central water system linked to
                                                    reservoirs and storage tanks was constructed. Today, there are
                                                    approximately 900 registered wells in San Leandro. Many are dormant
                                                    or are used for industry, water quality monitoring, and irrigation of
                                                    yards and commercial properties.
                                                    Domestic use of groundwater in San Leandro is currently not permitted
                                                    due to the presence of volatile organic compounds, gasoline, and heavy
                                                    metals. There are four major groundwater plumes in the city that are
                                                    undergoing site characterization and/or remediation. The largest is the
                                                    Davis-Washington-Alvarado (DWA) plume in central San Leandro,
                                                    which is approximately two miles long and over one mile wide. The
                                                    Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) has concluded that
                                                    shallow groundwater in the plume can be safely used for irrigation and
                                                    other outside uses, but should not be used in the home for domestic
                                                    purposes such as drinking, cooking, showering, or bathing.
6-28

                                                                                  S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                  O P E N  S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
E.       CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABILITY
This Element goes beyond the topics mandated by the State of California
and also covers the City’s response to global climate change. This
includes measures specifically intended to reduce greenhouse gases as
well as other measures to minimize waste, conserve energy and water,
and reduce consumption of non-renewable resources. The former
measures are covered by the City’s Climate Action Plan, discussed
below. The latter initiatives were initially developed to improve
environmental quality but today provide the collateral benefit of curbing
greenhouse gas emissions.
Global Climate Change
A broad international consensus exists among atmospheric scientists that
Earth‘s climate is changing in response to elevated levels of greenhouse
gas emissions in the atmosphere. According to the California Climate
Change Center, average temperatures in California are expected to rise
by 3.0 to 10.5 degrees Fahrenheit by the end of the century, primarily as a
result of greenhouse gas emissions. Rising temperatures present a
number of challenges, including higher sea levels due to thermal
expansion and melting ice, a decline in the Sierra snowpack,
displacement of plant and animal species, and greater frequency of
extreme weather events. The decline in the snowpack will directly
impact San Leandro’s water supply as well as water quality. Rising sea
levels will also impact the San Leandro shoreline.
                                                                                                                            6-29

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    In 2006, the California legislature approved Assembly Bill 32—the Global
                                                    Warming Solutions Act. AB 32 requires California to reduce GHG
                                                    emissions to 1990 levels by 2020. Most strategies to reduce GHGs focus
                                                    on the control of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, fluorocarbons,
                                                    and other gases that have been linked to climate change. Cities can help
                                                    implement these strategies through their land use and building controls,
                                                    transportation programs, and waste and energy policies.
                                                    San Leandro’s greenhouse gas emissions were estimated at 524,283
                                                    metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MTCO2e) in 2015. About 49
                                                    percent of this total was generated by transportation, while 46 percent
                                                    was generated by energy consumption. The remaining five percent
                                                    consisted of emissions from solid waste disposal, water use, wastewater
                                                    treatment, and off-road equipment. Of the energy-related emissions,
                                                    about 42 percent of the total was generated by residential uses and 58
                                                    percent was generated by non-residential uses such as industry and
                                                    commercial development.
                                                    In 2009, San Leandro adopted a Climate Action Plan, including strategies
                                                    to reduce GHG emissions 25 percent below 2005 levels by 2020. Most of
                                                    the emissions reduction measures in the Plan are aimed at City
                                                    operations and the public sector. However, the public sector generates
                                                    only a small fraction of the total emissions produced in the city. More
                                                    aggressive strategies will needed to be set to meet the targets set by the
                                                    State for 2030 and 2050. Future updates to the Climate Action Plan will
                                                    be necessary to quantify and implement these strategies.
                                                    Water
                                                    Water is a limited resource in California, subject to growing demand and
                                                    constrained supply. The threat of climate change and a reduced Sierra
                                                    snowpack makes it even more imperative to conserve water and explore
                                                    new sources to meet future needs. Conserving water can also provide
                                                    greenhouse gas benefits, since water pumping, heating, cooling, and
                                                    treatment consume energy which in turn generates carbon emissions.
                                                    At the time of General Plan adoption, California had experienced three
                                                    consecutive years of critical drought. The State of California and East
                                                    Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) have set mandatory use
                                                    reduction goals and adopted water use restrictions. EBMUD has
                                                    adopted watering limits for medians and lawns, driveways and
                                                    sidewalks, and operation of fountains. The City of San Leandro has
                                                    implemented additional conservation practices, and is continuing
6-30

                                                                                 S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                  O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
practices already in effect such as the use of
reclaimed water for golf course irrigation and well
water for parks.
The City works with EBMUD to implement water
efficiency measures and to encourage conservation
and wise water use among residents.                For
residential and commercial customers, substantial
water savings can be realized by eliminating leaks,
reducing water waste, and using water-efficient
toilets, showers, faucets, and appliances. Public
education is also a critical part of these efforts.
EBMUD has made substantial investments in
publications, school curricula, social media,
conferences, workshops, billboards, advertising,
and other media to raise public awareness and
influence behavior patterns.
San Leandro also implements the California
Building Standards Code and the California
Plumbing Code, which include measures to reduce
water consumption in new development. The City
adopted a Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance in
2010, including provisions to reduce water use and
water waste. Additional provisions are being
added to enable more efficient irrigation systems, gray water usage, and
on-site stormwater capture.
Reclaimed water systems have been developed at the San Leandro and
Oro Loma Water Pollution Control Plants, but only a small portion of the
effluent at each facility is presently being reused. The San Leandro plant
currently provides 200 million gallons of reclaimed wastewater per year
to irrigate three golf courses. Capacity is being expanded so that
additional effluent can be reused for landscape irrigation. Recycled
water from the Oro Loma Plant is used on the Sky West Golf Course in
Hayward. The technology exists for more widespread application of
recycled water, including its use for certain industrial processes and
commercial and industrial plumbing. Such applications will be
encouraged in the future, as they become more economically viable.
                                                                                                                           6-31
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    Solid Waste and Recycling
                                                    Reducing the amount of landfilled solid waste provides multiple
                                                    environmental benefits. Landfills are a source of methane and other
                                                    greenhouse gas emissions. They also have limited capacity, which
                                                    necessitates waste reduction and diversion strategies to avoid the loss of
                                                    additional open space for this purpose. Reducing landfilled waste also
                                                    helps to conserve natural resources by encouraging recycling and the use
                                                    of recycled products. In addition, composting of solid waste can provide
                                                    beneficial byproducts such as mulch and soil amendments.
                                                    Waste reduction in San Leandro is governed by a number of state laws.
                                                    These laws require recycling of food waste, green waste, and
                                                    construction and demolition debris. State law also requires recycling for
                                                    most commercial businesses, and requires new development to set aside
                                                    areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Recycling is seen as
                                                    an important part of California’s response to global warming.
                                                    In 1989, the California legislature required cities throughout California to
                                                    adopt the goal of diverting at least 50 percent of their solid waste from
                                                    landfills through recycling, composting, and waste reduction programs.
                                                    San Leandro achieved that goal in 2000. In 2007, the City joined other
                                                    Alameda County communities to adopt a 75 percent diversion target. As
                                                    of 2014, the City’s diversion rate was 74 percent. The State has recently
                                                    shifted to the use of per capita standards for measuring waste reduction.
                                                    In California in 2014, the per capita waste disposal target rate was 8.7
                                                    pounds per day for residents and 18.2 pounds per day for employees.
                                                    San Leandro’s actual per capita daily disposal rates were 4.6 pounds for
                                                    residents and 9.2 pounds for employees, well below the state targets.
6-32

                                                                                  S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
There are two major solid waste service
providers in San Leandro, making
interagency coordination an important part
of recycling administration. About two-
thirds of the City is served by Alameda
County Industries, a private hauler under
contract with the City of San Leandro. The
remainder of the City— primarily the
Washington Manor and Halcyon-Foothill
areas—are served by Waste Management of
Alameda County. The City, ACI, and Waste
Management have initiated education and
outreach efforts to discourage unnecessary
waste disposal and promote home
composting. The City also organizes annual
collection of bulky items, Citywide garage
sale, and other programs to encourage reuse
and recycling. Programs have also been implemented for the collection
of electronic waste, batteries, household hazardous waste, used motor
oil, and other materials that cannot be conventionally disposed.
CalRecycle reports that in 2014 a total of 117,167 tons of solid waste from
San Leandro was disposed at 16 different landfills. About 93 percent of
this total went to four landfills—Altamont (east of Livermore), Forward
(Manteca), Potrero Hills (Fairfield), and Vasco Road (Livermore). Three
of these landfills are scheduled for closure by 2025, with only Potrero
Hills expected to remain operational by the horizon year of this General
Plan. Expanded recycling and diversion can extend the life of local
landfills while also reducing the consumption of renewable resources.
Energy
Energy Conservation and Efficiency
Energy conservation and efficiency measures are an important part of
the city’s Climate Action Plan. About 45 percent of the greenhouse gases
emitted in San Leandro are related to energy consumption in buildings.
The City’s climate strategies focus both on reducing energy waste and
shifting from carbon-based sources such as coal and oil to renewable
sources such as solar and wind power. Energy conservation and
efficiency measures also achieve other important public policy goals.
They can reduce household expenses on utility bills, increase the city’s
resilience during an emergency, and improve environmental quality.
                                                                                                                            6-33

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                      What is A Green Building?
              Traditional building practices consume more of our resources than necessary, and can contribute to
              environmental problems such as air and water pollution, and depletion of forests and energy
              resources. “Green buildings” are deliberately designed to reduce impacts on the environment. They
              are energy-efficient, use renewable or recycled construction materials, and are designed to conserve
              water and reduce waste.
              “Green” building practices include:
                   The use of building materials with at least some recycled content.
                   Minimal construction waste.
                   Siting and design to conserve energy and reduce heating and cooling losses.
                   Siting and design to conserve natural features such as trees.
                   Minimal use of toxic or potentially hazardous construction materials.
                   Mechanical ventilation systems which ensure adequate fresh air circulation.
                   Accommodation of bicycles, carpools, and other “alternative” modes of transportation.
                   Drought-resistant landscaping.
                   Reclaimed water systems or recycling of greywater in plumbing.
              All of these principles share the common theme of reducing the impact of buildings on the
              environment while protecting the health and well-being of building occupants. Many of these
              principles have been incorporated into the California Building Code. In addition, San Leandro uses a
              green building checklist for building permit and development applications, has adopted green building
              standards for public buildings, and offers voluntary green building guidelines for new development.
6-34

                                                                                   S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   O P E N  S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
Much of the gain in energy efficiency and conservation during the last
four decades is the result of state and federal energy legislation. Title 24
of the California Building Code, which requires energy-efficient design,
is periodically revised to incorporate new technology and energy
resources. The latest codes, which went into effect in 2014, require
buildings to be 25-30 percent more energy efficient than the 2008
standards and require more efficient windows, insulation, lighting, and
ventilation systems. The integration of CalGreen (green building
standards) into the State Building Code also ensures more energy
efficient and sustainable construction practices. The replacement of
older appliances with newer, more energy efficient appliances is also
contributing to reductions in energy use.
A variety of tax incentives and subsidies have been created to encourage
the retrofitting of older buildings. These include energy efficiency grants
provided by the City of San Leandro and Alameda County. The City
recently received $732,400 in grant funds, which were spent on energy
efficiency programs available to residents, as well as upgrades to
municipal facilities (HVAC, lighting, street light conversion to LED, etc.).
Basic energy efficiency projects include replacement of windows and
doors, additional insulation, replacement of light fixtures, and upgrades
to space and water heating, ventilation, and refrigeration systems.
The State has also adopted a goal to make all new residential buildings
zero net energy by 2020 and new commercial buildings zero net energy
by 2030. The City has an important role in this process. In addition to
implementing State Building Codes and green building legislation, San
Leandro has joined the Alameda County Climate Protection Project and
is a member of the countywide Energy Joint Powers Agency which is
staffed by StopWaste.org. It is also home to the Zero Net Energy Center,
a training center for the application of sustainable energy technology.
San Leandro is also participating in several Property Assessed Clean
Energy (PACE) financing programs. PACE enables homeowners and
businesses to implement energy efficiency measures, solar installations,
seismic upgrades, and water efficiency upgrades using loans that are
repaid through property tax bills. Programs such as East Bay Energy
Watch and Energy Upgrade California are increasing awareness of
energy efficiency and providing a resource for San Leandro residents.
San Leandro’s Climate Action Plan includes additional energy reduction
strategies, although they are focused principally on public buildings.
Conservation remains the most effective and immediate strategy for
reducing the City’s energy-related emissions. Educational programs
                                                                                                                             6-35

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    spearheaded by Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), the City, and local
                                                    schools have emphasized the ways in which consumers can reduce
                                                    energy costs at home and at work.
                                                    Renewable Energy
                                                    San Leandro presently receives electricity and natural gas through
                                                    Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E).            Electricity is generated by a
                                                    combination of sources, including coal-fired power plants, nuclear
                                                    power plants, and hydro-electric dams, as well as newer sources of
                                                    energy, such as wind turbines and photovoltaic plants or “solar farms.
                                                    In 2014, approximately 27 percent of PG&E’s energy came from
                                                    renewable sources such as solar, geothermal, and wind power. The
                                                    utility has plans to increase this share to meet the state’s 33 percent clean
                                                    energy target by 2020.
                                                    At the local level, the City is exploring the concept of Community Choice
                                                    Aggregation (CCA). CCA allows public agencies such as the City of San
                                                    Leandro to procure electric power on behalf of utility customers, while
                                                    the transmission, distribution, repair, and billing continue to be done by
                                                    PG&E. The advantage of such a system is that the City can increase the
                                                    share of clean energy beyond the state target, and reduce associated
                                                                                     greenhouse gas emissions. Revenues from
                                                                                     electricity customers can be used for
                                                                                     additional renewable energy projects.
                                                                                     The City also supports the installation of
                                                                                     photovoltaics and other measures to
                                                                                     capture local energy resources and reduce
                                                                                     utility demand. Climatic conditions in the
                                                                                     City are favorable to the use of solar
                                                                                     energy, particularly for small-scale
                                                                                     applications such as domestic water
                                                                                     heating. The City’s planning and building
                                                                                     requirements presently accommodate
                                                                                     solar panels and other forms of solar
                                                                                     access. Additional ordinances and other
                                                                                     measures may be considered to protect
                                                                                     access to sunlight on San Leandro
                                                                                     properties, retrofit public buildings with
                                                                                     solar generators, and encourage site
                                                                                     planning practices which take advantage
                                                                                     of solar energy opportunities.
6-36

                                                                                 S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                  O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
Reducing Transportation-Related Emissions
Transportation is the greatest consumer of energy in San Leandro and in
the rest of California. The most far-reaching conservation efforts may
consist of strategies to reduce driving, improve vehicle fuel efficiency,
and promote the use of alternative fuel vehicles. The land use and
transportation strategies at the heart of this General Plan seek to
accomplish these objectives, with the parallel objectives of improving air
quality and congestion management. The same strategies identified in
the Transportation Element—improved transit, better bicycle and
pedestrian facilities, mixed use development, and more efficient traffic
flow—all support energy conservation and greenhouse gas reduction
principles.
Both this General Plan and the City’s Climate Action Plan strive to
reduce per capita vehicle miles traveled in San Leandro by 2035. This
will largely be achieved by creating a land use pattern that is less auto-
dependent, and by reducing commute lengths for San Leandro residents.
It will also be achieved through increased car sharing, carpooling,
telecommuting, transit passes, and other measures to reduce fossil fuel
consumption.
                                                                                                                           6-37

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    Green Infrastructure and Low Impact
                                                    Development
                                                    Green infrastructure refers to the creeks, wetlands, riparian areas, and
                                                    other natural systems that enable a community to function, particularly
                                                    with respect to drainage. The City’s street tre es are a particularly
                                                    important component of this system. Trees sequester carbon and reduce
                                                    building-related energy emissions by providing shade. The City
                                                    maintains approximately 20,000 trees in public rights-of-way and parks.
                                                    San Leandro has been named a “Tree City USA” by the National Arbor
                                                    Day Foundation and is committed to the care of its urban forest.
                                                    The City also implements Low Impact Development (LID) strategies
                                                    through its development review process. The basic premise of LID is to
                                                    avoid net increases in urban runoff volumes by retaining stormwater on-
                                                    site in new development. Because San Leandro is a developed city,
                                                    applying LID principles in new construction can actually increase the
                                                    amount of pervious surface and improve water quality in local creeks
                                                    and flood control channels. Rain gardens, bio-swales, porous pavement,
                                                    rainwater collection systems, and similar design features can filter out
                                                    pollutants, maintain or restore natural hydrologic functions, recharge the
                                                    aquifer, and reduce flood hazards.
6-38

                                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
F.       GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
R EHABILITATION OF E XISTING P ARKS
GOAL OSC-1 Maintain and improve San Leandro’s parks and
                 recreational facilities.
Policy OSC-1.1 Park Rehabilitation. Encourage the rehabilitation of the
               City’s parks to provide residents of all ages and physical
               capabilities with access to as wide a variety of
               recreational experiences as possible. Park improvements
               should maintain a balance between active and passive
               recreation areas and should ensure that the park system
               benefits a diverse range of user groups.
               Action OSC-1.1.A: Parks Action Strategy
               Develop and implement a San Leandro Parks Master Plan,
               including a current assessment of community needs,
               principles for park use, capital improvement projects,
               recommendations for operations and maintenance, and a
               funding and implementation program. The Plan should be
               developed with input from park users and from neighborhood
               and community groups that reflect the cultural diversity of
               San Leandro.
               Action OSC-1.1.B: Park Bond Measure
               Develop a proposal for a citywide park bond measure that
               would provide funds for the rehabilitation of neighborhood and
               community parks, the replacement of aging or obsolete
               equipment and facilities, and the development of new parks,
               community gardens, and creek improvements. As an initial
               step, a detailed list of facilities and rehabilitation costs should
               be developed. Projects should be selected to ensure that each
               neighborhood in the City will benefit and should be based on a
               comprehensive evaluation of citywide needs and conditions in
               each park.
               Action OSC-1.1.C: ADA Compliance
               Continue to implement Americans With Disabilities Act
               (ADA) compliance upgrades for all City parks.
                                                                                                                                   6-39

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    Policy OSC-1.2 Park Maintenance. Provide for the regular, systematic
                                                                   maintenance of San Leandro’s parks and recreational
                                                                   facilities to prevent deterioration, ensure public safety,
                                                                   and permit continued public use and enjoyment.
                                                                   Action OSC-1.2.A: Budget Allocation
                                                                   Ensure that a high level of support is provided for park
                                                                   maintenance and operations in the annual Public Works
                                                                   budget.
                                                                   Action OSC-1.2.B: New Funding Sources for Maintenance
                                                                   Evaluate the feasibility of increasing funding for park
                                                                   maintenance, repair, safety, and security through a variety of
                                                                   sources, such as landscape and lighting assessment districts.
                                                                   Action OSC-1.2.C: User Fee Updates
                                                                   Periodically update the fees charged for facility rentals,
                                                                   recreation programs, and other activities to ensure that they
                                                                   are appropriate and equitable.
                                                    Policy OSC-1.3 Management and Administration. Ensure that park
                                                                   operations and maintenance programs are carried out
                                                                   through the most efficient City organizational structure
                                                                   possible.
                                                                   Action OSC-1.3.A: Organizational Evaluation
                                                                   Evaluate the organizational structure of the City’s park
                                                                   maintenance program to determine if there are any changes
                                                                   that would improve the level of service, eliminate possible
                                                                   redundancies, and allow for more efficient operation.
                                                    Policy OSC-1.4 Priority on Renovation.           Where cost savings and
                                                                   equivalent benefits would be achieved, rehabilitate
                                                                   existing recreational facilities before building entirely
                                                                   new facilities. A priority should be placed on renovating
                                                                   athletic fields and swimming pools, improving energy
                                                                   efficiency, and replacing outdated facilities with new
                                                                   facilities that are safe, attractive, and more responsive to
                                                                   current needs.
6-40

                                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
               Action OSC-1.4.A: Lighting of Sports Fields
               Continue to pursue the installation of night lighting at
               athletic fields to accommodate evening sports activities.
               Lighting installation should consider the potential for impacts
               on nearby neighborhoods, impacts on the visibility of the night
               sky (e.g., dark sky considerations), and the ability to mitigate
               adverse impacts through site planning, lighting design, and
               scheduling.
Policy OSC-1.5 Park Stewardship. Promote pride of ownership in local
               parks by involving local residents and neighborhood
               groups in park maintenance and improvement,
               recreation programs, community outreach, and special
               events.
Policy OSC-1.6 Community Engagement. Ensure that programs and
               facilities in parks reflect the priorities of residents in the
               surrounding        neighborhoods.        Conduct         regular
               community outreach, workshops, and ongoing liaison
               with neighborhoods, including multi-lingual outreach,
               to solicit public input on park issues.
Policy OSC-1.7 Park Safety. Maintain a high level of personal safety
               and security in the City’s parks by encouraging broad
               community use, diversifying park activities, promoting
               neighborhood watch and stewardship programs,
               enforcing park ordinances and codes, maintaining
               effective graffiti abatement and litter removal programs,
               and undertaking design changes that improve visibility
               and access.
Policy OSC-1.8 Parks and Public Health. Recognize the link between
               parks and public health, particularly the potential to
               increase physical activity, reduce obesity, and improve
               general health. The City will continue to promote
               physical fitness through its recreational programs, and
               by making parks available and accessible to residents.
                                                                                                                                6-41

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                    Action OSC-1.8.A: Health Metrics and Recreation
                                                                    Monitor statistics on the health and well-being of San
                                                                    Leandro's children and youth, and evaluate the correlation
                                                                    between health indicators and access to parks and recreational
                                                                    facilities. Use health data to guide investment in new park
                                                                    and recreational facilities, and to shape new recreational
                                                                    programs.
                                                    Policy OSC-1.9  Siting of New Buildings. Require that new recreational
                                                                    buildings and other structures within parks are sited in a
                                                                    manner that minimizes their impacts on useable open
                                                                    space, maximizes energy efficiency and the use of green
                                                                    building and low impact development methods, avoids
                                                                    conflicts with existing park activities and nearby
                                                                    residential neighborhoods, and is compatible with the
                                                                    natural setting.
                                                    Policy OSC-1.10 Scheduling and Programming.                 Coordinate the
                                                                    scheduling and programming of recreational activities to
                                                                    avoid conflicts and more evenly distribute activities
                                                                    among City parks. Improve coordination of field
                                                                    maintenance and scheduling between the City and the
                                                                    school districts to maximize the availability of
                                                                    recreational facilities to the public.
                                                    Policy OSC-1.11 Projects with Impacts on Parks and Recreation.
                                                                    Require that capital improvement or development
                                                                    projects with the potential to adversely affect or
                                                                    temporarily disrupt San Leandro's park operations and
                                                                    open spaces include measures to mitigate impacts. This
                                                                    should include projects outside the City limits, such as
                                                                    work by EBMUD on Lake Chabot Dam and in the San
                                                                    Leandro watershed.
                                                    Policy OSC-1.12 Park Concessions. Where compatible with other park
                                                                    activities and consistent with the mission of the City’s
                                                                    Recreation and Human Services Department, consider
                                                                    the feasibility of revenue-generating concessions and
                                                                    other privately sponsored activities that generate funds
                                                                    for park rehabilitation and maintenance.
6-42

                                                                                  S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
D EVELOPMENT OF N EW P ARKS
GOAL OSC-2 Develop additional parkland in the city to better
                 meet existing needs and to respond to future needs.
Policy OSC-2.1 Level of Service. Achieve the following service standard
               for parks:
               (a) At least 5.00 acres of improved parkland per 1,000
               residents;
               (b) A park within one-half mile of each San Leandro
               resident.
               As defined in this Policy, this standard shall include
               community, neighborhood, mini-parks, and linear parks
               and trails, as well as school athletic fields and play areas
               for which joint use agreements exist. Pursuant to the
               Quimby Act, the standard also includes the Monarch
               Bay Golf Course and Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline in
               the baseline acreage. The standard does not include
               private property, wetlands and open spaces where the
               primary purpose is resource conservation rather than
               recreation. When evaluating the City’s progress toward
               meeting this standard, it should be recognized that
               school facilities covered by joint use agreements may be
               unavailable during school hours, and therefore may not
               meet recreational needs to the same extent as City parks.
Policy OSC-2.2 No Net Loss. Allow no net loss of open space within San
               Leandro’s parks and recreational facility system. In the
               event that land currently included in the City’s park
               inventory (Table 5-1) is to be converted to a non-park
               related purpose, an area of equivalent or larger acreage
               shall be set aside as parkland. Replacement open space
               should be comparable in value and function to the space
               that is lost.
Policy OSC-2.3 Park Dedication. Require new residential development
               to pay an impact fee and/or to dedicate parkland to
               offset the increase in park needs resulting from new
               residents. Where on-site parkland is dedicated, it should
               be improved, maintained, and accessible to the general
               public.
                                                                                                                            6-43

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                   Action OSC-2.3.A: Update of In-lieu fee
                                                                   Update the park in-lieu fee ordinance to better reflect current
                                                                   costs and needs, and to address park needs generated by infill
                                                                   development as well as new subdivisions. Any future nexus
                                                                   study conducted to justify a revised park impact fee should
                                                                   also consider the feasibility of expanding it to apply to
                                                                   commercial and industrial development. Adoption of a non-
                                                                   residential fee should be contingent upon a market study
                                                                   indicating the amount of the fee that would be feasible without
                                                                   affecting the City’s economic development goals.
                                                    Policy OSC-2.4 New Parks. Pursue opportunities for new parks that
                                                                   augment those dedicated within private development.
                                                                   When planning for such parks, place a priority on sites
                                                                   and/or facilities that:
                                                                   (a) Would benefit neighborhoods or user groups that are
                                                                   currently underserved by park and recreational facilities;
                                                                   (b) Meet a recreational facility need that has been
                                                                   identified by the community as a top priority;
                                                                   (c) Have a funding source identified;
                                                                   (d) Have strong community support and advocacy;
                                                                   (e) Would protect a special resource such as a historic
                                                                   building or sensitive natural area;
                                                                   (f) Have a willing seller or site donor; and
                                                                   (g) Are located in areas where substantial residential
                                                                   growth is planned.
                                                                   Action OSC-2.4.A: Shoreline Park Improvements
                                                                   Complete planned park improvements at the San Leandro
                                                                   Shoreline Development, including shoreline promenades and
                                                                   new pocket parks.
                                                                   Action OSC-2.4.B: Downtown Park Improvements
                                                                   Implement the open space recommendations of the Downtown
                                                                   Transit Oriented Development Strategy, including:
                                                                   (a) Dedication of new parkland along San Leandro Creek,
                                                                   (b) Possible relocation of Thrasher Park to a site of equivalent
                                                                   or greater size and dimensions along San Leandro Creek,
                                                                   (c) Creation of a park as part of the Town Hall Square
                                                                   development,
                                                                   (d) Potential expansion of Root Park
6-44

                                                                                    S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
               (e) Creation of a potential civic plaza in the event the
               Downtown Shopping Center is redeveloped,
               (f) Plazas and pocket parks within new development, and
               (g) Public realm improvements that enhance the quality and
               usability of streets and public spaces as gathering places and
               recreation areas. .
               Action OSC-2.4.C: Bayfair Area Park
               Identify an approximate location for a new neighborhood or
               community park as part of the planning for the Bay Fair
               Transit Oriented Development.
               Action OSC-2.4.D: Pursuit of Additional Funds
               Pursue diverse funding for park improvements, including but
               not limited to the General Fund, development impact fees,
               private donations, gifts and endowments, state and local bond
               measures, and federal and state grants.
Policy OSC-2.5 Non-Traditional Open Space. Take a creative approach
               to identifying new prospective parks and open spaces,
               including such features as rooftops and urban plazas.
               Streets themselves should be recognized as an important
               potential component of the open space system, with
               opportunities for additional greening, planting, parklets,
               food production, public art, trails, and recreational
               activities within public rights of way.
               Action OSC-2.5.A: Parklet Program
               Develop a parklet program and consider parklet placement in
               areas with active retail and restaurant businesses such as
               Downtown San Leandro.
               Action OSC-2.5.B: Rail Spurs
               Explore opportunities for the conversion of un-used rail spurs
               to public open space or green spaces, including outdoor dining
               areas and seating areas for workers nearby, as well as
               activities such as community gardening.
                                                                                                                              6-45
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    Policy OSC-2.6  Pocket Parks. Work with neighborhood groups to
                                                                    develop mini-parks, medians and landscaped traffic
                                                                    islands, community gardens, and similar areas that
                                                                    beautify neighborhoods, build community spirit, and
                                                                    provide places of enjoyment within residential areas.
                                                    Policy OSC-2.7  Community Gardens. Support the development of
                                                                    additional community gardens in the city, with a
                                                                    priority on underused utility-owned and School District-
                                                                    owned properties.
                                                    Policy OSC-2.8  Site Planning Guidelines. Ensure that new parks are
                                                                    designed to maximize public access and visibility, and
                                                                    minimize the potential for conflicts with surrounding
                                                                    uses.
                                                    Policy OSC-2.9  Provisions for Maintenance. Ensure that any proposal
                                                                    for new park or recreational facilities includes a
                                                                    commitment to a high level of ongoing maintenance.
                                                    Policy OSC-2.10 Trails. Encourage the development of additional trails
                                                                    within the City.
                                                                    Action OSC-2.10.A: East Bay Greenway
                                                                    Work with East Bay Regional Park District to develop a linear
                                                                    greenway and trail on the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way
                                                                    extending from Oakland south to the Bayfair area and
                                                                    continuing on to Hayward.
                                                                    Action OSC-2.10.B: Flood Control Right-of-Way
                                                                    Maintain a dialogue with Alameda County Flood Control on
                                                                    the use of the linear easements and utility paths along the top
                                                                    of channel banks. Although no public access to these areas is
                                                                    proposed at this time, the City will remain open to future
                                                                    opportunities to improve its trail system using these corridors.
                                                    Policy OSC-2.11 Open Space Easements. Explore the use of easements,
                                                                    long-term leases, cooperative agreements and other cost-
                                                                    effective means of acquiring or sharing open space with
                                                                    other owners.
6-46
                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                 O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
Policy OSC-2.12 Open Spaces in New Development. Promote the
                inclusion of plazas, courtyards, landscaped commons,
                rooftop gardens/ green space, and other publicly
                accessible open spaces within new commercial,
                industrial, and public facility development.
Policy OSC-2.13 Private Sector Facilities. Encourage privately owned
                and operated recreational facilities that are open to the
                general public, provided that such facilities are
                compatible with surrounding uses and consistent with
                community goals. Examples of such facilities include
                skating rinks, driving ranges, batting cages, family fun
                centers, and bowling alleys.
R EGIONAL P ARKS
GOAL OSC-3 Maximize the potential benefits of the East Bay
                  Regional Park District system for San Leandro
                  residents.
Policy OSC-3.1  Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline. Maintain Oyster Bay
                Regional Shoreline Park as permanent open space.
                Support EBRPD efforts to develop recreational facilities,
                such as picnic areas, off-leash dog areas, interpretive
                trails and plaques, and children’s play areas, at Oyster
                Bay.
                Action OSC-3.1.A: Update of Oyster Bay Park Plan
                Work with EBRPD to implement the Land Use Plan for
                Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline. The City will continue to
                work with EBRPD to maximize local benefits and minimize
                potential adverse impacts associated with future
                improvements.
Policy OSC-3.2  Public Awareness of EBRPD Facilities.            Promote
                greater public awareness of the East Bay Regional Park
                District lands and facilities in and around San Leandro,
                including Oyster Bay Shoreline, Fairmont Ridge, Lake
                Chabot, and Anthony Chabot Regional Park. Improve
                access to these parks from San Leandro, and advertise
                these parks to San Leandro households.
                                                                                                                          6-47

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                   Action OSC-3.2.A: EBRPD Publicity
                                                                   Publicize EBRPD facilities and activities through local access
                                                                   cable TV, internet and social media, program information in
                                                                   San Leandro’s Recreation Guides, park directional signs, and
                                                                   similar methods.
                                                    Policy OSC-3.3 Bay and Ridge Trails. Support the development and
                                                                   improvement of a regional trail system in and around
                                                                   San Leandro, including the Bay Trail and the Ridge
                                                                   Trail. Work with EBRPD to improve access from San
                                                                   Leandro neighborhoods to these trails by improving
                                                                   existing trails, and developing new spur trails, bike
                                                                   lanes, and signage.
                                                                   Action OSC-3.3.A: Bay Trail Missing Links
                                                                   Work with the EBRPD to complete the following
                                                                   improvements to the Bay Trail within San Leandro:
                                                                   (a) construction of a bicycle/pedestrian bridge across Oyster
                                                                   Bay Slough;
                                                                   (b) development of a signed bike route along Neptune Drive
                                                                   between Williams Street and Marina Boulevard;
                                                                   (c) spur trails between the Bay Trail and nearby San Leandro
                                                                   neighborhoods.
                                                                   Action OSC-3.3.B: Ridge Trail Spurs
                                                                   Work with the EBRPD to improve access to the Bay Area
                                                                   Ridge Trail and other regional parks in the East Bay Hills by:
                                                                   (a) Rebuilding the existing trail along San Leandro Creek
                                                                   from the City’s Chabot Park (at the end of Estudillo Avenue)
                                                                   to the Lake Chabot Dam;
                                                                   (b) Providing trail access across Fairmont Ridge from the
                                                                   Bay-O-Vista area to Anthony Chabot Park; and
                                                                   (c) Supporting development of a trail from San Leandro’s
                                                                   Chabot Park to Dunsmuir House and Dunsmuir Ridge (in
                                                                   Oakland), with connections to Anthony Chabot Regional
                                                                   Park.
                                                                   See also Action OSC-2.10.A on the East Bay Greenway
                                                    Policy OSC-3.4 Local Benefits from EBRPD.              Ensure that future
                                                                   regional park bond measures and EBRPD capital
                                                                   improvement programs include significant funding for
                                                                   projects in and around San Leandro. Work with Park
6-48

                                                                                    S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
               District staff and the Board member(s) serving San
               Leandro to ensure that the City’s interests are well
               represented.
Policy OSC-3.5 City/ EBRPD Partnerships. Pursue partnerships and
               joint efforts with EBRPD to fund, build, and maintain
               recreational improvements that benefit San Leandro
               residents.
Policy OSC-3.6 Coordination with EBRPD. Coordinate the City of San
               Leandro’s recreational planning, programming, and
               marketing with the EBRPD to avoid overlap, encourage
               collaboration, and increase recreational opportunities for
               San Leandro residents.
J OINT U SE
GOAL OSC-4 Pursue agreements with the School Districts, the
                 Boys and Girls Club, and other agencies and
                 organizations to ensure that all of San Leandro’s
                 open spaces and recreational facilities are available
                 for public use.
Policy OSC-4.1 Joint Use Agreements. Promote joint use agreements
               between the City and the San Leandro and San Lorenzo
               Unified School Districts to maximize public access to
               school recreational facilities and grounds during non-
               school hours. Emphasize agreements which:
               (a) provide access to facilities which are currently
               lacking in existing City parks, such as swimming pools,
               gymnasiums and sports fields; and
               (b) benefit areas that currently lack neighborhood or
               community parks.
               Action OSC-4.1.A: Joint Use Facilities Master Plan
               Periodically update the joint use agreements between the City
               and the two School Districts to address current conditions at
               school campuses and City parks, respond to current issues,
               and maximize the potential for each school site to complement
               City park resources.
                                                                                                                              6-49

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                   Action OSC-4.1.B: Burrell Field Complex
                                                                   Regularly work with the San Leandro Unified School District
                                                                   to renew or maintain agreements providing continued City
                                                                   access to the District-owned facilities at Burrell Field,
                                                                   including the Pac 1 and Pac 2 ball fields and the tennis courts.
                                                    Policy OSC-4.2 Comprehensive Approach. Consider joint use in the
                                                                   broadest possible context, including recreational
                                                                   programs, capital improvement projects, maintenance,
                                                                   and community outreach as well as the shared use of
                                                                   facilities. Coordination between the City and the School
                                                                   Districts in the programming of recreation and sports
                                                                   activities should be encouraged so that the widest range
                                                                   of opportunities are provided to San Leandro residents.
                                                    Policy OSC-4.3 Problem Solving. Partner with the School Districts to
                                                                   develop creative solutions to the maintenance, liability,
                                                                   security, and funding challenges associated with the
                                                                   joint use of school properties for public recreation.
                                                    Policy OSC-4.4 School Campus Design Changes. Work with the School
                                                                   Districts to implement design changes that allow school
                                                                   grounds to function as neighborhood parks as well as
                                                                   school recreation and athletic field areas, particularly in
                                                                   neighborhoods that lack existing parks. Such
                                                                   improvements should be consistent with school site
                                                                   master plans and should provide mutual benefits for
                                                                   both the School Districts and the City. Typical
                                                                   improvements might include tot lots, pathways,
                                                                   landscaping and shade trees, picnic areas, community
                                                                   gardens, ballfields, and similar aesthetic and recreational
                                                                   amenities.
                                                                   Action OSC-4.4.A: San Leandro USD Rehabilitation
                                                                   Projects
                                                                   Work with the San Leandro Unified School District to pursue
                                                                   the rehabilitation of turf areas, the upgrading of hard court
                                                                   areas, the development of additional softball/baseball and
                                                                   soccer fields, the acquisition of new children’s play equipment,
                                                                   and landscaping improvements on school campuses.
                                                                   Encourage the School District to include expansion and
                                                                   improvement of recreational facilities in future bond measures.
6-50

                                                                                       S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                        O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
               Action OSC-4.4.B: San Lorenzo USD Rehab Projects
               Work with the San Lorenzo Unified School District to pursue
               the development and rehabilitation of recreational facilities at
               school sites within the San Leandro city limits.
Policy OSC-4.5 Ongoing Communication. Maintain ongoing communi-
               cation between the City Council, the Recreation and
               Parks Commission, and the School Boards to address
               issues of mutual concern and promote additional joint
               use agreements.
               Action OSC-4.5.A: Field Reservation Practices
               Continue to work with the San Leandro and San Lorenzo
               Unified School Districts to coordinate policies, practices, and
               operating procedures for athletic fields and other facilities.
Policy OSC-4.6 Non-Profit Service Providers. Encourage coordination
               with non-profit recreational service providers in San
               Leandro (such as the Boys and Girls Club) so that the
               public becomes more aware of their facilities, programs,
               and services. Consider joint use agreements with non-
               profit and/or private companies to further increase
               access to recreational facilities.
Policy OSC-4.7 Other Agencies
               Explore joint use opportunities with other public or
               semi-public agencies to provide for appropriate
               recreational uses of their properties and rights-of-way.
               Action OSC-4.7.A: Utility Corridors
               Contact PG&E and EBMUD to determine the potential for
               recreational activities such as trails and community gardens
               within their rights-of-way.
                                                                                                                                 6-51
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    S AN L EANDRO C REEK
                                                    GOAL OSC-5 Protect San Leandro Creek as a renewed open space
                                                                     and natural resource, a green connection between the
                                                                     San Leandro Hills and San Francisco Bay, and a core
                                                                     part of San Leandro’s identity.
                                                    Policy OSC-5.1 Creek Stewardship. Support the efforts of community
                                                                   groups such as the Friends of San Leandro Creek to
                                                                   increase public education and recreation, promote
                                                                   habitat      restoration,    conduct     creek    clean-up,
                                                                   maintenance, and monitoring programs, and achieve
                                                                   water quality improvements.
                                                                   Action OSC-5.1.A: Creek Trail Master Plan Study
                                                                   Implement the recommendations of the 2016-17 Creek Trail
                                                                   Master Plan Study for improved access, vegetation
                                                                   management, education, and resource enhancement.
                                                                   Action OSC-5.1.B: Community Program Support
                                                                   Continue to support community-based ecological survey,
                                                                   water quality monitoring, and clean-up programs.
                                                                   Action OSC-5.1.C: Priority Conservation Area
                                                                   Pursue a "Priority Conservation Area" designation for San
                                                                   Leandro Creek through the Association of Bay Area
                                                                   Governments and Metropolitan Transportation Commission.
                                                    Policy OSC-5.2 Creekside Development. Require new development
                                                                   adjacent to San Leandro Creek to maintain setbacks from
                                                                   the top of the creek bank, dedicate public access
                                                                   easements for creekside amenities, and where
                                                                   appropriate, undertake improvements such as erosion
                                                                   control, habitat restoration, vegetation management,
                                                                   bank stabilization, and trail dedication. Development
                                                                   and/or      recreational    improvements       should    be
                                                                   coordinated with appropriate state and federal resource
                                                                   agencies.
                                                    Policy OSC-5.3 Orientation of New Structures. Encourage all new
                                                                   structures on creekside sites to be designed so that the
                                                                   creek is treated as an amenity and focal point.
6-52

                                                                                    S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
Policy OSC-5.4 Creek Access. Pursue increased public access to and
               along San Leandro Creek through trails, new and
               expanded parks, and open space set-asides within future
               creekside developments.
               Action OSC-5.4.A: Chain of Parks
               Pursue the development of an interconnected chain of parks
               and a continuous trail along San Leandro Creek between East
               14th Street and the north end of Preda Street.
               Action OSC-5.4.B: Hills to Bay Connection
               Pursue the long-term development of a "hills to bay" trail
               system. Where adjacent lands are public or proposed for
               development, the trail should follow the creekbank. Where
               adjacent lands are private or public access is infeasible, the
               trail may use the rights of way of streets running parallel to
               its route.
Policy OSC-5.5 Balanced Objectives. Ensure that future creekside
               improvements balance the objective of greater public
               access with the objectives of restoring wildlife habitat,
               minimizing flood hazards, and respecting the privacy
               and security of persons living along the creek.
Policy OSC-5.6 Habitat Restoration. Encourage the enhancement and
               restoration of the natural riparian habitat along San
               Leandro Creek. The upper reaches of the creek should
               be retained as a natural waterway and should not be
               further channelized for flood control purposes.
Policy OSC-5.7 Creek Maintenance. Support creek maintenance
               projects that minimize erosion, stabilize creek banks,
               and protect property from the threat of flooding. Work
               with private property owners and Alameda County to
               ensure that fallen vegetation and other potentially
               hazardous flow obstructions are promptly removed.
               Action OSC-5.7.A: Removal of Hazardous Trees
               Undertake strategic vegetation management projects along
               San Leandro Creek which remove invasive species and
               hazardous trees and replace them with native species.
                                                                                                                              6-53
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                    Policy OSC-5.8  Public Information. Promote public information on San
                                                                    Leandro Creek, with a focus on youth-oriented
                                                                    environmental programs. The City should support or co-
                                                                    sponsor events such as creek clean-ups, creek walks,
                                                                    student projects, creek classes and workshops, street
                                                                    fairs, and other events that foster greater appreciation of
                                                                    the creek and creek environment.
                                                                    Action OSC-5.8.A: Environmental Education Center
                                                                    Develop an Environmental Education Center on public land
                                                                    adjacent to San Leandro Creek.
                                                    Policy OSC-5.9  Watershed Approach.             Ensure that plans for San
                                                                    Leandro Creek consider the context of the entire
                                                                    watershed, including upstream pollution sources and
                                                                    effective solutions that extend beyond the City limits.
                                                                    Action OSC-5.9.A: Lake Chabot Releases
                                                                    Work with EBMUD to manage releases of water from Lake
                                                                    Chabot Dam in a way that provides the maximum potential
                                                                    benefit for fish and wildlife habitat in San Leandro Creek.
                                                    Policy OSC-5.10 San Leandro Creek and Human Service Needs. Engage
                                                                    County safety net agencies, San Leandro Hospital
                                                                    clinics, homeless advocates, the Police and Fire
                                                                    Departments, and others in the community to address
                                                                    homelessness along San Leandro Creek.
6-54
                                                                                   S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                    O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
P LANT AND A NIMAL C OMMUNITIES
GOAL OSC-1 Identify, protect, and enhance San Leandro’s
                 significant plant and animal communities..
Policy OSC-6.1 Ecosystem Management. Promote the long-term
               conservation of San Leandro’s remaining natural
               ecosystems, including wetlands, grasslands, and
               riparian areas. Future development should minimize the
               potential for adverse impacts to these ecosystems and
               should promote their restoration and enhancement.
Policy OSC-6.2 Mitigation of Development Impacts. Require measures
               to mitigate the impacts of development or public
               improvements on fish and wildlife habitat, plant
               resources, and other valuable natural resources in the
               City.
Policy OSC-6.3 Habitat Restoration. Encourage the restoration of native
               vegetation in the City’s open spaces as a means of
               enhancing habitat and reducing wildfire hazards.
Policy OSC-6.4 Species of Special Concern. Ensure that local planning
               and development decisions do not damage the habitat of
               rare, endangered, and threatened species, and other
               species of special concern in the City and nearby areas.
               Action OSC-6.4.A: Biological Assessments
               Require biological assessments for development in areas where
               special status species may be present. Require mitigation in
               accordance with state and federal regulations where potential
               adverse impacts exist.
Policy OSC-6.5 San Leandro Shoreline Marshlands. Continue the
               restoration of the San Leandro Shoreline Marshlands as
               a unique natural area. The emphasis in this area should
               be on resource conservation, trails and ecological study.
                                                                                                                             6-55

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                   Action OSC-6.5.A: San Leandro Shoreline Marshlands
                                                                   Enhancement Program
                                                                   Conduct periodic assessments of hydrology, vegetation, and
                                                                   wildlife along the San Leandro shoreline and marshlands, and
                                                                   make adjustments to the existing management program based
                                                                   on the findings.
                                                                   Action OSC-6.5.B: Predator Control Plan
                                                                   Continue to require implementation of a predator control plan
                                                                   (controlling feral and domestic animals) and an invasive weed
                                                                   control program in the San Leandro Shoreline Marshlands.
                                                                   Action OSC-6.5.C: Dredge Materials Management Site
                                                                   Consider restoration alternatives for the former Dredge
                                                                   Materials Management Site located east of the Tony Lema
                                                                   Golf Course and north of the Shoreline Marshlands. Planning
                                                                   for this area should consider potential impacts related to sea
                                                                   level rise.
                                                    Policy OSC-6.6 Intergovernmental Coordination. Coordinate with the
                                                                   appropriate regional, state and federal agencies and
                                                                   other organizations in their efforts to conserve and
                                                                   enhance ecological resources in San Leandro. Refer local
                                                                   projects to these agencies as required for their review
                                                                   and comment.
6-56
                                                                                    S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
R ESOURCE C ONSERVATION AND G REENHOUSE G AS
R EDUCTION
GOAL OSC-7 Promote            recycling, water conservation, green
                 building, and other programs which reduce
                 greenhouse gas emissions and create a more
                 sustainable environment.
Policy OSC-7.1 Recycling. Actively promote recycling, composting, and
               other programs that reduce the amount of solid waste
               requiring disposal in landfills.
               Action OSC-7.1.A: Source Reduction and Recycling
               Programs
               Continue to implement Source Reduction and Recycling
               programs, consistent with the Stopwaste.org Strategic Plan.
               Action OSC-7.1.B: Waste Reduction Programs
               Encourage special bulky waste pick-up events, citywide garage
               sales, programs offering rebates for inefficient appliances or
               polluting vehicles, disincentives to excessive packaging, and
               other waste collection activities that reduce pollution and
               improper waste disposal.
               Action OSC-7.1.C: Commercial and Multi-Family
               Residential Programs
               Continue to expand recycling programs for multi-family
               dwellings and commercial-industrial customers, and to
               implement construction and demolition debris recycling and
               e-waste recycling programs. Commercial and industrial
               recycling programs should include a significant public
               information and education component and should be
               coordinated through the Chamber of Commerce and other
               business organizations.
               Action OSC-7.1.D: Food Waste Recycling
               Continue to operate green waste and food waste recycling
               programs.
                                                                                                                              6-57
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                   Action OSC-7.1.E: Public Education
                                                                   Expand public education on recycling, particularly for
                                                                   apartment dwellers. Promote school programs that educate
                                                                   children about recycling.
                                                                   Action OSC-7.1.F: Discouraging Unnecessary Consumption
                                                                   Promote waste reduction through initiatives that discourage
                                                                   excessive or unnecessary consumption and encourage the use
                                                                   of “second hand” goods and recycled materials.
                                                    Policy OSC-7.2 Water Conservation. Promote the efficient use of
                                                                   existing water supplies through a variety of water
                                                                   conservation measures, including the use of recycled
                                                                   water for landscaping.
                                                                   Action OSC-7.2.A: Urban Water Management Plan
                                                                   Take the actions necessary to implement EBMUD’s Urban
                                                                   Water Management Plan at the local level.
                                                                   Action OSC-7.2.B: Expansion of Reclaimed Water Use
                                                                   Expand the City's reclaimed water system, enabling further
                                                                   reductions in the use of potable water for landscaping. The
                                                                   City will seek additional funding for projects which enable the
                                                                   delivery of high-quality reclaimed water to an expanded
                                                                   customer base, with additional infrastructure for water
                                                                   delivery.
                                                    Policy OSC-7.3 Drought-Tolerant Landscaping. Encourage the use of
                                                                   native vegetation and Bay-friendly landscaping and
                                                                   enforce the State Department of Water Resources Model
                                                                   Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (WELO).
                                                    Policy OSC-7.4 Development Standards. Maintain local planning and
                                                                   building standards that require the efficient use of water
                                                                   through such measures as low-flow plumbing fixtures
                                                                   and       water-saving       appliances.     Require     water
                                                                   conservation measures as a condition of approval for
                                                                   major developments.
                                                                   Action OSC-7.4.A: Graywater Recycling
                                                                   Explore Building Code revisions and other programs to
                                                                   facilitate the installation of graywater recycling systems and
                                                                   other systems which capture runoff for domestic use and
                                                                   landscaping.
6-58

                                                                                  S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                   O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
Policy OSC-7.5 City Conservation Practices. Ensure that City itself
               follows conservation practices in its day-to-day
               operations and is a role model for businesses and
               residents in the area of conservation. The City should
               encourage the use of reusable and recyclable goods in its
               purchasing policies and practices, and should develop
               strategies that encourage residents and businesses to do
               the same.
               Action OSC-7.5.A: Community Conservation Events
               Promote community events and fairs that increase
               environmental awareness, such as Arbor Day tree planting,
               Earth Day activities, shoreline clean-ups, and creek
               restoration.
               See the Environmental Hazards Element for policies and
               actions on air and water quality, including green
               infrastructure.
Policy OSC-7.6 Reducing Municipal Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
               Reduce greenhouse gas emissions associated with
               municipal operations, including those associated with
               energy use, City vehicles, City recycling and composting
               operations, and utilities.
               Action OSC-7.6.A: Financial Impacts of Greenhouse Gas
               Reduction Measures
               Conduct cost-benefit analyses to prioritize greenhouse gas
               reduction programs, ensure that such programs are fiscally
               responsible, and maximize the cost-effectiveness of local
               efforts.
Policy OSC-7.7 Climate Action Plan. Maintain and periodically update
               a local Climate Action Plan. The Plan should be
               periodically updated to reflect the completion of tasks,
               emerging priorities, new technologies, new laws, and
               higher targets for emissions reduction.
               Action OSC-7.7.A: Funding for Climate Action Plan
               Implementation
               Pursue federal, state, utility, and non-governmental funding
               sources to develop and implement greenhouse gas reduction
               strategies. Adequate staffing and funding should be provided
               for Plan implementation.
                                                                                                                            6-59
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                    Action OSC-7.7.B: Climate Action Plan Updates
                                                                   Update the Climate Action Plan, including the local
                                                                   greenhouse gas emissions inventory, at least every five years.
                                                                   CAP updates should compare the inventory results with
                                                                   previous inventories to evaluate progress towards the City’s
                                                                   emissions reductions goals, and should set new quantifiable
                                                                   objectives for the next planning period. The next CAP should
                                                                   consider the use of a consumption-based greenhouse gas
                                                                   emissions inventory that highlights community emissions
                                                                   generated through the consumption of goods, services, and
                                                                   transportation produced outside the City limits.
                                                                   Action OSC-7.7.C: Participation in Multi-Jurisdictional
                                                                   Programs
                                                                   Evaluate ways to increase collaboration with other
                                                                   jurisdictions on emissions reduction strategies, such as the
                                                                   national Carbon Disclosure Project.
                                                                   See also Policy OSC-7.6/Action OSC-7.6.A and Action 8.1.A
                                                    Policy OSC-7.8 Green Building. Promote green building in new
                                                                   construction and remodels.
                                                                   Action OSC-7.8.A: Green Building Codes and Checklists
                                                                   Ensure the enforcement of California Green Building Code
                                                                   requirements and the continued use of green building
                                                                   checklists during the permitting of major residential and non-
                                                                   residential construction projects.
                                                                   Action OSC-7.8.B:       Green Building Incentives and
                                                                   Requirements
                                                                   Pursue additional measures to incentivize or require green
                                                                   building practices for major remodels and new construction,
                                                                   such as establishing minimum certification levels within the
                                                                   appropriate green building protocols (such as Green Point
                                                                   Rated or LEED ©) or developing voluntary standards which
                                                                   exceed those of the California Green Building Code. Options
                                                                   include the development of sustainability guidelines which
                                                                   encourage        additional      energy-saving       measures,
                                                                   environmentally-preferable building materials, green roofs,
                                                                   rainwater harvesting, and other sustainable design principles.
6-60

                                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                      O P E N  S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
               Action OSC-7.8.C: Green Building Education
               Continue public education and outreach on green building
               methods, materials, and benefits.
Policy OSC-7.9 Reducing Greenhouse Gases Through Land Use and
               Transportation Choices.            Locate and design new
               development in a manner which maximizes the ability
               to use transit, walk, or bicycle for most trips, reduce
               dependence on fossil fuel powered vehicles, and reduce
               vehicle miles traveled.
               Action OSC-7.9.A: Transit-Oriented Development
               Implement transit-oriented development plans for the
               Downtown and Bay Fair BART station areas and the East
               14th Street corridor.
               Action OSC-7.9.B: Pedestrian Orientation
               Implement design guidelines which encourage pedestrian-
               friendly development and which de-emphasize the
               predominance of surface parking lots in transit-oriented
               development areas such as the BART stations and East 14 th
               Street corridor.
               Action OSC-7.9.C: Bicycle and Pedestrian Improvements
               Implement the capital projects identified in the San Leandro
               Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan, and support new projects
               such as the East Bay Greenway to facilitate travel on foot and
               by bicycle.
               Action OSC-7.9.D: Reducing Motor Vehicle Emissions
               Expand car-sharing and ride-sharing programs, the use of fuel
               efficient and electric vehicles, and other measures that reduce
               emissions from motor vehicles.
               Action OSC-7.9.E: Improving Public Transit
               Support increased levels of investment in public
               transportation service and public transit infrastructure so that
               a larger share of daily trips may be taken by bus, rapid bus,
               BART, shuttles, and other modes which result in lower
               greenhouse gas emissions that single passenger automobiles.
                                                                                                                                6-61
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                    See the Land Use Element and the Transportation Element for
                                                                    additional policies on the role of land use and transportation
                                                                    decisions in reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
                                                    Policy OSC-7.10 Open Space and Carbon Emissions. Enhance the
                                                                    quality of the urban environment, including streets,
                                                                    parks, and yards, in order to absorb carbon emissions
                                                                    and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
                                                                    Action OSC-7.10.A: Street Trees
                                                                    Continue to implement street tree planting and urban forestry
                                                                    programs, recognizing the potential for trees to sequester
                                                                    carbon.
                                                                    See the Historic Preservation and Community Design
                                                                    Element for additional policies on street trees.
                                                    E NERGY
                                                    GOAL OSC-8 Promote the efficient use of energy and the increased
                                                                       use of renewable energy by San Leandro residents
                                                                       and businesses.
                                                    Policy OSC-8.1  Conservation and Energy Efficiency. Strongly advocate
                                                                    for increased energy conservation by San Leandro
                                                                    residents and businesses, and ensure that the City itself
                                                                    is a conservation role model.
                                                                    Action OSC-8.1.A: Climate Action Plan Implementation
                                                                    Implement the energy efficiency measures outlined in the San
                                                                    Leandro Climate Action Plan, and periodically update these
                                                                    measures to reflect new Code requirements, emerging
                                                                    technology, completed actions, and new opportunities.
                                                                    Among the measures identified are locally adopted energy
                                                                    efficiency standards, a third party or municipal financing
                                                                    program for energy efficiency, a revolving loan for energy
                                                                    efficiency improvements, and various education and outreach
                                                                    strategies.
6-62
                                                                                        S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                        O P E N  S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
               Action OSC-8.1.B: Energy Retrofits of Public Facilities
               Continue the retrofitting of City facilities and infrastructure
               to reduce energy consumption and costs. This should include
               conversion of the City's streelight system to LED lighting,
               study of the feasibility of solar energy at the wastewater plant,
               and future retrofits in response to new technology and energy
               resources.
Policy OSC-8.2 Planning and Building Practices.                     Encourage
               construction, landscaping, and site planning practices
               that minimize heating and cooling costs and ensure that
               energy is efficiently used. Local building codes and
               other City regulations and procedures should meet or
               exceed state and federal standards for energy
               conservation and efficiency, and support the City’s
               greenhouse gas reduction goals.
Policy OSC-8.3 Weatherization and Energy Upgrades. Promote the
               weatherization and energy retrofitting of existing homes
               and businesses, including the development of solar
               space heating and water heating systems, and the use of
               energy-efficient lighting, fixtures and appliances.
Policy OSC-8.4 Local Energy Resources. Accommodate the use of local
               alternative energy resources, such as solar power, wind,
               methane gas, and industrial waste heat (cogeneration).
               Ensure that alternative energy infrastructure is
               compatible with surrounding land uses and minimizes
               environmental impacts on the community.
               Action OSC-8.4.A: Community Choice Aggregation
               Continue to explore Community Choice Aggregation, an
               approach to energy procurement in which the City would
               partner with other jurisdictions to secure alternative energy
               supply contracts.
               Action OSC-8.4.B: Design Guidelines for Wind Turbines
               Develop design guidelines for wind turbines and other wind
               energy facilities, and encourage the use of such facilities in the
               city, where aesthetic and environmental concerns can be
               sufficiently addressed.
                                                                                                                                  6-63

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L     P L A N
O P E N S P A C E , P A R K S , A N D C O N S E R V A T I O N
                                                                   Action OSC-8.4.C: Solar Access
                                                                   Continue to implement State codes protecting solar access and
                                                                   ensuring the future viability of solar energy systems.
                                                                   See the Economic Development Element for a discussion of
                                                                   microgrids in the industrial area.
                                                    Policy OSC-8.5 Public Information and Education. Promote public
                                                                   information and education on energy conservation and
                                                                   retrofit programs, in part through partnerships with the
                                                                   agencies offering such programs.
                                                                   Action OSC-8.5.A: Realtor and Lender Program
                                                                   Work with local realtors and lenders to distribute information
                                                                   on local energy retrofit programs,”Energy Star” products,
                                                                   energy-related tax credits, and local contractors providing
                                                                   retrofit and weatherization services.
                                                                   Action OSC-8.5.B: Public Information
                                                                   Develop and disseminate information to San Leandro
                                                                   residents and businesses on energy conservation and
                                                                   renewable energy opportunities, including advantageous
                                                                   financing programs for residents and businesses. Work with
                                                                   the School Districts to provide similar information to school
                                                                   children and their families.
                                                    Policy OSC-8.6 Reducing Peak Demand
                                                                   Encourage innovative responses to reduce peak
                                                                   demands on the electric power grid, such as flexible
                                                                   work shifts and the development of local power sources.
                                                                   See the San Leandro Climate Action Plan for additional
                                                                   strategies on energy conservation, energy efficiency, and
                                                                   renewable energy.
6-64

                                                                                7
                                                                            ENVIRONMENTAL
A.      OVERVIEW
Environmental Hazards incorporates the state-mandated “Safety” and
“Noise” elements of the General Plan. The Chapter addresses natural
and man-made hazards in the City, including earthquakes, landslides,
floods, sea level rise, wildfire, air and water pollution, hazardous
materials, and aviation accidents. It includes a summary of emergency
preparedness in San Leandro, with policies that provide the foundation
for disaster planning in the City. The Element also addresses noise
issues, with the dual objective of mitigating existing noise problems and
avoiding future disturbances and conflicts.
The overall purpose of this Element is to minimize the potential for
damage and injury resulting from environmental hazards. The State
Government Code requires that the Element identify and evaluate the
hazards that are present and establish appropriate goals, policies, and
                                                                            HAZARDS
action programs to reduce those hazards to acceptable levels.
Environmental hazards define basic constraints to land use that must be
reflected in how and where development takes place.
Public education is critical to the successful implementation of this
Element. Although San Leandrans are generally aware that the City is
located in “earthquake country,” there is still much that can be done to
improve readiness and response when disaster strikes. The
Environmental Hazards Element takes a pro-active approach to
emergency preparedness, emphasizing mitigation and reduced exposure
to hazards as well as response and recovery. This Element is closely
coordinated with the City’s Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP), a
federally mandated plan to reduce exposure to hazards and ensure
eligibility for federal disaster preparedness and relief funds.
                                                                                            7-1

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          The Element also sets forth a pro-active strategy for addressing noise
                                          issues in the community. San Leandro’s proximity to a major
                                          international airport and location alongside some of Caifornia’s busiest
                                          freeways and rail corridors create relatively high levels of noise in much
                                          of the city. The Element recommends several programs to resolve
                                          domestic, transportation, and airport noise conflicts.
                                          B.      NATURAL HAZARDS
                                          Earthquakes
                                          Seismic Conditions
                                          Earthquakes are the most pervasive safety hazard in San Leandro. The
                                          eastern edge of the City is crossed by the Hayward Fault, creating the
                                          potential for serious and widespread damage. The last great quake on
                                          the Hayward Fault—a magnitude 7.0 temblor in 1868—destroyed many
                                          buildings in San Leandro and changed the course of the City’s history
                                          when it destroyed the Alameda County Courthouse in the center of town
                                          (see photo below).
                                          A 2008 study of earthquake probabilities by the US Geological Survey
                                          and other partners estimated that there is a 63 percent chance that a
                                          magnitude 6.7 or greater quake will strike the Bay Area in the next 30
                                                                             years. Published forecasts indicate a
                                                                             31 percent likelihood that such a
                                                                             quake will occur on the Hayward
                                                                             Fault. A major earthquake could also
                                                                             occur on the San Andreas Fault, which
                                                                             is located about 15 miles west of San
                                                                             Leandro, and the Calaveras Fault,
                                                                             which is about 10 miles to the east (see
                                                                             Figure 7-1).        A quake of this
                                                                             magnitude could topple buildings,
                                                                             disrupt infrastructure, cripple the
                                                                             transportation system, and trigger
                                                                             landslides    throughout      the   San
                                                                             Leandro Hills.
7-2

                                                                                                                                                                                               S A N
                                                                                                                                                                         L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
      Earthquake Probabilities
                                   Figure 7-1
                                 Source: 2007 Working Group on California Earthquake Probabilities, 2008. The Uniform CA Earthquake Rupture Forecast, Ver. 2 (UCERF 2)
                                                                                                                                                                         E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
7-3
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          The major earthquake-related hazards in San Leandro are ground
                                          shaking, ground failure, and liquefaction. These hazards tend to be
                                          amplified on artificial fill and on deep alluvial soils like those found
                                          along the Bay and old streambeds. Earthquake hazard maps prepared
                                          by the Association of Bay Area Governments indicate that a large
                                          Hayward Fault quake would trigger very strong shaking throughout the
                                          city and a high risk of liquefaction in the Marina Faire/Mulford Gardens
                                          and Washington Manor/Bonaire neighborhoods.
                                          The California Geological Survey has designated the area immediately
                                          adjacent to the Hayward Fault as a “Special Studies Zone.” Before any
                                          development may occur within this zone, geologic studies are required
                                          to determine the precise location of active fault traces and feasibility of
                                          construction. Structures must be set back at least 50 feet from any fault
                                          trace and must be engineered to reduce the potential for earthquake
                                          damage. Elsewhere in the City, the California Building Code contains
                                          specific requirements for structural design, foundations, grading, and
                                          seismic loads, to reduce the potential for quake damage.
                                          Figure 7-2 shows the location of the Hayward Fault and Special Studies
                                          Zone, along with those areas identified as having the highest risk for
                                          liquefaction in a major earthquake.
                                          Structural Hazards
                                          Enforcement of the California Building Code by the San Leandro
                                          Building Department helps ensure that new construction will withstand
                                          the forces associated with a major earthquake. However, many of the
                                                                                      buildings in San Leandro pre-
                                                                                      date modern codes and are
                                                                                      susceptible to damage. The
                                                                                      City has implemented a
                                                                                      decades-long      program      to
                                                                                      retrofit unreinforced masonry
                                                                                      buildings (URMs), most of
                                                                                      which were located in and
                                                                                      around Downtown. With that
                                                                                      hazard      now     substantially
                                                                                      reduced, the focus has turned
                                                                                      to soft-story buildings, concrete
                                                                                      tilt-up structures, and older
                                                                                      single family homes that could
                                                                                      be seismically strengthened.
7-4

       S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
             E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                         Figure 7-2
  Hayward Fault Location
and Liquefaction Hazards
                                                 7-5
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          There are about 350 soft-story buildings in San Leandro. These are
                                          mostly two and three story structures with “tuck under” parking at the
                                          ground level and one to two stories of residential or office uses above.
                                          The design of such structures, with large openings, few internal walls on
                                          the ground floor, and slender columns supporting the weight of the
                                          upper floors, can result in inadequate lateral support during an
                                          earthquake. This type of construction was especially prevalent in the
                                          1950s and 60s, a period during which much of San Leandro’s multi-
                                          family stock was built. Structural stability can be improved through the
                                          addition of shear walls and lateral bracing at the lower level. The
                                          General Plan recommends a soft story building improvement plan to
                                          avoid the potential for loss of housing stock and casualties during an
                                          earthquake.
                                          The city has about 320 tilt-up structures, mostly in the industrial areas.
                                          Many of these structures require additional roof to wall connections to
                                          avoid their collapse during an earthquake. Structural upgrades are
                                          typically required as these buildings are remodeled.
                                          There are also a large number of older wood-frame homes in San
                                          Leandro. About 10 percent of the city’s housing stock pre-dates 1940.
                                          The City has been implementing programs to help residents seismically
                                          strengthen their homes, including classes and seminars, tool lending, do-
                                          it-yourself retrofit guidance, and limited financial support to low-income
                                          homeowners. Many “brace and bolt” measures are relatively simple and
                                          affordable, but some can be a significant cost burden for property
                                          owners. The City will continue to pursue grants and other funding
                                          sources to support these programs in the future.
                                          San Leandro has completed the retrofitting of most public facilities,
                                          including City Hall, the Police Station, the Main Library, and most fire
                                          stations. Both the San Leandro and San Lorenzo Unified School Districts
                                          have also undertaken major seismic retrofit programs and continue to
                                          work to improve the safety of school facilities. Retrofit work by Caltrans
                                          and BART is ongoing, while EBMUD is undertaking a comprehensive
                                          program to reinforce its reservoirs and major water lines, including
                                          strengthening the Lake Chabot Dam.
7-6

                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                    E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Landslides and Erosion
Landslides are relatively common in the East Bay Hills, especially during
high intensity rainstorms. Most slides occur naturally, but they may be
exacerbated by excessive grading, improper construction, and poor
drainage. The San Leandro Hills have a history of destructive landslides,
including a 1998 event that required the relocation of two homes and
threatened five others. Any additional development in the hills must be
carefully engineered to avoid the risk of further property damage or loss
of life.
Erosion is the wearing away of the soil mantle by running water, wind,
or geologic forces. It is a naturally occurring phenomenon and ordinarily
is not hazardous. However, excessive erosion can contribute to
landslides, siltation of streams, undermining of foundations, and
ultimately the loss of structures. Removal of vegetation tends to heighten
erosion hazards. The City enforces grading and erosion control
ordinances to reduce these hazards. Maintenance programs along San
Leandro Creek also reduce the threat of erosion.
Wildfire
The risk of urban wildfire in California has increased dramatically as a
result of population growth on fire-prone hillsides and the effects of
drought and climate change. The danger is not just limited to rural
areas. In fact, the costliest wildfire in U.S. history took place in an urban
area just eight miles north of San Leandro in 1991. That fire caused 25
                                                                                                                        7-7
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          deaths and $3 billion in property damage and resulted in the loss of over
                                          3,000 homes in the Oakland Hills.
                                          The risk is less severe in the San Leandro Hills than in the Oakland Hills
                                          due to the lack of a dense tree canopy, gentler slopes, newer
                                          development, and the width and grade of local streets. Nonetheless, the
                                          city is adjacent to thousands of acres of potentially flammable coastal
                                          scrub and forested open space. The California Department of Forestry
                                          and Fire Prevention (CalFire) has designated the eastern edges of the
                                          Bay-O-Vista neighborhood and the Daniels Drive area of San Leandro as
                                          being a “Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone” (see Figure 7-3). Such
                                          areas are the focus of collaborative efforts between CalFire, Alameda
                                          County Fire, and local cities to reduce fire hazards and improve response
                                          to wildfires.
                                          Land within the San Leandro city limits is classified as a Local
                                          Responsibility Area (LRA) by CalFire. Fire protection within LRAs is
                                          provided by local fire departments and fire districts, rather than by the
                                          State. The Alameda County Fire Department is responsible for wildfire
                                          prevention activities in the city. The Department works with property
                                          owners to maintain defensible space around homes and to require the
                                          removal of flammable vegetation and combustible litter. The California
                                          Fire Code specifies additional requirements that are enforced by the
                                          City’s Building Department. The City also requires fire-resistant roofing
                                          materials in new construction and major remodeling projects.
7-8

S A N   L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
        E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                         Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones
                            Figure 7-3
                                                                                7-9
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Flooding
                                          Flood hazards in San Leandro are associated with overbank flooding of
                                          creeks and drainage canals, dam failure, tsunamis, and rising sea level.
                                          Overbank Flooding
                                          At one time, flooding along creeks and streams was relatively common
                                          in San Leandro. These hazards were greatly reduced during the 1960s
                                          and 1970s when the Alameda County Flood Control and Water
                                          Conservation District (ACFCWCD) channelized the lower portions of
                                          San Leandro Creek and constructed flood control ditches in the southern
                                          part of the City. Today, ACFCWCD manages a network of channels,
                                          levees, storm drains, pump stations, culverts, and dikes intended to
                                          reduce flood hazards throughout the county.
                                          Although the channels were effective, they did not eliminate flood
                                          hazards entirely. During the last 50 years, urbanization in the watersheds
                                          has increased impervious surface area, which has resulted in faster rates
                                          of runoff and higher volumes of stormwater in the channels. Maps
                                          published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
                                          indicate that a 100-year storm (e.g., a storm that has a one percent chance
                                          of occurring in any given year) could cause shallow flooding in parts of
                                          western San Leandro. Areas within the 100-year flood zones (shown in
                                          Figure 7-4) include land adjacent to San Leandro Creek, San Lorenzo
                                          Creek, and the Estudillo Canal; land along flood control channels in the
                                          vicinity of Bayfair Center and Bonaire Park; and coastal areas
                                          surrounding Oyster Bay Regional Shoreline, the San Leandro Shoreline
                                          Park, and Heron Bay. Other types of flood hazards, including coastal
                                          flooding and ponding, have also been mapped in the city.
7-10
S A N   L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
        E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                            FEMA-Designated Flood Plains
                               Figure 7-4
                                                                           7-11
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          The principal consequence of a property’s designation within the 100-
                                          year flood zone is that flood insurance is required for federally insured
                                          mortgage loans. Insurance also may be required by other mortgage
                                          lenders. Moreover, the City’s Flood Plain Management Ordinance
                                          requires that new construction, additions, and major home improvement
                                          projects be raised at least one foot above the base flood elevation—this
                                          can be a significant expense for homeowners making alterations to
                                          existing structures.      FEMA regulations also require that any
                                          development in the flood plain must be preceded by a hydrologic and
                                          hydraulic analysis and must demonstrate that the development does not
                                          cause any increase in flood hazards elsewhere.
                                          FEMA is in the process of revising its coastal flood maps for Bay Area
                                          counties. The Alameda County Public Works Agency and the City of
                                          San Leandro are working together on actions that will remove
                                          approximately 1,000 properties in western San Leandro from the 100-
                                          year flood plain designation shown on these maps. This will require the
                                          construction of sea walls in locations such as the western edge of Mission
                                          Bay Mobile Home Park, and the raising of bank heights along the
                                          Estudillo Canal below Wicks Boulevard. The City and Flood Control
                                          District are in the process of evaluating and improving other levees so
                                          they meet FEMA certification standards. This could remove additional
                                          areas from the 100-year floodplain.
                                          Other planned flood control projects in the San Leandro area include
                                          wetlands restoration at the mouth of San Lorenzo Creek, de-silting of
                                          Flood Channel Line “N” from the UP railroad tracks westward to San
                                          Francisco Bay, rehabilitation of the Estudillo Canal tide gates, and
                                          hazardous tree removal along San Leandro Creek. FEMA is also
                                          studying the effects of sea level rise on Bay Area shorelines, creeks, and
                                          levees to determine what changes may be needed to provide adequate
                                          flood protection. ACFCWCD is also studying options to provide greater
                                          flood protection to properties in the San Lorenzo Creek watershed,
                                          including increasing the capacity of Don Castro Reservoir, constructing
                                          flood walls, and removing bottlenecks along the San Lorenzo Creek
                                          channel.
7-12

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Other Flood Hazards
Dam Failure.         Dam failure refers to the uncontrolled release of
impounded water stored behind a dam. It can be caused by heavy
rainfall, earthquakes, landslides, improper operation or maintenance,
poor construction or maintenance, vandalism, and other natural or
human actions. The California Office of Emergency Services (CalOES)
requires the preparation of Emergency Action Plans by dam operators
identifying warning, evacuation, and post-flood actions in the event of a
dam failure.
CalOES prepares dam inundation maps for major dams around the state.
Their maps indicate that San Leandro would be directly impacted by
failure of either of the East Bay Municipal Water District (EBMUD) dams
on San Leandro Creek. The Upper San Leandro Reservoir Dam was
built in 1977 and the Lake Chabot Dam was built in 1892. Both dams are
inspected on an annual basis to ensure they are safe and performing as
intended. A seismic upgrade of Chabot Dam is expected to begin in
2016. While failure of these dams is extremely unlikely, fast-moving
water could cause substantial damage in the northern part of San
Leandro and would flood most of the city.
Tsunamis. Tsunamis are oceanic waves that are generated by
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, or underwater landslides. Most
tsunamis result in strong and fast tides, rather than giant breaking
waves; casualties are often the result of currents and floating debris.
Although over 50 tsunamis have been
observed in the Bay Area since 1850,
local damage has been very limited.
The risk is much lower in San Leandro
than it is in coastal cities because the
Bay is an enclosed body of water.
There is a slight potential for flooding
in low lying areas along the immediate
shoreline. Portions of the shoreline
area with elevations less than 12 feet
above sea level are located within a
designated       tsunami      inundation
evacuation zone and could face an
evacuation order in the event of a very
large off-shore earthquake.
                                                                                                                  7-13
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Rising Sea Level. Global sea level has been rising as a result of melting
                                          sea ice and thermal expansion. The rate has been accelerating, with
                                          multiple sources indicating a potential rise of 55 inches by Year 2100.
                                          This poses a number of risks to western San Leandro, including
                                          increased incidences of flooding from King Tides, storm surges, and
                                          runoff from creeks and flood control channels. Development in
                                          vulnerable areas must be planned and designed to be elevated above
                                          future projected coastal flood levels. There is also a need to make
                                          existing development along the shoreline more resilient, either by
                                          adapting structures to recognize the potential for future flooding or by
                                          constructing flood protection devices along the shoreline.
                                          In the future, sea level rise risk assessments will be required for projects
                                          in areas where the long-term risk of coastal flooding is present. Such
                                          assessments will need to address the likelihood of flooding and the need
                                          for shoreline improvements such as levees and seawalls. The City itself
                                          will need to engage in adaptation planning to protect public and private
                                          property in vulnerable areas.
                                          C.       MAN-MADE HAZARDS
                                          Air Pollution
                                          Air pollution is a byproduct of industrial, domestic, agricultural and
                                          transportation activities, particularly the combustion of fossil fuels. It is
                                          strongly influenced by topography and climatic factors such as wind
                                                                                direction and temperature. The effects
                                                                                of air pollution range from minor
                                                                                problems such as reduced visibility to
                                                                                serious health hazards like asthma
                                                                                and heart disease. Maintaining clean,
                                                                                healthful air is an important goal in
                                                                                San Leandro, to be achieved not only
                                                                                by regulating stationary sources but
                                                                                also by influencing the way people
                                                                                travel in and around the City. The
                                                                                City’s air quality strategies dovetail
                                                                                with its climate action strategies, as
                                                                                both are focused on the reduction of
                                                                                greenhouse gas emissions.
7-14

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                 E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Motor vehicles are the primary source of air pollution in San Leandro
and the Bay Area. Industrial and commercial activities such as
electronics manufacturing, auto repair, dry cleaning, and the use of
solvents are also contributors. Additionally, particulate matter is
emitted into the air during construction, grading, and wood burning,
which can compound air quality problems. On warm summer days,
these sources result in high levels of ozone, carbon monoxide, and
particulates throughout the region.
Air pollutants are regulated by numerous federal and State laws.
Ambient air quality standards have been established for some of these
pollutants, including carbon dioxide, ozone, nitrogen oxides, sulfur
dioxide, and fine and coarse inhalable matter (see text box for more
information). Because the federal and State standards for ozone and
particulate matter are sometimes exceeded, the Bay Area has been
designated a “non-attainment area” for these pollutants. Any air basin
that does not meet federal standards is required to prepare a Clean Air
Plan which identifies strategies for improving air quality. In the San
Francisco Bay Area, preparation of such plans is the responsibility of the
Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). The Clean Air
Plan is regional in nature but identifies many strategies that can be
implemented at the local level.
The regional Clean Air Plan in effect at the time of General Plan adoption
was adopted in 2010, although an update is forthcoming. The Plan’s
focus is on Stationary and Area Source Measures and Transportation
Control Measures (TCMs) aimed at attaining the federal and State ozone
standards.       Typical TCMs include
improving      regional     rail   service,
promoting ridesharing, and using pricing
policy to influence travel choices. Other
regional plans, such as ABAG/MTC’s
Plan Bay Area, support the goal of
improving air quality by reducing
dependence        on     gasoline-powered
automobiles. This is principally achieved
by improving transit, adding bicycle and
pedestrian      infrastructure,   focusing
growth on areas near public transit, and
shortening commute lengths by creating
a more even distribution of jobs and
housing throughout the region.
                                                                                                                   7-15

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          The San Leandro 2035 General Plan implements the regional Clean Air
                                          Plan at the local level by incorporating many transportation control
                                          measures as land use and transportation policies. These policies aspire
                                          to reduce automobile dependency and promote transportation
                                          alternatives. By encouraging transit-oriented development, better transit
                                          service, improved provisions for bicycles and pedestrians, shuttles and
                                          carpools, and shorter commutes, the Plan will help achieve cleaner air.
                                          BAAQMD also issues permits to stationary sources of air pollution in the
                                          Bay Area and inspects these sites to ensure that they operate within
                                          allowable standards. Stationary sources include dry cleaning businesses,
                                          gas stations, medical offices, retail stores, building suppliers, printers,
                                          and a range of other industrial and commercial activities. The BAAQMD
                                          also maintains a data base of air quality complaints filed by residents
                                          and businesses in each Bay Area community. Over 12,000 complaints a
                                          year are typically received, with most relating to noxious odors, smoke,
                                          and non-compliant vehicles. Each complaint is investigated and
                                          corrective action is required if a problem is detected.
                                          The Air District is also addressing resident exposure to toxic air
                                          contaminants (TACs), especially along freeways and in areas with heavy
                                          truck traffic. Particulate Matter accounts for 85 percent of the cancer risk
                                          from airborne toxics, with internal combustion engines being the
                                          primary source. New regulations for diesel-powered vehicles have
                                          reduced risk levels, but additional precautions may be needed for
                                          development near high volume roadways such as Interstate 880. In the
                                          future, health risk assessments may be required for new development in
                                          areas of heavy traffic, and special air filtration systems may be required
                                          to reduce the potential for TAC exposure.
                                          Policies in the San Leandro General Plan call for the enforcement of state
                                          and federal air quality standards, the regulation of construction and
                                          grading to control airborne dust, tree planting to absorb carbon
                                          monoxide, and the siting of development to avoid exposure to odors and
                                          air contaminants. The Plan also promotes public education on air quality
                                          hazards and encourages residents to “spare the air” by curtailing certain
                                          activities when pollution hazards are greatest.
7-16

                                                                              S A N  L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                     E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                               In a Nutshell...
                                       An Air Pollution Primer
The major components of air pollution are ozone, carbon monoxide, suspended particulate matter,
nitrogen and sulfur dioxide, and toxic air contaminants.
Ozone (O3) is formed through a series of photochemical reactions involving reactive organic
compounds and nitrogen oxides. It is characterized by a visibility reducing haze. Motor vehicle
emissions, refineries, power plants, solvents, and pesticides are the primary sources. Ozone is
considered a regional pollutant because its precursors are transported and diffused by wind. This
makes it particularly difficult to eliminate. The State and federal ozone standards are rarely exceeded
at the monitoring location closest to San Leandro (in Oakland) but are occasionally exceeded at
monitoring locations in Livermore, Concord and other inland areas.
Carbon Monoxide (CO). Carbon Monoxide is an odorless, colorless gas formed by the incomplete
combustion of fuels and other organic substances. Motor vehicles are the main source, particularly
vehicles which are idling or driving slowly. High levels of atmospheric CO can lower the amount of
oxygen in the bloodstream, aggravate cardiovascular disease, and cause fatigue, headaches, and
dizziness. In contrast to ozone, CO tends to be a localized problem. Concentrations usually
correspond to areas of traffic congestion (called “hot spots”). CO levels at monitoring stations in the
East Bay are well within State and federal standards.
Suspended Particulate Matter (PM10 and PM2.5). PM10 and PM2.5 include solid and liquid inhalable
particles that are less than 10 and 2.5 microns in diameter, respectively. These particles include
smoke, dust, aerosols, and metallic oxides. Major sources include road traffic (i.e., dirt particles),
agriculture, fires, and construction and demolition activities. Health hazards are usually most severe
during wildfires, and during the winter months when firewood is burned. Between 2011 and 2015,
the state standard for PM10 was exceeded once at the monitoring station closest to San Leandro,
while the federal standard for PM2.5 was exceeded on seven days.
Nitrogen Dioxide and Sulfur Dioxide. These pollutants are both within acceptable levels in the Bay
Area. Nitrogen dioxide is a brown-colored gas that is a byproduct of the combustion process. Sulfur
dioxide is a colorless gas with a strong odor. It is generated through the combustion of fuels
containing sulfur, such as oil and coal. Major contributors of nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide
include motor vehicles, power plants, and refineries.
Toxic Air Contaminants. Toxic air contaminants (TACs) are emissions with short-term and/or long-
term health effects which may be harmful even in very small quantities. These emissions, which
include asbestos, benzene, beryllium, diesel particulate matter, mercury, and vinyl chloride, are
regulated through emission limits rather than ambient air quality standards. Several of these
chemicals are known carcinogens. Common sources of TACs include gas stations, factories, medical
incinerators, dry cleaners, wastewater treatment plants, and hospitals. Regulation of toxic air
contaminants is achieved through federal and state controls on individual sources.
                                                                                                                       7-17

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Water Pollution
                                          The creeks and channels that flow through San Leandro are prone to
                                          pollution from a variety of sources. Fifty years ago, the most egregious
                                          sources of pollution in the area were heavy industries, landfills, and
                                          sewage plants, many of which discharged directly into San Francisco Bay
                                          with little or no wastewater treatment. Passage of the 1969 Porter
                                          Cologne Water Quality Act in California and the 1972 federal Clean
                                          Water Act brought about numerous pollution control requirements
                                          aimed at both “point” (open pipe) and “non-point” sources. These
                                          requirements have resulted in significant improvements to water quality
                                          in the Bay and the partial recovery of several fish and wildlife species.
                                          At the federal level, the US Environmental Protection Agency
                                          implements water quality regulations and sets standards for all surface
                                          waters. Waters that do not meet these standards are considered
                                          “impaired” and are subject to additional requirements, including
                                          mandatory plans to achieve compliance. At the State level, the Porter
                                          Cologne Act established the State Water Resources Control Board and a
                                          system of nine Regional Water Quality Control Boards (RWQCB) in
                                          California. Each Board must adopt a water quality control plan and
                                          implement programs to address local water quality issues. The San
                                          Francisco Bay RWQCB updated its Basin Plan in 2015.
7-18

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
In general, non-point source pollutants such as runoff from lawns and
parking lots are harder to control than point sources. Runoff can contain
oil, grease, litter, animal waste, household chemicals, pesticides, and
other substances that are washed into storm drains and local creeks.
This results in high levels of nutrients and depletion of oxygen in these
water bodies, which harms aquatic life and causes other environmental
problems. In San Leandro, all stormwater runoff eventually discharges
to San Francisco Bay. The Bay is considered impaired by a number of
pollutants, such as mercury and PCBs. San Leandro and San Lorenzo
Creeks are considered impaired by diazinon, which was once a
commonly used insecticide.         Illegal dumping and trash are also
problems in San Leandro Creek.
In 1987, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency began requiring
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits for
surface water discharges. These permits identify limits on the allowable
concentrations of pollutants that may be contained in receiving water
bodies, as well as prohibitions on certain types of discharges.
Discharges in San Leandro are covered by a Municipal Regional Permit
(MRP) administered by the San Francisco RWQCB. The most recent
permit, which includes all cities in Alameda County plus the County
itself, went into effect on January 1, 2016. The permit requires the
implementation of a countywide Clean Water Program.
 The Clean Water Program includes several components, including
regulatory compliance and management, watershed planning,
stormwater monitoring, public information and participation, public
works maintenance, development and construction controls, illicit
                                                                                                                  7-19
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          discharge control, and a best management practices program. Program
                                          achievements in San Leandro include storm drain stenciling, distribution
                                          of information at City fairs and festivals, student tours of the Water
                                          Pollution Control Plant, and City support to the Friends of San Leandro
                                          Creek. Numerous improvements to the storm drainage system to
                                          remove trash and pollution also have been completed.
                                          An important part of the Clean Water Program is Provision “C.3” of the
                                          MRP. This empowers the City of San Leandro to require site design and
                                          stormwater treatment measures in new development to avoid future
                                          pollution from urban runoff. All new development or redevelopment
                                          projects that create or replace 10,000 square feet of impervious surfaces
                                          (or 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surfaces for specific uses
                                          such as parking lots) are subject to these requirements. Design measures
                                          to reduce runoff are also required for projects that create or replace
                                          between 2,500 and 10,000 square feet of impervious surface. To avoid
                                          downstream flooding and erosion problems, Provision C.3 also requires
                                          that runoff rates not be increased as a result of development. This is
                                          primarily accomplished through low impact development (LID)
                                          measures such as pervious pavement, rain gardens, green roofs, and
                                          water collection systems on roof gutters.
                                          Another part of the Clean Water Program relates to construction and
                                          earth-moving activities. State law requires projects that disturb more
                                          than one acre of land to prepare stormwater pollution prevention plans.
                                          These plans must list the steps that applicants will take to prevent soil
                                          erosion and the discharge of construction-related pollutants to nearby
                                          waters. Typical steps include silt fencing, fiber rolls, and coverings for
                                          stockpiled soil and debris. The plans must also include monitoring
                                          programs and show how the project will comply with post-construction
                                          runoff requirements.
                                          San Leandro also administers a Storm Water Management and Discharge
                                          Ordinance. The intent of the Ordinance is to eliminate non-storm water
                                          discharge to City storm sewers and reduce pollutants in storm water
                                          discharge to the maximum extent practical. The Ordinance provides a
                                          mandate for preventive measures such as street sweeping and regular
                                          cleaning of storm drain inlets. It also establishes a local inspection and
                                          enforcement program, with fines and penalties for violations. The
                                          Ordinance also prohibits development within 30 feet of the centerline of
                                          any creek or 20 feet from the top of bank without written authorization
                                          from the City.
7-20

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Water quality monitoring is an other key part of the City’s Clean Water
Program. Monitoring is regularly conducted in San Leandro Creek and
in San Francisco Bay near the San Leandro shoreline. The purpose of the
monitoring is to assess water quality conditions and trends, and identify
potential sources of contamination. No specific “hot spots” have been
identified in San Leandro. However, the urban character of the
watershed continues to present a challenge to restoring water quality.
Hazardous Materials
Hazardous materials include substances that may pose a threat to
human health or the environment when they are improperly handled,
stored, transported or disposed. As a City with a large industrial
presence and an extensive rail and freeway network, San Leandro faces
the risk of hazardous materials incidents every day. Even if all handling
and storage regulations are properly followed, hazardous substances
may present a health risk if they are released during an accident or
emergency. Many of the hazardous materials issues in the City are the
result of activities that pre-date current environmental regulations. Thus,
local programs are designed to prevent future problems while correcting
problems that originated in the past.
Contaminated Sites and Hazardous Building Materials
The      State    Department      of   Toxic
Substances Control (DTSC) “Envirostor”
data base indicates 52 locations in San
Leandro that are undergoing some form
of hazardous material remediation. Of
these locations, 14 are sites that are
actively       undergoing      investigation,
cleanup, or maintenance activities. Most
are industrial properties, including
facilities that are no longer operational or
have since been replaced by new uses.
Some of these properties have land use
restrictions as a result of past
contamination. Further clean-up would
be required before uses such as housing
could be permitted on these sites.
                                                                                                                    7-21

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          In addition, 40 sites in the city have been identified as undergoing active
                                          investigation and/or clean-up requirements specifically for water quality
                                          issues.1      Many of the water quality issues are related to leaking
                                          underground storage tanks.
                                          There are also four major groundwater plumes in San Leandro that are
                                          undergoing site characterization and/or remediation. These are known as
                                          the 1964 Williams Street plume, the Caterpillar plume, the Davis-
                                          Washington-Alvarado (DWA) plume, and the Hester Street plume. The
                                          largest groundwater plume is the DWA plume in central San Leandro,
                                          which is approximately two miles long and over one mile wide. In each
                                          of the four plumes, the primary contaminant of concern is
                                          trichloroethene, or TCE. TCE is a solvent that was commonly used for
                                          industrial metal degreasing. Properties within the plume areas may use
                                          shallow groundwater for irrigation and other outdoor uses, but may not
                                          use groundwater for domestic purposes such as drinking, cooking,
                                          showering, or bathing.
                                          The City also has older buildings with asbestos, lead paint, PCBs, and
                                          other materials that are potentially hazardous if disturbed. Lead-based
                                          paint was widely used before it was banned in 1978. It does not pose a
                                          threat if left undisturbed, but deterioration or disruption can result in
                                          exposure, which in turn can cause damage to the brain and nervous
                                          system. Friable asbestos also may be present in older buildings. If
                                          asbestos fibers become airborne during demolition or remodeling, they
                                          can contribute to lung disease and other ailments. Polychlorinated
                                          biphenlys (PCBs) represent another potential threat—these materials
                                          were commonly used in electrical equipment prior to 1979. The potential
                                          presence of these substances may require special procedures when
                                          remodeling or demolishing older buildings.
                                          The level of hazardous materials clean-up required at any given site
                                          depends on the degree of contamination and the type of land use that is
                                          planned. Environmental assessments are routinely required on
                                          development sites with a documented history of hazardous materials use
                                          or hazardous building materials. Clean-up can be a long and
                                          complicated process, involving local, state and federal agencies. The City
                                                   1  There is overlap between the Envirostor list and the water quality
                                          (Geotracker) list. Some of the sites identified in the DTSC data base are also undergoing
                                          water quality remediation.
7-22

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                   E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
is committed to working with property owners to expedite this process
while meeting all applicable requirements and maintaining public safety.
The City is also committed to protecting residents and “sensitive
receptors” such as schools and nursing homes from potential impacts
associated with hazardous materials in the community.
Handling, Transport, and Storage
In California, implementation of many federal and state hazardous
materials regulations has been delegated to local agencies. San Leandro
became a Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA) in 1997 and has
responsibility for carrying out laws relating to hazardous materials
storage, use, treatment, and disposal. The City’s Environmental Services
Division administers Hazardous Materials Business Plan requirements,
the Hazardous Waste Generator Program, the California Accidental
Release Program, above ground and underground storage tank
programs, and permitting for on-site hazardous waste treatment.
State law requires businesses in San Leandro to submit plans for the safe
storage and use of chemicals if those businesses handle or store materials
in excess of certain quantities. It also requires businesses to develop
emergency response plans and procedures, training programs, and
inventories of hazardous materials stored or handled on site. A variety
of other codes establish specific provisions for the design of storage
tanks, containment facilities, and handling practices. Such provisions
significantly reduce the risk of a chemical release and also include
provisions for evacuation in the event of an emergency.
The transport of hazardous materials is also closely regulated, although
the City has less control over such activities due to the interstate nature
of commercial and industrial traffic. Caltrans serves as first responder for
hazardous material spills, while the California Highway Patrol enforces
hazardous waste transportation rules. Common carriers are licensed by
the CHP, with placards required for motor carriers who transport
hazardous materials in excess of specific weight limits. Communication
with state and federal regulatory agencies is critical to reduce the risk of
accidents and ensure that response to transportation-related hazardous
materials incidents is immediate and effective.
                                                                                                                     7-23

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Household Hazardous Waste
                                          When hazardous substances used for domestic purposes are discarded,
                                          they become household hazardous waste. These substances include
                                          paint, lawn care supplies, used motor oil, car batteries, anti-freeze,
                                          household cleaners, pool chemicals, roofing products, and any other
                                          products containing potentially dangerous materials. Californians
                                          improperly discard large quantities of household hazardous waste each
                                          year, presenting a threat to water quality and landfill safety, and creating
                                          a potential source of groundwater contamination. Household hazardous
                                          wastes must be safely disposed at a designated household hazardous
                                          waste facility. The closest facilities to San Leandro are in Oakland and
                                          Hayward.
                                          As with so many of the programs identified in this Element, public
                                          education is critical to the success of the City’s hazardous substance
                                          programs. Residents should continue to be informed about the proper
                                          use, storage, and disposal of hazardous household materals. Businesses
                                          should be kept apprised of state and federal hazardous materials
                                          regulations. Trucks and other carriers should be licensed and trained in
                                          hazardous materials transport. An ongoing effort should be made to
                                          inform residents and businesses alike about what to do in the event of a
                                          hazardous materials emergency.
7-24

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Aviation Hazards
Traffic to and from Oakland International Airport results in a large
number of flights over the city, including many aircraft passing over
residential areas and business districts. San Leandro is also impacted by
flights in and out of Hayward Airport and San Francisco International
Airport. The potential for a crash at any of these airports is an ever-
present concern.
The Alameda County Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) has
designated safety zones at the ends of the runways at Oakland
International Airport to ensure the compatibility of future development
with airport operations. The intent of these zones is to avoid
concentrations of people and/or other high hazard situations in the
vicinity of the runways. The Safety Zone for the runways at Oakland’s
North Field extends into San Leandro, encompassing land below flight
approach and landing paths west of I-880 and north of Williams Street.
Several different zones are designated, reflecting the level of hazard in
each area.
Land in San Leandro falls within Zones 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7. No portion of
San Leandro falls within Zone 1, which is the runway protection zone
(where the greatest restrictions apply). Zone 2 is the second most
restrictive zone, and occupies a small area north of Davis Street and
generally west of the UP railroad tracks. The ALUC’s Land Use Plan
suggests that this area be used for open space, warehousing, non-
intensive industry, storage, and other uses with employment densities
below 60 persons per acre.
                                                                                                                  7-25

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Zone 3 occupies two small areas, one north of Adams Avenue and
                                          another at the Water Pollution Control Plant. This zone allows
                                          employment densities up to 100 persons per acre, and strictly limits uses
                                          such as day care, medical facilities, and hotels. Zone 4 covers a larger
                                          area in the city and is more permissive, allowing certain types of retail
                                          uses and distribution centers. Zones 6 and 7 are the largest of the zones
                                          geographically, and are relatively unrestricted, with uses such as
                                          housing, office, and restaurants permitted. However, certain precautions
                                          are still recommended in these areas.
                                          The ALUC has also identified a Height Referral Zone around the airport,
                                          in accordance with FAA regulations. Height restrictions do not
                                          significantly affect development in San Leandro but could apply in the
                                          event that tall buildings, communication towers, or similar structures are
                                          proposed in the portion of the city located west of I-880 and north of
                                          Marina Boulevard.
                                          Alameda County firefighters are trained to respond to aviation accidents,
                                          both on land and at sea. The City of Oakland also has a special fire-
                                          fighting unit at Oakland International Airport, equipped with apparatus
                                          for aviation incidents. In the event of an aviation accident in San
                                          Leandro, the County Fire Department would respond first, with back-up
                                          provided by the City of Oakland as needed. The US Coast Guard has
                                          designated the San Leandro Marina as the emergency response point in
                                          the event of an aircraft accident on the water. The City, County, and Port
                                          of Oakland will revisit this designation in the future, given the
                                          navigation constraints on the channel and approved plans for the San
                                          Leandro shoreline.
                                          D.        EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
                                          San Leandro’s location on the Hayward Fault makes it imperative to be
                                          ready when disaster strikes. The City’s emergency preparedness
                                          programs are operated collaboratively by the San Leandro Police
                                          Department, the Alameda County Fire Department, and other City
                                          Departments. The primary aspects of preparedness are mitigation (i.e.,
                                          reducing exposure to hazards), training and education, disaster
                                          response, evacuation, and post-disaster recovery.
7-26

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Most mitigation efforts are aimed at the seismic retrofitting of buildings,
transportation facilities, and infrastructure. The City has adopted a Local
Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) which identifies ongoing programs to
mitigate hazards as well as new programs to be implemented in the
coming years. The City’s initial LHMP was adopted in 2005. In 2010,
San Leandro adopted a multi-jurisdictional LHMP prepared by ABAG
with regionally applicable recommendations and a local section tailored
to San Leandro. In 2015-16, the City prepared an LHMP Update,
coordinating this process with the General Plan Update to ensure
internally consistent strategies.
Although earthquakes are the primary threat addressed by the LHMP,
the Plan also addresses tsunamis, floods, fire, drought, extreme heat, and
dam and levee failure. The focus of the LHMP is on reducing risks before
disaster strikes by considering hazards in land use and building
decisions, and by proactively mitigating hazards where they already
exist. This can reduce the cost, loss of life and property, and
environmental damage when disasters strike.
Training and education are crucial components of disaster planning.
Currently, the Alameda County Fire Department provides Community
Emergency Response Team (CERT) and Personal Emergency
Preparedness (PEP) training. CERT is designed to improve disaster
preparedness at the neighborhood level, while PEP is aimed at
individual households. The City has also developed preparedness tips
for special needs groups such as children and the elderly. As noted
earlier in this chapter, San Leandro also offers training and assistance to
residents seeking to retrofit their homes and take steps to reduce
earthquake-related hazards.
                                                                                                                    7-27

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Another aspect of training involves drills and simulation exercises. Full-
                                          scale disaster simulation exercises are conducted regularly with City
                                          staff and representatives from other agencies. Such exercises are essential
                                          to maintain effective performance and identify where changes in
                                          emergency plans may be needed. All City employees receive basic
                                          emergency preparedness training, with advanced training provided to
                                          personnel with designated positions in the City’s Incident Command
                                          System.
                                          The City’s emergency response programs are based on the Standard
                                          Emergency Management System (SEMS). This is a state-mandated
                                          organizational structure that allows agencies throughout California to
                                          communicate using common terms and operating procedures. In the
                                          event of a major emergency, the Senior Community Center on East 14th
                                          Street would be activated as an Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and
                                          City staff would be deployed to fulfill various management, operations,
                                          planning, logistics, and administrative functions.
                                          Other components of emergency response include radio broadcasts and
                                          warning sirens. The City’s emergency radio band (1610 AM) provides a
                                          quick and effective way to convey information to the public. Emergency
                                          sirens are in place, although they were inactive at the time of General
                                          Plan adoption. The City is also working to ensure that its emergency
                                          preparedness programs reflect language diversity and cultural practices.
7-28

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                   E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Evacuation is another component of disaster preparedness.. While the
freeways are the most logical routes out of town, they could potentially
be impassable following a major earthquake. Arterial streets, particularly
Doolittle, East 14th, San Leandro Boulevard, Washington, Halcyon/
Fairmont, Bancroft/Hesperian, and MacArthur/Foothill would function
as the major routes out of the City if evacuation became necessary. A
formal evacuation plan should be prepared as part of the City’s ongoing
emergency preparedness program.
Post-disaster response includes the provision of shelter, food, medical
assistance, and financial aid, and the rebuilding process. Mobile medical
and communication equipment is also needed to improve readiness.
Future revisions to the Emergency Management Plan should include
programs to address immediate needs after a disaster strikes, and the
longer-term needs associated with recovery and reconstruction.
E.       NOISE
San Leandro’s location in the heart of a major metropolitan area makes it
susceptible to noise conflicts. Each day, hundreds of thousands of cars
pass through the City on freeways and major thoroughfares. Large and
small planes pass over the City throughout the day and night, many
flying at low altitudes to and from Oakland International Airport.
Freight and passenger trains, BART trains, buses, and trucks produce
noise and vibration impacts in many San Leandro neighborhoods. Even
in relatively quiet parts of the City, domestic noise sources such as leaf
blowers, home and car stereos, security alarms, and barking dogs can be
a source of annoyance.
In San Leandro, as in all communities, maintaining neighborhood “peace
and quiet” is a basic part of protecting the quality of life. San Leandro
residents and businesses, and the City itself, have invested a great deal of
time and energy to deal with noise proactively by mitigating existing
conflicts and protecting the City from future conflicts.         Cities are
required to address noise issues in their general plans, primarily by
promoting development patterns that recognize the sources of noise and
the locations of noise-sensitive uses. This General Plan achieves that
objective while also expressing the City’s ongoing commitment to reduce
noise conflicts in the community.
                                                                                                                     7-29

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          The following sections of this Element describe the noise environment in
                                          San Leandro, the major issues to be resolved, and the strategies for
                                          mitigating noise problems. Policies and actions under Goals EH-7, EH-8,
                                          and EH-9 set forth a coordinated program to address stationary,
                                          transportation, and aircraft noise issues in the future.
                                          Existing and Projected Noise Environment
                                          The text box on page 7-30 provides an overview of how noise is
                                          measured. Chart 7-1 indicates the noise levels associated with typical
                                          sounds in an urban environment.
                                          Noise levels can be expressed graphically through the use of contour
                                          diagrams. Figure 7-5 shows noise contours in San Leandro in 2015 based
                                          on traffic volumes and noise monitoring conducted as part of the
                                          General Plan update. Each contour band shown on the map corresponds
                                          to the approximate noise level generated at that location shown . The
                                          contours represent approximations only—the actual noise level at any
                                          given location depends on a number of factors, such as topography,
                                          vegetation and building cover.
7-30

                                                                                 S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                       E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                              In a Nutshell...
                                      How Noise is Measured
Human perception of noise is usually defined in decibels (dB). Decibels are measured on a
logarithmic scale, which means that each increase of 10 dB is equivalent to a doubling in loudness.
The measurements are usually taken on an “A-weighted” scale which filters out very low and very
high frequencies. Everyday sounds range from 20 dB, which is very quiet, to over 100 dB, which is
very noisy. Above 70 dB, noise can become irritating and disruptive.
Noise measurements are usually expressed with some indication of the duration of the measurement
period. For longer periods, the measurement reflects the average noise level over the period.
Adjustments are usually made to reflect the greater sensitivity of people to noise at night. The term
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is used to describe the average noise level during a 24-
hour period, with a penalty of 5 dB added to sound levels between 7 and 10 PM, and a penalty of 10
DB added to sound levels between 10 PM and 7 AM. The term Day-Night Average Level (Ldn) is
similar, but only includes the 10 dB penalty for 10 PM – 7 AM noise. Shorter measurement durations,
typically one hour, are described in Energy Equivalent Levels (Leq), indicating the total energy
contained by sound over a given sample period.
Use of the longer measurement periods accounts for the variations in the frequency of sound levels
that may occur during the day. For instance, a landing jet airplane may produce a sustained noise
level of 75 dB as it passes over a particular site in San Leandro. The CNEL reading would be much
lower, since the noise is not continuous throughout the day and night.
The US Environmental Protection Agency has suggested an exterior noise goal of 55 dB (Ldn) in
residential areas. The US Department of Housing and Urban Development’s minimum standard is 65
dB (Ldn). Most local governments use 60 dB (Ldn) as the limit for exterior noise exposure in new
residential areas. As a guideline, interior noise levels should be no louder than 45 dB (Ldn). Since the
noise reduction provided by a typical house is about 20-25 dB with the windows closed, special
insulation measures are usually required where exterior noise exceeds 60 dB.
                                                                                                                         7-31

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          CHART7-1: TYPICAL SOUND LEVELS IN AN URBAN ENVIRONMENT
                                          Perceived Sound                Sound Level Examples
                                          Level                               (dB)
                                                                               160   Fireworks at 3 feet
                                             Painfully Loud                    150   Jet takeoff
                                                                               140   Threshold of pain
                                                                               130   Power drill
                                                                               120   Thunder
                                           Uncomfortably Loud
                                                                               110   Auto horn at 3 feet, Rock
                                                                                     band
                                                                               100   Snowmobile, Pile driver
                                                                               90    Diesel truck, lawn mower at 3
                                                Very Loud                            feet
                                                                               80    Garbage disposal, Siren at
                                                                                     100’
                                                                               70    Vacuum cleaner, leaf blower
                                                                                     at 50’
                                            Moderately Loud
                                                                               60    Ordinary conversation
                                                                               50    Average home, light traffic
                                                                               40    Library
                                                   Quiet
                                                                               30    Quiet conversation
                                                                               20    Soft whisper
                                                Very Quiet
                                                                               10    Rustling leaves
                                             Barely Audible                     0    Threshold of hearing
                                          Source: California Air Resources Board
7-32

S A N   L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
        E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                         Figure 7-5
                                      Noise Contours-2015
                                                            7-33
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Figure 7-5 illustrates that many parts of San Leandro are located in areas
                                          where ambient noise levels exceed 60 dB Ldn. A substantial number of
                                          homes are within the 65 dB Ldn contour, indicative of a relatively noisy
                                          exterior environment. The 60 and 65 dB contours form bands parallel to
                                          the city’s freeways, railroads, and major arterials. Noise monitoring
                                          conducted as part of the General Plan indicated noise levels of 65-67 dB
                                          CNEL at locations near the freeway and BART tracks. Sound walls have
                                          been constructed in many places to reduce noise levels.
                                          Figure 7-6 illustrates projected noise contours in 2035. Although traffic
                                          increases on San Leandro streets are expected, little change to the
                                          ambient noise environment is expected. Noise increases of less than 3 dB
                                          Ldn over a long period of time are generally not perceptible. There are
                                          only a few locations in the city where increases of this magnitude are
                                          expected in the next 20 years, principally where existing noise levels are
                                          relatively low.
                                          Noise Compatibility
                                          Given the potential for adverse psychological and physiological impacts,
                                          some land uses are considered to be more sensitive to noise than others.
                                          Residential areas, schools, child care centers, hospitals, churches,
                                          libraries, and nursing homes are typically regarded as noise-sensitive.
                                          Certain types of park and recreational areas also may be noise-sensitive.
                                          It is important that future land use decisions protect such uses and
                                          further, that new noise-sensitive uses are located and designed in a way
                                          that protects occupants from harmful noise impacts.
                                          Chart 7-2 provides noise compatibility guidelines for land uses based on
                                          State of California guidelines. The guidelines identify those areas where
                                          various uses are acceptable, conditionally acceptable, normally
                                          unacceptable, or clearly unacceptable based on ambient noise levels. The
                                          guidelines recognize that mitigation may make certain uses acceptable,
                                          even where exterior noise levels are relatively high. This is important in
                                          San Leandro, given the number of future housing sites located near
                                          BART, an area with relatively high ambient noise levels.
7-34

S A N   L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
        E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                        Figure 7-6
                                     Noise Contours-2035
                                                           7-35
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                   CHART 7-2: SAN LEANDRO LAND USE COMPATIBILITY GUIDELINES
                                                                                                          CNEL (dBA)
                Land Uses                                                                 55    60        65     70       75      80
                Residential – Low Density Single-Family, Duplex, Mobile
                Homes
                Residential – Multiple Family
                Transient Lodging, Motels, Hotels
                Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes
                Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters
                Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports
                Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks
                Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation, Cemeteries
                Office Buildings, Businesses, Commercial and Professional
                 Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agricultural
                              Normally Acceptable:                                  Normally Unacceptable:
                              Specified land use is satisfactory based              New construction or development should generally be
                              upon the assumption that any buildings                discouraged. If new construction does proceed, a
                              involved are of normal conventional                   detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements
                              construction, without any special noise               must be made and needed noise insulation features
                              insulation requirements.                              included in the design.
                              Conditionally Acceptable:                             Clearly Unacceptable:
                              New construction or development should                New construction or development generally should not
                              be undertaken only after a detailed                   be undertaken.
                              analysis of the noise reduction
                              requirements is made and the needed
                              noise insulation features included in the
                              design. Conventional construction, but
                              with closed windows and fresh air supply
                              systems or air conditioning will normally
                              suffice.
                  Source: Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, General Plan Guidelines, November 2003.
7-36

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Noise mitigation is achieved by reducing the source of the noise,
modifying the path between the noise source and receiver, or adjusting
the noise receiver. These approaches are described below:
   Reducing noise at the source usually involves muffling the sound,
    replacing noisy equipment, or regulating the hours during which the
    source is in operation. For example, federal regulations require
    mufflers on cars, hush kits on jet airplanes, and curfews at some
    airports.
   Modifying the path between source and receiver can be
    accomplished with barriers such as sound walls, berms, or
    vegetation.
   Adjusting the noise receiver is typically done through building
    orientation, design, and construction. Double-paned windows,
    carpeting, acoustical ceiling tiles, and insulation are all examples of
    ways to reduce noise interior levels at the receiving end.
The California Building Code includes noise insulation standards to limit
the extent of noise transmitted into habitable spaces. These standards
indicate the extent to which walls, doors, floors, and ceilings must block
or absorb sound between exterior and interior spaces. An interior
standard of 45 dBA CNEL is required for any habitable room. The City
requires an acoustical analysis to demonstrate how dwelling units have
been designed to meet this standard on sites where the ambient exterior
noise level exceeds 60 dBA CNEL.
Stationary and Construction Noise
Stationary noise sources include industrial and commercial operations,
and domestic activities. Construction noise, while temporary, can be a
significant contributor to ambient noise levels. Cities can exercise more
control over these sources than mobile sources such as trains and
aircraft. This control is typically exercised through zoning and through
the enforcement of local ordinances regulating noise and business
activities.
Many uses in San Leandro’s industrial areas generate noise through their
regular operations. Generators, fans, chillers, boilers, compressors,
pumps, mechanical equipment, and air conditioning systems may run 24
hours a day in some locations. Other sources, such as horns, buzzers,
and merchandise off-loading, may be more intermittent. Industrial noise
sources are of greatest concern when they are close to sensitive receptors
                                                                                                                    7-37

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                                                      such as housing. This is the case in some West
                                                                      San Leandro neighborhoods and on the
                                                                      perimeter of the Washington Avenue
                                                                      industrial area. Monitors indicate that noise
                                                                      levels exceed 60 dB Ldn in many of the city’s
                                                                      industrial areas and may exceed 70 dB Ldn
                                                                      where other significant noise sources (such as
                                                                      railroad tracks or freeways) are also
                                                                      present.Levels in the Built Environment
                                                                      In commercial areas, noise from restaurants,
                                                                      bars, car washes, and other businesses may
                                                                      create conflicts with adjacent residential uses.
                                                                      Commercial uses can generate noise from
                                          heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems, loading docks, trash
                                          compactors, and mechanical equipment. Related vehicle and truck
                                          traffic can also be a source, and certain activities such as outdoor dining
                                          or live music can be objectionable to neighbors.
                                          The City presently uses development review and zoning—specifically,
                                          the conditional use permit process—to limit the hours of operation for
                                          noise-producing activities and to identify noise muffling and buffering
                                          requirements. Shielding equipment may be required for industrial
                                          operations and measurable noise limits may be set for air conditioners,
                                          compressors, and other exterior noise sources. Similarly, the City
                                          requires noise mitigation by residential developers when homes are
                                          placed near freeways, industrial uses, and other noise sources. This may
                                          include sound walls, double-paned windows, and other measures that
                                          protect future residents while helping nearby industrial and commercial
                                          uses remain viable.
                                          Construction and demolition noise may occur anywhere in the city.
                                          Although it is temporary and intermittent, such noise can be particularly
                                          intrusive because of its very high output and repetitive nature. At a
                                          distance of 50 feet, a pile driver and jackhammer may generate noise
                                          levels exceeding 100 dBA and 88 dBA respectively (see Chart 7-1).
                                          Construction scheduling requirements are typically established to ensure
                                          that such noise is limited in duration and occurs only during daytime
                                          hours. Contractors may also be required to use equipment with
                                          mufflers, silencers, and low noise emission features to avoid potential
                                          problems.
7-38

                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Most domestic noise sources are associated with home appliances, yard
maintenance and home construction equipment, air conditioners, power
tools, hot tubs, and other household activities. Loud music, yelling, and
barking dogs are also the source of frequent complaints. The City treats
such complaints as a police matter and relies on the Municipal Code to
address them.
Chapter 4-1 of the San Leandro Municipal Code restricts the hours of
operation of sound amplifying equipment and states that noise is
considered a nuisance if it disturbs a person with “normal sensitivity.”
The Municipal Code includes specific provisions related to loud music in
parks, operation of loud equipment, and construction activities. It does
not specify allowable decibel levels at the source or at residential
property lines. The Code identifies the criteria to identify violations,
including sound levels, time, duration, recurrent vs intermittent,
proximity to residential uses, population density, and the nature of the
noise itself.
Transportation Noise
The heavy volume of traffic in and around San Leandro results in high
noise levels in many parts of the City. The Nimitz Freeway (I-880) was
built before effective noise standards were in place and has residential
uses along 60 percent of its San Leandro frontage. Portions of the
roadway are elevated and the freeway is a major interstate truck route.
Sound walls have been constructed along all segments abutted by
residential uses within San Leandro.
                                                                                                                  7-39

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          The MacArthur Freeway (I-580) has historically been less of a problem,
                                          in part due to its design, but also because of the low volume of truck
                                          traffic and relatively low night-time volumes. The abutting uses are
                                          almost entirely residential and are very sensitive to noise impacts due to
                                          the varying topography. Sound walls have been constructed along
                                          several segments of I-580.
                                          Arterial roads such as Davis Street, Washington Avenue, Marina
                                          Boulevard, and East 14th Street all carry high traffic volumes. Ambient
                                          noise levels along these streets usually exceeds 60 dB CNEL, requiring
                                          noise mitigation measures in new construction.
                                          The three Union Pacific Railroad corridors that cross San Leandro also
                                          affect adjacent uses, although the Oakland Subdivision (the line furthest
                                          east) is inactive. Data from the federal Railroad Administration indicates
                                          that more than 50 trains a day pass through the city. Passing trains are
                                          among the loudest noise sources in the city, exceeding 95 dBA at 100 feet.
                                          Train horns may be even louder, approaching 110 dBA. Brakes, coupling
                                          impacts, and crossing guard warnings are also common sources of noise
                                          along the railroads.
                                          In some parts of central San Leandro, the impacts are amplified because
                                          the rail lines run parallel to and relatively close to the elevated BART
                                          tracks. BART carries 203 northbound trains and 203 southbound trains
                                          through the city each weekday. The cumulative effect of these sources
                                          makes it imperative that noise mitigation measures be incorporated for
                                          any development in that corridor.
                                          The most common approach to reducing transportation noise in San
                                          Leandro in the past has been to construct sound walls. Although such
                                          walls are usually welcomed by immediately adjoining property owners,
                                          they are almost always controversial. The aesthetic impacts of a sound
                                          wall can be significant and there are often concerns about the
                                          displacement of sound to other locations.
                                          A balanced approach to mitigating transportation noise is recommended
                                          in this General Plan, with sound walls used in some locations and other
                                          measures used where feasible. These measures might include the use of
                                          rubberized asphalt or other changes to streets and highway pavement,
                                          the use of quieter BART trains and AC Transit buses, and restrictions on
                                          train horns and the scheduling of train switching operations. Improved
                                          technology for the muffling of sound from automobiles, trucks, and
                                          motorcycles (including the increased use of electric cars) may result in
7-40
                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
reduced noise levels in the future. It is also important to ensure that
aesthetic and maintenance considerations are fully considered when
sound walls are built. Dense plantings of shrubs and trees, for example,
can soften the visual effects of a wall while also absorbing additional
sound waves.
Additional noise problems can be avoided by ensuring that new
development along freeways, arterials, and railroads is designed to
minimize exposure to transportation noise. For example, the design of
housing adjacent to the BART line should place the more noise-sensitive
rooms such as bedrooms away from the tracks, while less sensitive
rooms such as garages, closets, and utility areas may be closer to the
tracks. The use of solid walls and reduced window openings facing the
noise source also can cut down noise levels. Courtyards may be
incorporated to create quieter spaces in buildings with otherwise noisy
exterior settings. Balconies should be avoided where they would
overhang noisy streets or face train tracks.
Airport Noise
Airport noise has been a persistent issue in San Leandro since the 1950s
and became a greater concern during Oakland International Airport’s
growth during the 1980s and 90s. Between 1990 and 2000, passenger
volumes increased from 5.5 million to 10.6 million. In 2015, the airport
handled 11.2 million passengers, which is down from the 2007 peak of
14.2 million passengers. The airport also handles a considerable amount
of air cargo and general aviation traffic. Much of this traffic uses
runways that are located less than a mile from the San Leandro city
limits. The City is also affected by noise from planes landing and taking
off at Hayward Executive Airport, which is four miles to the south, and
to a lesser extent at San Francisco International, which is 12 miles to the
west.
Oakland International Airport is subdivided into North and South
airfields. The North Field contains three runways (10L/28R, 10R/28L, and
15/33), as well as general aviation, maintenance, and some cargo
facilities. The South Field includes the commercial passenger runways
(12/30) and most cargo facilities. The flight path impacting San Leandro
most directly is associated with landing aircraft on Runway 28R at the
North Field. Most descending aircraft pass over Marina Square, the
Timothy Drive/Davis West area, and the Adams Street industrial area
before touching down. Helicopters also use this corridor.
                                                                                                                    7-41

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          The City is also impacted by commercial flights using Runway 12/30.
                                          Although planes taking off and landing on this runway do not pass
                                          directly over San Leandro, the area between the runway and the San
                                          Leandro shoreline is open water, providing few opportunities for sound
                                          to be absorbed. Consequently, the San Leandro Shoreline and adjacent
                                          waterfront neighborhoods may experience high noise levels. Residential
                                          areas also may be impacted by high levels of airport noise when flight
                                          patterns are shifted due to inclement weather.
                                          Although all of San Leandro’s residential areas fall outside of the “Noise
                                          Impact Boundary” defined by the Federal Aviation Administration
                                          (FAA) and the Port of Oakland, many San Leandro residents are still
                                          concerned with high noise levels. These concerns include late night
                                          arrivals and departures, low-flying aircraft, engine run-ups, and the
                                          frequency of overflights. While the 24-hour ambient noise levels are
                                          within levels deemed acceptable by the FAA, some areas experience
                                          short-duration incidents where noise levels exceed 70 dBA.
                                          The Port of Oakland has been implementing a Noise Compatibility
                                          Program (NCP) for Oakland Airport since the 1970s. The current NCP
                                          includes a variety of components for both the North and South Fields to
                                          reduce off-site impacts. For instance, certain types of aircraft are
                                          prohibited from departing or arriving on the North Field, and aircraft
                                          must follow particular flight tracks when landing and taking off.
                                          Educational training and program information is used to advise pilots of
                                          the preferred procedures. A permanent noise monitoring system also has
                                          been installed.
7-42

                                                                        S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                              E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
The last 20 years have seen significant improvements to the airport-
related noise environment in San Leandro. In 1994, there were 28
residences within Oakland International Airport’s 65 dB CNEL contour
and 554 residences within the Airport’s 60 dB CNEL contour. Today,
there are no homes in airport-related noise contours exceeding 60 dB,
largely as a result of quieter aircraft. Noise mitigation programs are
specified in a Settlement Agreement reached between the City of San
Leandro and the Port of Oakland in November 2000 and amended
through 2017. The Agreement prohibits the Airport from allowing large
or heavy commercial passenger aircraft on the North Field, except
during emergencies and periods when the main runway is closed for
maintenance or repair. Most of the terms of the Settlement Agreement
have already been met, including the offer to insulate additional homes
to reduce interior noise levels. A Community Noise Management Forum
has been created to regularly address community noise concerns; San
Leandro is a regular participant in this process.
The City will continue to maintain a dialogue
with the Port of Oakland on further noise
abatement      procedures,     particularly   in
residential areas impacted by overflights and
in areas between the 55 and 65 dB CNEL
contours. The City will continue to be an
active participant in discussions about the
airport’s future and will ensure that future
development decisions consider the potential
for exposure to airport noise. Through its
participation in the Noise Management
Forum, San Leandro will work to reduce noise
impacts associated with implementation of
new flight pattern protocols at Bay Area
airports. In 2016, several East Bay cities were
experiencing impacts from the Metroplex air
traffic control system, which has resulted in
more concentrated air traffic patterns. San
Leandro will work with Congressional
representatives and others to bring FAA
oversight and regulations up to date to
address and to resolve increased noise impacts
on the community.
                                                                                                                7-43

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          F.       GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
                                          M ITIGATION OF N ATURAL H AZARDS
                                          GOAL EH-1 Reduce the potential for injury, property damage, and
                                                        loss of life resulting from earthquakes, landslides,
                                                        floods, and other natural disasters.
                                          Policy EH-1.  Risk Management. Minimize risks from geologic,
                                                        seismic, flood, and climate change-related hazards by
                                                        ensuring the appropriate location, site planning, and
                                                        design of new development. The City’s development
                                                        review process, and its engineering and building
                                                        standards, should ensure that new construction is
                                                        designed to minimize the potential for damage.
                                                        Action EH-1.1.A: Soils and Geologic Reports
                                                        Require soils and/or geologic reports for development in areas
                                                        where potentially serious geologic risks exist. These reports
                                                        should address the degree of hazard, design parameters for the
                                                        project based on the hazard, and appropriate mitigation
                                                        measures.
                                          Policy EH-1.2 Earthquake Retrofits.            Strongly encourage the
                                                        retrofitting of existing structures to withstand
                                                        earthquake ground shaking, and require retrofitting
                                                        when such structures are substantially rehabilitated or
                                                        remodeled.
                                                        Action EH-1.2.A: Residential Retrofit Program
                                                        Undertake programs to assist homeowners with earthquake
                                                        retrofitting. As funding allows, such programs could include
                                                        home inspections, do-it-yourself classes, tool lending libraries,
                                                        the Brace and Bolt Program, and other measures that reduce
                                                        the risk of damage and injury in an earthquake.
                                                        Action EH-1.2.B: Change of Occupancy Upgrades
                                                        Continue requirements that structures at high risk of
                                                        earthquake damage be retrofitted when there is a change of
                                                        occupancy or a major building remodel.
7-44

                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                      E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
               Action EH-1.2.C: Soft-Story Buildings
               Develop an implementation strategy to reduce the hazards
               posed by soft-story buildings (multi-story structures with
               little or no first floor bracing).
               See the Housing Element Action 56.02-B for additional
               guidance on soft-story buildings.
Policy EH-1.3  Off-Site Impacts of Hillside Development. Ensure that
               development within landslide-prone or geologically
               hazardous areas does not contribute to higher hazard
               levels on adjacent or nearby properties. Require
               drainage and erosion control provisions in such areas to
               avoid slope failure and to mitigate potential hazards to
               other properties.
Policy EH-1.4: Code Revisions. Revise and update construction codes
               and regulations to incorporate the latest available
               information and technology related to earthquake and
               flood hazards.
Policy EH-1.5  Public Awareness. Promote greater public awareness of
               earthquake hazards, along with incentives and
               assistance to help property owners make their homes
               and businesses more earthquake-safe.
               Action EH-1.5.A: Educational Materials
               Provide links from the City's website to hazard maps,
               including maps showing fault line locations, ground shaking
               levels for earthquakes of different magnitudes, and liquefaction
               hazards.
Policy EH-1.6  Construction in the Flood Plain. Implement federal
               requirements relating to new construction in flood plain
               areas to ensure that future flood risks to life and
               property are minimized.
               Action EH-1.6.A: FIRM Amendments
               Continue to work with FEMA to amend and update Federal
               Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) so that they correctly depict
               flood hazards in the City.
                                                                                                                        7-45
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Policy EH-1.7 Reducing Flood Hazards. Work collaboratively with
                                                        County, State, and federal agencies to develop short-
                                                        and long-term programs that reduce flood hazards in
                                                        the City. At the local level, the City will regularly
                                                        maintain its storm drainage system and ensure that
                                                        those portions of San Leandro Creek under its
                                                        jurisdiction remain clear of obstructions.
                                                        Action EH-1.7.A: Coordination With ACFCWCD
                                                        Improve coordination with the Alameda County Flood Control
                                                        and Water Conservation District to ensure that flood channels
                                                        are regularly cleaned and maintained. This should include
                                                        coordination of tree removal projects on ACFCWD land.
                                                        Action EH-1.7.B: Increase Flood Channel Capacity
                                                        Work with Alameda County, State and federal agencies, and
                                                        elected officials to improve flood control channel Line A Zone
                                                        2 (the Estudillo Canal) to reduce flood hazards, including
                                                        reconstruction of golf course bridges to improve channel
                                                        capacity. As appropriate and necessary, pursue measures to
                                                        increase the capacity of other flood control facilities to reduce
                                                        the number of adjacent San Leandro properties subject to
                                                        flooding.
                                          Policy EH-1.8 Sea Level Rise. Consider the effects of projected sea
                                                        level rise in the design and planning of all development,
                                                        recreational improvements, and infrastructure along the
                                                        San Leandro shoreline.
                                                        Action EH-1.8.A: Adaptation Plans
                                                        Develop long-term adaptation plans which minimize the
                                                        potential for coastal flooding on public and private properties
                                                        near the San Leandro shoreline. Periodically evaluate the risk
                                                        to homes, businesses, parks, and other features and take steps
                                                        to protect or fortify these areas to reduce damage potential.
7-46
                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                    E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
W ILDFIRE H AZARDS
GOAL EH-2 Minimize urban wildfire hazards, both within the city
              and throughout the East Bay Hills.
Policy EH-2.1 Fire Codes. Adopt and enforce building and fire
              prevention codes that require property owners to reduce
              wildfire hazards on their properties.
              Action EH-2.1.A: Vegetation Management
              Work with Code Enforcement staff to ensure effective
              vegetation management by property owners in designated
              “Local Responsibility Area (LRA) Very High Fire Hazard
              Severity” zones.
              Action EH-2.1.B: Refinement of Fire Hazard Severity Maps
              Work with CalFire to improve the accuracy of the maps
              indicating Very High Fire Severity Areas in San Leandro.
Policy EH-2.2  Fire Prevention By Design. Ensure that the planning
              and design of development in very high fire hazard
              areas minimizes the risks of wildfire and includes
              adequate provisions for vegetation management,
              emergency access, and firefighting.
              Action EH-2.2.A: Design Principles
              Site and configure new development to reduce the potential for
              wildfire in areas deemed to have Very High Fire Hazard
              severity ratings. Principles to be followed in such areas
              include:
              (a) Clustering development to reduce the need for multiple
              response teams in the event of a wildfire;
              (b) Requiring defensible space around structures;
              (c) Requiring fire-resistant materials as appropriate;
              (d) Requiring residential fire sprinkler systems and other fire
              suppression, detection, and alarm equipment where
              appropriate;
              (e) Engaging the Fire Department and EBMUD in the
              review of development to ensure that adequate provisions are
              made for fire flow and emergency vehicle access
                                                                                                                      7-47

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                                        In addition, as recommended by the Community Services and
                                                        Facilities Element of the General Plan, the City will maintain
                                                        service standards, and continue to plan for the facilities,
                                                        equipment, personnel, and communication systems needed to
                                                        address future fire hazards.
                                          Policy EH-2.3 Mutual Aid.           Work collaboratively with other
                                                        jurisdictions and agencies to reduce wildfire hazards in
                                                        San Leandro, with an emphasis on effective vegetation
                                                        management and mutual aid agreements.
                                                        Action EH-2.3.A: Task Force Participation
                                                        Continue to participate in multi-jurisdictional task forces and
                                                        programs that address wildfire hazards in the East Bay Hills,
                                                        including measures to reduce hazards in designated Very
                                                        High Fire Hazard Severity Zones, consistent with SB 1241.
                                          A IR Q UALITY
                                          GOAL EH-3 Promote and participate in efforts to improve the
                                                        region’s air quality.
                                          Policy EH-3.1 Clean Air Plan Implementation. Cooperate with the
                                                        appropriate regional, state, and federal agencies to
                                                        implement the regional Clean Air Plan and enforce air
                                                        quality standards.
                                          Policy EH-3.2 Transportation Control Measures. Promote strategies
                                                        that help improve air quality and reduce greenhouse gas
                                                        emissions by reducing the necessity of driving. These
                                                        strategies include more reliable public transportation,
                                                        carpooling and vanpooling programs, employer
                                                        transportation demand management (TDM) programs,
                                                        better provisions for bicyclists and pedestrians, and
                                                        encouraging mixed use and higher density development
                                                        around transit stations.
7-48

                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                      E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Policy EH-3.3 Land Use Compatibility. Discourage new uses with
              potential adverse air quality impacts, including the
              emission of toxic air contaminants and fine particulates,
              near residential neighborhoods, schools, hospitals,
              nursing homes, and other locations where public health
              could potentially be affected.
Policy EH-3.4 Design, Construction, and Operation. Require new
              development to be designed and constructed in a way
              that reduces the potential for future air quality
              problems, such as odors and the emission of any and all
              air pollutants. This should be done by:
              (a) Requiring construction and grading practices that
              minimize airborne dust and particulate matter;
              (b) Ensuring that best available control technology is
              used for operations that could generate air pollutants;
              (c) Encouraging energy conservation and low-polluting
              energy sources;
              (d) Promoting landscaping and tree planting to absorb
              carbon monoxide and other pollutants; and
              (e) Implementing the complementary strategies to
              reduce greenhouse gases identified in the Climate
              Action Plan.
              Action EH-3.4.A: Development Review
              Work with the BAAQMD in the review and monitoring of
              businesses and activities with the potential for air quality
              impacts.
              Action EH-3.4.B: Health Risk Assessments
              Implement Bay Area Air Quality Management District
              Guidelines and State Office of Environmental Health Hazard
              Assessment policies and procedures requiring health risk
              assessments for residential development and other sensitive
              land use projects within 1,000 feet of major sources of toxic air
              contaminants, including freeways and roadways with over
              10,000 vehicles per day. As appropriate, identify mitigation
              measures (such as air filtration systems) to reduce the
              potential exposure to particulate matter, carbon monoxide,
              diesel fumes, and other potential health hazards. Measures
              identified in the HRA shall be included in the environmental
              document and/or incorporated into the site development plan
              as a component of the proposed project/
                                                                                                                        7-49
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          See the Hazardous Materials Goal for additional relevant policies.
                                          Policy EH-3.5   Odors. Ensure prompt response to complaints about
                                                          odor problems and other potential air quality nuisances
                                                          and hazards reported by residents and businesses.
                                                          Action EH-3.5.A: Odor Reporting and Inspection Program
                                                          Establish links from the City's website to the BAAQMD
                                                          website, in order to direct residents to BAAQMD’s odor
                                                          reporting and inspection program, data on odor complaints in
                                                          the city, and additional information on air quality programs.
                                          Policy EH-3.6:  "Spare the Air" Education. Promote public education
                                                          on air quality hazards and the steps that residents can
                                                          take to help maintain clean air and reduce greenhouse
                                                          gas emissions. Continue to participate in the BAAQMD
                                                          “Spare the Air” program and other programs that
                                                          increase public awareness of air quality issues.
                                          Policy EH-3.7   Aircraft Emissions. Advocate for greater local and
                                                          regional control over air pollution caused by aircraft,
                                                          including ground operations and flyovers from Oakland
                                                          International Airport.
                                                          Action EH-3.7.A: Aviation-Related Air Pollution
                                                          Advocate for additional monitoring of air quality levels by the
                                                          BAAQMD around Oakland International Airport.
                                          Policy EH-3.8   Regulatory Changes. Stay apprised of changes in state
                                                          and federal air quality regulations and implement
                                                          programs as required to ensure local compliance.
                                          Policy EH-3.9   Alternative Fuel Vehicles. Promote the development of
                                                          infrastructure which supports the use of alternative fuel
                                                          (i.e., electric) vehicles, including electric charging
                                                          stations and preferential parking for electric vehicles.
                                                          Action EH-3.9.A: Replacement of City Vehicle Fleet
                                                          Pursue the gradual replacement of the City’s passenger vehicle
                                                          fleet with vehicles using cleaner-burning fuels, such as
                                                          natural gas and electricity.
7-50

                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                 E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Policy EH-3.10 Downwind Impacts.             Consider the direction of
               prevailing winds in the siting of facilities likely to
               generate smoke, dust, and odors. Ensure that such
               facilities are sited to minimize the impacts on downwind
               residential areas and other sensitive uses.
W ATER Q UALITY
GOAL EH-4 Maintain and improve water quality in San Leandro’s
               creeks, wetlands, and offshore waters.
Policy EH-4.1  Urban Runoff Control. Continue to implement water
               pollution control measures aimed at reducing pollution
               from urban runoff. These measures should emphasize
               best management practices by residents, businesses,
               contractors, and public agencies to ensure that surface
               water quality is maintained at levels that meet state and
               federal standards.
               Action EH-4.1.A: Trash Capture Devices
               Develop a funding plan for the installation and maintenance
               of trash capture devices on City storm drains, in order to
               comply with the unfunded State mandate for 100 percent
               trash capture in local storm drain systems.
               Action EH-4.1.B: Municipal Regional Permit
                Implementation
               As required by Section C3 of the Stormwater Municipal
               Regional Permit (also known as "C3" requirements), ensure
               that the City's development review procedures continue to
               include water quality protection measures. These include
               measures related to water supply, flood control, habitat
               protection, groundwater recharge, Bay-friendly landscaping,
               and sustainable development. In addition, the City will
               continue to require Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans
               for qualifying projects and will ensure that such projects
               include appropriate measures to minimize the potential for
               water pollution.
                                                                                                                   7-51

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Policy EH-4.2 Clean Water Education.                Promote the public
                                                        information and participation provisions of the Alameda
                                                        Countywide Clean Water Program.
                                                        Action EH-4.2.A: Clean Water Program Educational
                                                        Components
                                                        Continue to implement programs in coordination with the
                                                        Alameda County Clean Water Program to better educate the
                                                        public on urban runoff hazards. Examples of these programs
                                                        include storm drain stenciling, exhibits at farmers markets
                                                        and local street fairs, website information, and television and
                                                        newspaper advertising. Use these programs to increase
                                                        awareness of clean water laws and the penalties associated
                                                        with illicit discharges.
                                          Policy EH-4.3 Interagency Coordination. Coordinate water quality
                                                        planning, regulation, and monitoring with other public
                                                        agencies that are involved in water resource
                                                        management. Establish partnerships and task forces
                                                        with these agencies and with nearby cities as needed to
                                                        develop programs addressing issues that cross
                                                        jurisdictional lines.
                                                        Action EH-4.3.A: Municipal Regional Permit Revisions
                                                        Remain an active participant in discussions of possible
                                                        revisions to state and federal clean water legislation, including
                                                        revisions to the Municipal Regional Permit for stormwater.
                                          Policy EH-4.4 Water Quality Monitoring. Continue to support water
                                                        quality monitoring in San Leandro waterways to
                                                        evaluate the progress of local clean water programs and
                                                        identify the necessary steps for improvement.
                                          Policy EH-4.5 Public Works Maintenance. Continue, and if feasible
                                                        expand, City Public Works maintenance activities,
                                                        including scheduled street sweeping and cleaning of
                                                        storm drains and culverts, to minimize pollution from
                                                        surface runoff.
7-52
                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                    E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
               Action EH-4.5.A: Community Clean-Ups
               Coordinate with community groups to develop clean-up
               programs for the shoreline, creeks, and flood control channels
               to remove debris and litter and minimize the potential for
               surface water pollution.
               Action EH-4.5.B: Street Sweeping Improvements
               Improve the effectiveness of the City’s street sweeping
               program through measures such as:
               (a) ticketing or towing of illegally parked cars;
               (b) increased public education about the program and the
               water quality benefits it provides; and
               (c) notification to property owners via information-sharing
               websites and social media.
Policy EH-4.6: Illicit Discharges. Control illicit discharges into the
               City’s stormwater system through inspections,
               compliance evaluations, enforcement programs, and
               tracking activities.
Policy EH-4.7  Pre-Treatment Requirements. Maintain and enforce
               pre-treatment requirements for industries as needed to
               minimize the discharge of potentially toxic materials
               into the City’s sanitary sewer system.
Policy EH-4.8  Hazardous Spill Response.             Maintain and update
               hazardous spill response and clean-up programs that
               minimize potential impacts on water quality.
Policy EH-4.9  Nearshore Waters. Ensure the continued improvement
               of nearshore waters through the regulation of water
               pollution sources along the San Leandro shoreline,
               including boating and other water-oriented activities.
Policy EH-4.10 Groundwater Protection. Protect San Leandro’s
               groundwater from the potentially adverse effects of
               urban uses. Future land uses should be managed to
               reduce public exposure to groundwater hazards and
               minimize the risk of future hazards.
                                                                                                                      7-53

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                                         Action EH-4.10.A: Groundwater Monitoring
                                                         Encourage continued monitoring of local groundwater by
                                                         State regulatory agencies and the private sector and take steps
                                                         to prevent further contamination.
                                                         Action EH-4.10.B: EBMUD Injection Wells
                                                         Work with EBMUD on groundwater management and safety,
                                                         including plans for injection wells and aquifer storage of
                                                         groundwater.
                                          Policy EH-4.11 Green Infrastructure. Consistent with the Municipal
                                                         Regional Stormwater Permit for the San Francisco Bay
                                                         Area, promote the increased use of green infrastructure
                                                         as a means of improving stormwater quality. This shall
                                                         include the incorporation of low impact development
                                                         (LID) drainage design in public and private streets,
                                                         parking lots, roofs, and other facilities. This also
                                                         includes the use of best management practices to reduce
                                                         impervious surfaces, including strategies using
                                                         vegetation, soils, and natural processes to manage water
                                                         and create a healthier urban environment.
                                                         Action EH-4.11.A: Green Infrastructure Plan
                                                         Develop and implement a Green Infrastructure Plan, as
                                                         required by the Regional Water Quality Control Board. The
                                                         Plan should include a mechanism to prioritize and map areas
                                                         for planned and potential projects, projections for impervious
                                                         surface reductions, a process for tracking and mapping
                                                         completed projects, design guidelines and details for green
                                                         infrastructure projects, an implementation program, and an
                                                         evaluation of funding options to cover construction and
                                                         ongoing maintenance.
                                                         Action EH-4.11.B: Green Infrastructure Capital Projects
                                                         Annually review planned capital projects to identify
                                                         opportunities to incorporate green infrastructure.
                                                         Action EG-4.11.C: Green Infrastructure Outreach
                                                         Conduct outreach and education to gain support for green
                                                         infrastructure plans and demonstrate the benefits of such
                                                         plans, such as water quality improvement, flood control,
                                                         greenhouse gas reduction, and safer pedestrian and bike
                                                         access.
7-54
                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
H AZARDOUS M ATERIALS
GOAL EH-5 Protect local residents and workers from the risks
              associated with hazardous materials.
Policy EH-5.1 Regulatory Compliance. Work with the appropriate
              county, regional, state, and federal agencies to develop
              and implement programs for hazardous waste
              reduction, hazardous material facility siting, hazardous
              waste handling and disposal, public education, and
              regulatory compliance.
              Action EH-5.1.A: CUPA Programs
              Continue to implement State programs as required by the
              City’s Certified Unified Program Agency (CUPA)
              designation.
              Action EH-5.1.B: Implementation of County Hazardous
              Waste Management Plan
              Work with Alameda County on the implementation and
              coordination of local hazardous materials waste programs.
              Action EH-5.1.C: Pipeline Safety
              Coordinate with appropriate regulatory agencies to ensure the
              safety of all fuel pipelines that cross San Leandro, and to
              ensure that record-keeping, maintenance, and operating
              conditions are fully compliant with state and federal safety
              regulations.
Policy EH-5.2 Clean-Up of Contaminated Sites. Ensure that the
              necessary steps are taken to clean up residual hazardous
              wastes on any contaminated sites proposed for
              redevelopment or reuse. Require soil evaluations as
              needed to ensure that risks are assessed and appropriate
              remediation is provided.
Policy EH-5.3 Design of Storage and Handling Areas. Require that all
              hazardous material storage and handling areas are
              designed to minimize the possibility of environmental
              contamination and adverse off-site impacts. Enforce and
                                                                                                                    7-55

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                                        implement relevant state and federal codes regarding
                                                        spill containment facilities around storage tanks.
                                                        Action EH-5.3.A: Implement Codes and Regulations
                                                        Ensure enforcement of, and compliance with, all adopted
                                                        hazardous materials regulations.
                                          Policy EH-5.4 Separation from Sensitive Uses. Provide adequate and
                                                        safe separation between areas where hazardous
                                                        materials are present and sensitive uses such as schools,
                                                        residences, and public facilities. Zoning and other
                                                        development regulations should include performance
                                                        standards to avoid safety hazards and achieve
                                                        compatibility between uses.
                                          Policy EH-5.5 Incident Response. Maintain the capacity to respond
                                                        immediately and effectively to hazardous materials
                                                        incidents. Provide ongoing training for hazardous
                                                        materials enforcement and response personnel.
                                          Policy EH-5.6 Household Hazardous Wastes. Promote public
                                                        education about the safe disposal of household
                                                        hazardous waste, such as motor oil and batteries,
                                                        including the locations of designated household
                                                        hazardous waste disposal sites.
                                                        Action EH-5.6.A: Publicity of Household Hazardous Waste
                                                        Information
                                                        Work with Alameda County and Alameda County Industries
                                                        (ACI) to provide each household with information on the
                                                        location and operating hours of household hazardous waste
                                                        collection facilities and the protocol for the disposal of such
                                                        wastes.
                                          Policy EH-5.7 Hazardous Building Materials. Ensure the safe and
                                                        proper handling of hazardous building materials, such
                                                        as friable asbestos and lead based paint. If such materials
                                                        are disturbed during building renovation or demolition,
                                                        they should be handled and disposed of in a manner
                                                        that protects human health and the environment.
7-56
                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                     E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Policy EH-5.8 Public Awareness. Increase public awareness of
              hazardous material use and storage in the City, the
              relative degree of potential health hazards, and the
              appropriate channels for reporting odor problems and
              other nuisances.
              Action EH-5.8.A: Disclosure to Property Owners
              Pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code, enforce
              community disclosure laws (e.g., Right-to-Know laws) that
              inform property owners of the presence of hazardous materials
              nearby.
              Action EH-5.8.B: Rail Transport of Hazardous Materials
              Monitor proposals for the transport of potentially hazardous
              or explosive materials by rail through San Leandro, and take
              appropriate actions to ensure the safety of local residents and
              businesses.
Policy EH-5.9 Community Preparedness.             Ensure that the City’s
              Emergency Preparedness programs include provisions
              for hazardous materials incidents, as well as measures to
              quickly alert the community and ensure the safety of
              residents and employees following an incident.
E MERGENCY P REPAREDNESS
GOAL EH-6 Attain—and            sustain—comprehensive and highly
              effective emergency preparedness and recovery
              programs.
Policy EH-6.1 Preparedness as a Top Priority. Establish emergency
              preparedness as a top City priority. Staffing and
              funding levels for local preparedness programs should
              be sufficient to keep all residents and business well
              informed and prepared in the event of a major
              earthquake or similar disaster.
              Action EH-6.1.A: Essential Service Facility Upgrades
              Periodically evaluate the ability of City facilities to function
              after a major disaster such as an earthquake. Take steps to
              address any deficiencies, and to ensure that emergency
                                                                                                                       7-57

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                                        services and communication can be provided following a
                                                        disaster.
                                          Policy EH-6.2 SEMS Planning.             Use the Standard Emergency
                                                        Management System (SEMS) as the basis for the City’s
                                                        Emergency Preparedness programs. The City should
                                                        maintain and periodically update a SEMS-based
                                                        emergency preparedness plan that provides direction
                                                        and identifies responsibilities following a disaster.
                                                        Action EH-6.2.A: Emergency Operations Plan Update
                                                        Expand the City’s Emergency Operations Plan to address
                                                        evacuation routes and post-disaster recovery.
                                                        Action EH-6.2.B: Local Hazard Mitigation Plan
                                                        Maintain a Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) which
                                                        assesses the vulnerability of areas in the city to different types
                                                        of natural hazards (such as earthquakes, wildfires, and floods)
                                                        and includes measures to reduce the potential for damage.
                                          Policy EH-6.3 Public Education and Awareness. Promote public
                                                        education and awareness on all aspects of emergency
                                                        preparedness, including the type and extent of hazards
                                                        in the community, measures to reduce the likelihood of
                                                        damage and injury, provisions for emergency supplies,
                                                        steps to take immediately after a disaster, and the
                                                        locations of shelters and medical facilities.
                                                        Action EH-6.3.A: Educational Materials
                                                        Provide web-based material and links from the City's website
                                                        to internet websites to improve emergency preparedness.
                                                        Ensure the availability of materials in multiple languages
                                                        whenever feasible.
                                                        Action EH-6.3.B: Staffing Levels
                                                        Maintain dedicated City staff position(s) for emergency
                                                        preparedness program administration, including outreach to
                                                        schools, the business community, neighborhood groups,
                                                        residents, and City staff, as well as well as the implementation
                                                        of programs before, during, and after an emergency.
7-58

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                   E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Policy EH-6.4  Drills. Conduct periodic emergency response exercises
               to test the effectiveness of local preparedness
               procedures. Maintain SEMS training programs to ensure
               that City personnel are sufficiently prepared to respond
               to an emergency and staff an Emergency Operations
               Center.
               Action EH-6.4.A: Radio 1610
               Maintain and upgrade Radio 1610 AM, and continue to use
               local cable television and Nixle 360 (or an equivalent
               successor) to provide important news bulletins to San Leandro
               residents.
               Action EH-6.4.B: Siren Testing
               Consider reactivation of the City's emergency warning sirens,
               along with education about the procedures to follow in the
               event the sirens are sounded.
Policy EH-6.5  Training Programs.            Maintain community-based
               emergency preparedness training programs targeted to
               neighborhoods and businesses groups. Ensure that such
               programs respond directly to local needs; include
               provisions for non-English speaking, disabled, and
               sight/hearing impaired residents; and are well
               publicized throughout the community.
 Policy EH-6.6 Emergency Shelters.          Identify essential emergency
               facilities in the City, including shelters, and take the
               necessary actions to ensure that they will remain
               operational following a disaster.
               Action EH-6.6.A: Disaster Response Equipment
               Continue to improve communication systems and utilize
               technology to improve disaster preparedness and post-disaster
               response.
Policy EH-6.7  Schools and Hospitals. Coordinate local emergency
               preparedness efforts with the San Leandro and San
               Lorenzo Unified School Districts, and with local
               hospitals. Work with both School Districts to implement
               disaster preparedness curricula targeted to students.
                                                                                                                     7-59
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Policy EH-6.8  Businesses and Social Service Agencies. Coordinate
                                                         emergency planning efforts with other jurisdictions, the
                                                         business community, and social service agencies,
                                                         including agencies serving special needs groups such as
                                                         seniors and persons with disabilities.
                                          Policy EH-6.9  Multi-Lingual Information. Ensure that emergency
                                                         preparedness information, including printed material,
                                                         radio broadcasts, video, websites, and other media, is
                                                         available in non-English languages (e.g., Spanish,
                                                         Chinese), in addition to English.
                                          Policy EH-6.10 Funding Sources. Pursue a variety of funding sources,
                                                         such as grants, low-interest loans, and tax credits, to
                                                         retrofit community facilities and assist residents and
                                                         businesses with seismic upgrades.
                                                         Action EH-6.10.A: Brace and Bolt Program
                                                         Pursue additional allocations from the State Residential
                                                         Mitigation Program to continue the Brace and Bolt program.
                                          Policy EH-6.11 Climate Change.           Prepare for the weather-related
                                                         impacts of climate change, such as more frequent
                                                         extreme weather events, temperature extremes, and
                                                         prolonged drought. Street rights-of-way, parks, and
                                                         other public spaces, including such features as street
                                                         trees and landscaping, should be designed to be more
                                                         resilient to such events.
                                                         See the Open Space, Parks, and Conservation Element for
                                                         additional policies on climate change.
7-60
                                                                                 S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                       E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
N OISE C OMPATIBILITY
GOAL EH-7 Ensure that noise associated with the day-to-day
              activities of San Leandro residents and businesses
              does not impede the peace and quiet of the
              community.
Policy EH-7.1 Noise Compatibility Table. Ensure that potential noise
              impacts are considered when new development is
              proposed. Projects that could significantly increase noise
              levels should incorporate mitigation measures to reduce
              such impacts. Apply the standards shown in Chart 7-2
              when evaluating applications for future development.
              Chart 7-2 specifies the maximum noise levels that are
              normally acceptable, conditionally acceptable, and
              normally unacceptable for new development.
              Action EH-7.1.A: Review of Future Development Proposals
              On an on-going basis, review future development proposals
              for compliance with the General Plan Noise and Land Use
              Compatibility standards in Chart 7-2. Require acoustical
              studies for projects that are likely to be exposed to noise levels
              that exceed the “normally acceptable” standard and for
              projects that are likely to generate noise in excess of these
              standards. Impose mitigation measures based on the findings.
              Noise studies should consider the effects of significant short-
              term noise sources (such as passing trains or planes) as well as
              the average noise levels that may be experienced over a 24-
              hour period.
Policy EH-7.2 Residential Interior Noise Standard. As required by the
              State of California, ensure that interior noise levels in
              new residential construction do not exceed 45 dB Ldn.
              For non-residential construction, the acceptable interior
              noise levels should be determined on a case by case
              basis, depending on the type of activity proposed.
              Action EH-7.2.A: Insulation Standards
              Continue to enforce Title 24 insulation standards for all new
              residential construction, including the interior noise level
              standard of 45 dBA Ldn in all habitable rooms for dwelling
              units.
                                                                                                                         7-61

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          Policy EH-7.3  Residential Exterior Noise Standard. Strive to maintain
                                                         an exterior noise level of no more than 60 dB Ldn in
                                                         residential areas. Recognizing that some San Leandro
                                                         neighborhoods already exceed this noise level,
                                                         encourage a variety of noise abatement measures that
                                                         benefit these areas.
                                          Policy EH-7.4  Degradation of Ambient Noise Levels. If a
                                                         neighborhood is well within acceptable noise standards,
                                                         do not automatically allow noise levels to degrade to the
                                                         maximum tolerable levels shown in Chart 7-2. A
                                                         project’s noise impacts should be evaluated based on the
                                                         potential for adverse community response, as well as its
                                                         conformance to the adopted standards. For CEQA
                                                         purposes, an increase of 3 dB Ldn should generally be
                                                         considered a significant adverse impact.
                                          Policy EH-7.5: Noise-Sensitive Uses. Discourage noise-sensitive uses
                                                         such as hospitals, schools, and rest homes from locating
                                                         in areas with very high noise levels unless sufficient
                                                         noise mitigation and buffering can be provided.
                                                         Conversely, discourage new uses likely to produce high
                                                         levels of noise from locating in areas where noise-
                                                         sensitive uses would be adversely impacted.
                                                         Action EH-7.5.A: Conditions of Approval
                                                         When approving development or issuing conditional use
                                                         permits, establish conditions of approval (including
                                                         construction hours and operating hours) that minimize the
                                                         potential for noise impacts on nearby properties.
                                          Policy EH-7.6: Minimizing Noise in New Housing Areas. In the event
                                                         that new housing is constructed in areas that exceed
                                                         normally acceptable noise levels, require project design
                                                         and construction measures that minimize noise
                                                         intrusion.
                                          Policy EH-7.7  Noise Reduction Measures. Encourage local businesses
                                                         to reduce noise impacts on the community by replacing
                                                         excessively noisy equipment and machinery, applying
                                                         noise-reduction technology, and following operating
                                                         procedures that limit the potential for conflicts.
7-62

                                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                      E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Policy EH-7.8          Responding to Noise Problems. Continue to respond
                       promptly and effectively to local noise complaints and
                       noise problems, enforcing City codes and ordinances as
                       necessary to ensure that a peaceful environment is
                       maintained.
Policy EH-7.9          Vibration Impacts. Limit the potential for vibration
                       impacts from construction and ongoing operations to
                       disturb sensitive uses such as housing and schools.
                                  -    : Vibration Impacts.
                       Adopt Standard Conditions of Approval or Construction
                       Development Standards to reduce the potential for vibration-
                       related construction impacts for development projects near
                       sensitive uses. Vibration impacts shall be considered as part of
                       the project-level environmental evaluation and approval
                       process for individual development proposals. 2
2 The City intends to adopt a Standard Condition of Approval for new non-residential
land uses that are subject to CEQA and require the use of large construction equipment
(e.g., vibratory roller, pile drivers) within 50 feet of sensitive receptors (e.g., residential
dwelling, classroom): The Condition would stipulate that future proposed projects shall
use the best available technology for construction equipment and permanent operations
so that vibrations are reduced to a level consistent with FTA guidelines for annoyance
and architectural damage. Methods to reduce construction-related vibration include the
use of smaller and well-maintained equipment, use of static rollers instead of vibratory of
rollers, drilling of piles as opposed to pile driving, limitations on construction hours, and
guidelines for the positioning of vibration-generating equipment.
                                                                                                                                        7-63
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          T RANSPORTATION N OISE
                                          GOAL EH-8 Reduce the effects of surface transportation noise,
                                                        including vehicular noise and noise associated with
                                                        railroad and BART traffic.
                                          Policy EH-8.1 Transit Vehicle Noise. Encourage BART and AC Transit
                                                        to develop and apply noise-reduction technologies that
                                                        reduce the noise impacts associated with BART trains
                                                        and bus traffic.
                                                        Action EH-8.1.A: Lobbying for Quieter Public Transit
                                                        Systems
                                                        Maintain regular contact with local representatives on the AC
                                                        Transit and BART Boards to lobby for measures that reduce
                                                        noise generated by transit vehicles. Strongly urge AC Transit
                                                        and BART to apply state-of-the art technology to achieve
                                                        quieter operations.
                                          Policy EH-8.2 Street and Highway Noise. Where feasible and
                                                        appropriate, develop and implement noise reduction
                                                        measures when undertaking improvements, extensions,
                                                        or design changes to San Leandro streets.
                                                        Action EH-8.2.A: California Vehicle Code Enforcement
                                                        Enforce the applicable sections of the California Vehicle Code
                                                        pertaining to noise emissions, and enforce applicable traffic
                                                        laws pertaining to speeding, racing, and screeching cars.
                                                        Action EH-8.2.B: Overnight Truck Parking
                                                        Enforce restrictions on overnight truck parking to minimize
                                                        noise problems associated with idling trucks near residential
                                                        areas.
                                          Policy EH-8.3 Site Planning and Building Design. Require new
                                                        development or redevelopment near freeways, arterials,
                                                        BART, and major bus routes to incorporate site planning
                                                        and architectural design measures that reduce the
                                                        exposure of future building occupants to traffic noise.
                                          Policy EH-8.4 State and Federal Legislation. Support state and federal
                                                        legislation aimed at reducing transportation noise.
7-64
                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                     E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Policy EH-8.5 Train Noise. Work with the appropriate parties and
              agencies to reduce or mitigate the noise and vibration
              from trains traveling through San Leandro.
              Action EH-8.5.A: Train Horns
              Continue to work with federal and state agencies and
              authorities from the Union Pacific Railroad to pursue effective
              relief from freight train noise, including train horns and noise
              from the trains themselves.
Policy EH-8.6 Freeway Noise. Work with local transportation agencies,
              including Caltrans and the Alameda County
              Transportation Commission, to mitigate noise from
              Interstates 880, 580, and 238. Encourage these agencies to
              pursue a variety of measures, such as landscaping,
              berms, pavement changes, and sound walls to reduce
              the noise impacts of local freeways.
              Action EH-8.6.A: I-580 Sound Walls
              Maintain processes through which neighborhoods may
              petition for sound walls to reduce noise impacts from adjacent
              transportation facilities. Pending proposals include eastbound
              Interstate 580 between 108th Street and MacArthur/Dutton.
Policy EH-8.7 Sound Wall Design. Where sound walls are used,
              encourage aesthetically pleasing and innovative designs
              and require citizen input in the siting and design
              process. Require future sound wall engineering and
              acoustical design studies to address and mitigate the
              potential for displacement of sound from impacted
              properties to other properties further away from the
              noise source. .
                                                                                                                       7-65
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                          A IRPORT I MPACTS
                                          Goal EH-9     Minimize the local impacts and hazards created by air
                                                        traffic, ground operations, and all other aviation
                                                        activities, particularly those associated with Oakland
                                                        International Airport.
                                          Policy EH-9.1 Monitoring of Airport Plans. Actively participate in
                                                        forums and discussions regarding operations and
                                                        expansion plans for Oakland International Airport. Seek
                                                        local representation on task forces, commissions, and
                                                        advisory boards established to guide airport policies and
                                                        programs.
                                                        Action EH-9.1.A: Participation in Airport Community
                                                        Noise Management Forum
                                                        Supplement the City’s participation in the Airport-
                                                        Community Noise Management Forum through local Airport
                                                        task forces and other airport-based advisory groups. The
                                                        mission of such groups should be to monitor Airport plans
                                                        and programs and advocate on behalf of residents and
                                                        businesses impacted by Airport operations and expansion
                                                        plans. Noise Management Forum activities should include
                                                        discussions with the FAA to address and resolve air traffic
                                                        impacts associated with implementation of the Metroplex air
                                                        traffic system.
                                          Policy EH-9.2 Mitigation of Airport Noise. Pursue mitigation of
                                                        airport noise impacts to the fullest extent possible.
                                                        Support and advocate for operational practices, changes
                                                        to     aircraft,   new     technologies,   and    physical
                                                        improvements that would reduce the number of
                                                        properties in San Leandro that are impacted by noise.
                                                        Action EH-9.2.A: Settlement Agreement Implementation
                                                        Continue implementation of the 2000 Settlement Agreement
                                                        between the City of San Leandro and the Port of Oakland, as
                                                        amended through 2017, to support noise insulation for
                                                        additional San Leandro residences.
7-66

                                                                            S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                  E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
Policy EH-9.3 Changes to Airport Operations. Ensure that any
              changes to airport operations that would potentially
              result in higher noise levels in San Leandro incorporate
              comprehensive noise mitigation measures, even when
              the impacts will be of limited duration. To the greatest
              extent feasible, any changes in airport activity should
              avoid impacts to noise sensitive uses such as residential
              areas and schools.
Policy EH-9.4 Comprehensive Noise Abatement. Advocate for noise
              abatement and mitigation programs that are based not
              only on the airport’s noise contour maps, but that
              consider other factors such as the frequency of
              overflights, the altitude of aircraft, and the hours of
              operation.
Policy EH-9.5 Use of North Field. Strongly discourage any long-range
              plans that would extend the runways at the North Field
              (27 L/R and 9 L/R), or increase the use of the North Field
              for cargo jets or commercial passenger airlines, except as
              required for emergencies and periodic maintenance
              procedures.
Policy EH-9.6 Airport Safety Zones. Regulate land uses within
              designated airport safety zones, height referral areas,
              and noise compatibility zones to minimize the
              possibility of future noise conflicts and accident hazards.
Policy EH-9.7 Legislative Changes to Improve Mitigation. Pursue
              legislative changes that provide San Leandro and other
              cities with greater leverage regarding the mitigation of
              noise impacts, air pollution impacts, and other off-site
              impacts resulting from aviation.
              Action EH-9.7.A: Local Representation on Airport Issues
              Lobby for regional representation or other forms of municipal
              input on the Port of Oakland Commission so that the impacts
              of Port operations on adjacent cities can be more
              comprehensively addressed.
                                                                                                                    7-67

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
E N V I R O N M E N T A L H A Z A R D S
                                                        Action EH-9.7.B: Relocation of the Noise Impact Boundary
                                                        Support federal legislation that would relocate the Noise
                                                        Impact Boundary from the 65 dB to the 55 dB CNEL contour.
                                                        In the event this change is made, evaluate the need for
                                                        additional measures that would reduce noise impacts to homes
                                                        located in the 55 dB CNEL or louder range.
                                          Policy EH-9.8 Monitoring Programs. Promote ongoing monitoring of
                                                        noise levels associated with airport operations and
                                                        support expanded monitoring of other off-site impacts,
                                                        such as air quality. Advocate for additional study of the
                                                        health effects of airport noise and emissions, and use the
                                                        findings of such research in defining the City’s position
                                                        on airport related issues.
                                                        Action EH-9.8.A: Expansion of the Noise Compatibility
                                                        Program
                                                        Continue to work with the Port of Oakland on implementing
                                                        the Noise Compatibility Program for the airport, including
                                                        advocating for quieter aircraft, mitigating night-time engine
                                                        run-up activities, and the monitoring of noise levels at
                                                        additional locations in and around San Leandro.
                                          Policy EH-9.9 Aviation Accidents.          Maintain a high degree of
                                                        readiness to respond to aircraft accidents. Continue to
                                                        participate in preparedness drills and mutual aid
                                                        activities with the City of Oakland to ensure quick and
                                                        effective response to emergencies.
                                                        Action EH-9.9.A: Water Rescue Operations
                                                        Work collaboratively with the Port of Oakland and the
                                                        Alameda County Fire Department to identify and maintain an
                                                        appropriate location for emergency response to water rescue
                                                        operations, in the event the San Leandro Shoreline can no
                                                        longer serve this function.
7-68

                                                                                 8
                                                                             HISTORIC PRESERVATION
A.      OVERVIEW                                                             AND
The Historic Preservation and Community Design Element seeks to
preserve San Leandro’s legacy of historic resources, enhance the
aesthetic character of the City, and maintain the features that make San
Leandro unique. Although the Element is not explicitly required by State
law, its goals are among the highest of City priorities.
Historic Preservation is defined as the sensitive maintenance, continued
use, and restoration of older buildings and sites having historic,
architectural, aesthetic, or cultural value. As one of the oldest
communities in the East Bay, San Leandro has a rich history, presenting
opportunities for a more vital preservation program. Such a program can
provide economic and tourism benefits, engender civic pride, and create
a stronger “sense of place” in the City. Many historic buildings in San
                                                                                COMMUNITY DESIGN
Leandro have been lost to demolition over the past century—the General
Plan seeks to avoid further unnecessary losses so that living reminders of
the City’s heritage may be preserved for future generations.
Community Design addresses all aspects of the City’s visual
appearance—from the design of its buildings to the character of its
gateways, streets and public spaces. Architecture, construction materials,
and landscaping play a major role in how San Leandro looks and feels.
Policies and actions in this Element ensure that new construction and
rehabilitation projects will be sensitive to their surroundings and
contribute positively to the character of the City. The Element places
particular emphasis on the “greening” of San Leandro through
additional tree planting and landscaping. Ultimately, a greener and more
attractive City can provide economic and property value benefits as well
as ecological and aesthetic benefits.
                                                                                                     8-1

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     B.        HISTORIC PRESERVATION
                                                     Historic and Archaeological Resources
                                                     The San Leandro area was home to Native Americans for more than
                                                     3,000 years before the first European settlers arrived. The city occupies
                                                     territory that was once inhabited by the Ohlone Indians. Very few traces
                                                     of the native inhabitants remain today, but evidence from nearby sites
                                                     and early records provides a picture of what life was like in the area
                                                     prior to the arrival of Spanish explorers and missionaries. At least 10
                                                     archaeological sites have been identified between San Leandro Creek
                                                     and San Lorenzo Creek, most consisting of remnant shell mounds near
                                                     the shoreline and along the banks of the creeks.
                                                     There are also few remaining traces of the first 100 years of European
                                                     settlement in San Leandro. A variety of Early California architectural
                                                     styles existed in the town during the 1850s and 1860s, but virtually all of
                                                     these structures were lost as a result of earthquakes, fires, or demolition.
                                                     The only structure still standing in San Leandro confirmed to pre-date
                                                     the City’s 1872 incorporation is the Alta Mira Club, constructed in 1860
                                                     and located at 561 Lafayette Avenue. That building, originally the home
                                                     of Ignacio Peralta, has been a designated California Historical Landmark
                                                     since 1937 and has been on the National Register of Historic Places since
                                                     1978.
8-2

                                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                          H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
There are several dozen structures in the City built between 1870 and
1900 that are still standing. Most are residential buildings built in the
vernacular or Victorian styles that were popular at the time. The Daniel
Best Home, an Italianate Victorian built in the late 1870s at Clarke and
Estudillo, is probably the best example. Elsewhere in the City, there are a
few examples of Queen Anne, Second Empire, and Italianate homes,
generally scattered to the southeast of Downtown. Another
concentration of turn-of-the century vernacular homes can be found
along Orchard Avenue between Davis and Williams Street. These homes
are also notable for the community of Portuguese settlers that once
resided there.
San Leandro has a handful of non-residential buildings dating from the
late 1800s. These are generally small wood frame structures, such as the
Little Brown Church, the Little Shul synagogue, and the former Southern
Pacific Railroad Depot. Some of these buildings have been moved from
their original locations but they are still important cultural landmarks.
The City has several hundred structures dating from the early 20th
century, but only a few have been officially recognized as historically
significant. The best known—the Casa Peralta at 384 West Estudillo
Avenue—was built in 1901 by one of Ignacio Peralta’s daughters. The
Casa was originally built as a Victorian residence but was remodeled as a
Moorish villa in 1926. The building was donated to the City in 1971 and
has been on the National Register of Historic Places since 1982.
                                                                                                                                  8-3

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                                            There are also a number of distinctive commercial
                                                                            structures from the early 1900s, including the
                                                                            neoclassical Daniel Best Building (1909) at East 14 th
                                                                            and Estudillo Avenue. Its distinctive white terra
                                                                            cotta façade and prominent clock make this
                                                                            building the symbolic “heart” of San Leandro.
                                                                            Many of the nearby buildings of this era were lost
                                                                            during the second half of the 20th century to make
                                                                            way for parking or more modern structures.
                                                                            There are many examples of early 20th century
                                                                            residential architecture in San Leandro, especially in
                                                                            the northeast part of the City. Some 3,700 homes in
                                                                            San Leandro pre-date World War II. Neighborhoods
                                                                            such as Broadmoor, Estudillo Estates, Peralta, Best
                                                                            Manor, and Farrelly Pond are characterized by well-
                                                                            maintained California bungalows, Craftsman and
                                                                            Prairie-style homes, and Mediterranean-style
                                                                            cottages. Some of these neighborhoods include
                                                                            design elements typical of the City Beautiful
                                                     movement of the early 1900s, including winding streets, manicured open
                                                     spaces (such as Victoria Circle), gracious street trees, and large front
                                                     lawns.
                                                     Structures built between 1940 and 1960 represent about half of San
                                                     Leandro’s housing stock and much of its commercial, industrial, and
                                                     public building stock. These structures are old enough to qualify as
                                                     potentially “historic” under federal and State preservation laws, but
                                                     would be unlikely to be designated as landmarks unless they displayed
                                                     certain distinctive features. A 60 or 70 year old structure would be most
                                                     likely to be considered “historic” if it exemplified the distinctive
                                                     characteristics of an architectural style or period, a particular method of
                                                     construction, or the work of a well-known architect. Buildings may also
                                                     be deemed historically important if they are associated with notable
                                                     individuals or historic events.
                                                     Some of San Leandro’s mid-century buildings exemplify the
                                                     architectural conventions that were in vogue at the time of their
                                                     construction. Structures such as the Bal Theatre and the Pelton Shopping
                                                     Center are reminders of an important period not only in San Leandro’s
                                                     history but in the history of California and the Bay Area. The City has a
                                                     particularly large inventory of vintage signs from the 1940s and 1950s.
                                                     These contribute to architectural character and provide a nostalgic
8-4

                                                                                        S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                         H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
connection to the City’s past. In some instances, signage has been saved
or restored even where the buildings themselves have been remodeled
using more contemporary materials and architecture.
Some of the historic resources in the City are landscapes rather than
structures. For instance, the City contains several heritage redwood trees
that have been recognized as warranting protection. There are also
important resources just outside the City limits, such as the San Lorenzo
and Calvary Cemeteries, old San Lorenzo Village, and the Lake Chabot
Dam.
San Leandro also has numerous sites where important buildings (such as
the Alameda County Courthouse) once stood. Even though the buildings
themselves are gone, there is an opportunity to increase public
awareness of the past through plaques and markers. There may also be
places in the City yet to be recognized for their historic significance, such
as the first of the thousands of homes in the Washington Manor tract, or
some of the early industrial buildings in West San Leandro.
A pro-active approach to preservation would help preserve these
resources, while supporting other General Plan goals related to
neighborhood character, community spirit, and the overall quality of life
in San Leandro.
Developing a More Effective Preservation
Program
The first modern-day inventory of historic buildings in San Leandro was
conducted in 1974, shortly after the city’s 100 th anniversary. An outcome
of this process was a local register of about two dozen historic buildings
and four heritage trees. Structures built after 1920 were largely excluded
from the registry, as they were still considered too recent to be historic.
When the San Leandro General Plan was updated in 1999-2002, it
included a priority recommendation to update the 1974 inventory. This
important step was completed within a few years of Plan adoption. The
City also created a History Room at the San Leandro Library, amended
its Historic Preservation Ordinance, and supported development of the
San Leandro History Museum and Art Gallery at 320 West Estudillo
Avenue.       However, some of the other initiatives called for in 2002
remain to be carried out and are being carried forward through the 2014-
2016 General Plan Update.
                                                                                                                                 8-5

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     Some of the City’s most important resources remain at risk and are
                                                     vulnerable to unsympathetic additions, alterations, and demolition. The
                                                     policies and actions in the 2035 Plan ensure that future development
                                                     decisions are sensitive to historic resources. The intent is to create a
                                                     preservation strategy that enhances neighborhoods and revitalizes
                                                     shopping districts while maintaining flexibility for property owners.
                                                     Plan policies emphasize that such strategies must not be overly intrusive,
                                                     costly, or burdensome. They should preserve and create economic
                                                     opportunity at the same time they preserve the city’s heritage.
                                                     Figure 8-1 identifies the location of listed historic resources in San
                                                     Leandro. This information is further detailed in Table 8-1. The table
                                                     identifies three types of resources:
                                                        Historic Structures, which are primarily homes, commercial
                                                         buildings, and public buildings that have been deemed historically
                                                         important. The list includes two buildings on the National Register
                                                         of Historic Places, eight buildings listed as California Places of
                                                         Historic Interest, and more than 20 buildings listed on San Leandro’s
                                                         local register (the City’s Register includes the state and nationally
                                                         listed structures).
                                                        Historic Sites, which are the locations where important buildings
                                                         once stood, or where notable events took place. Such sites are
                                                         principally marked with historic plaques since the structures
                                                         themselves no longer exist. Most of the historic sites are California
                                                         Places of Historic Interest; sites are generally not included on San
                                                         Leandro’s local register.
8-6

                                 S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
  H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N

                                                  Figure 8-1
                                Historic Resources
                                                                          8-7

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
               TABLE 8-1         DOCUMENTED HISTORIC RESOURCES IN SAN LEANDRO, 2015
               Name                                           Listings      Map      Year      Status
                                                                            Key      Built
               HISTORIC BUILDINGS
               Alta Mira Clubhouse (Peralta House)            NR, CHL, LR   2, 4, 43 1860      Community Facility
               Casa Peralta                                   NR, CPHI,     1,11,    1901      Community Facility
                                                              LR            33
               Daniel Best House                              CPHI, LR      12, 35   1870s     1315 Clarke
               Little Brown Church (384 W Estudillo)          CPHI, LR      14, 38   1880      Moved to location behind
                                                                                               Casa Peralta
               Manual Garcia Home (1206 Hyde)                 CPHI, LR      15, 40   1875      Residence
               Captain Roberts Home (526 Lewelling)           CPHI, LR      20, 32   1878      Office/residence
               Southern Pacific RR Depot (801 Davis)          CPHI, LR      27,47    1898      Relocated    to   Thrasher
                                                                                               Park
               Little Shul (642 Dolores)                      CPHI, LR      13, 39   1889      Moved to this site, still in
                                                                                               use
               Old Lamplighter’s Home (28 Dabner)             CPHI, LR      16, 41   1872      Residence
               Best Building (1300 E. 14th)                   LR            30       1911      Office building
               308 W. Joaquin                                 LR            48       1896      Residence
               1363 Hays (blacksmith shop)                    LR            31       Est 1900  Garage (for 308 Joaquin)
               857 Estudillo                                  LR            37       Est 1890  Residence
               678 Juana                                      LR            49       1890      Residence
               291 Joaquin (not mapped))                      LR                     1885      Residence/office
               397 Maud                                       LR            36       1880s     Residence
               310-312 Warren                                 LR            50       Est 1900  Residence
               Orchard Avenue Homes (“Kanaka Ln”)             LR            42       1880-1900 +/- 20 private homes on
                                                                                               Orchard Av
               659 Estudillo                                  LR            34       1900-1910 Residence
               Water Tank House (444 Harlan)                  LR            51       N/A       Residence
               Water Tank House (254 Callan)                  LR            52       N/A       Residence
               Water Tank House (383 Preda)                   LR            53       N/A       Residence
8-8

                                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                               H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
TABLE 8-1       DOCUMENTED HISTORIC RESOURCES IN SAN LEANDRO, 2015 (CONTINUED)
Name                                   Listings      Map Key       Year Built      Status
HISTORIC SITES
Jose Joaquin Estudillo Home site       CHL           3                            Plaque only (550 Estudillo)
Rancho San Antonio/ Peralta            CHL           5                            Plaque at Hays and East 14th (Root
Grant/DeAnza Exhibition site                                                      Park)
Alameda County Courthouse site         CPHI          7                            Plaque at Davis and Clarke—now
                                                                                  St. Leander’s School
Alameda County Gazette site/ San       CPHI          8, 25                        Plaques at Davis and Clarke
Leandro Reporter sites
Best Tractor/ Caterpillar site         CPHI          9                            Plaque at 800 Davis
San Leandro Town Hall site             CPHI          29                           Plaque at 250 Davis
Roberts Landing                        CPHI          21                           Bay Trail Plaque near mouth of
                                                                                  San Lorenzo Creek
San Leandro Ball Park site             CPHI          22                           San Leandro Blvd at the BART
                                                                                  Station
San Leandro Methodist Church site      CPHI          23                           1349 Hays, replaced by Odd
                                                                                  Fellows Bldg
San Leandro Plaza                      CPHI          24                           Plaque at E. 14th and Washington
Mulford Clubhouse site                 CPHI          18                           13075 Aurora Dr
Portuguese Union of California site    CPHI          19                           1120 E 14th (now CVS site at
                                                                                  Davis)
Thrasher Park                          CPHI          28                           Plaque on Davis St.
HISTORIC LANDSCAPE FEATURES
San Leandro Oyster Beds                CHL           6                            North Dike Road
Calvary Cemetery (uninc.)              CPHI          10                           Near Fairmount Dr.
San Lorenzo Cemetery (uninc.)          CPHI          26                           College and Hesperian
Lake Chabot (1892) (uninc.)            CPHI          N/A                          Lake Chabot Road
Redwoods (Juana/Bancroft)              LR            44
Redwood Trees (647 Juana)              LR            45
Redwood Trees (651 Juana)              LR            46
 Source: Tom Origer Associates, 2015. City of San Leandro, 2015
                                                                                                                                       8-9

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y  D E S I G N
                                                         Historic Landscape Features, including two historic cemeteries
                                                          (both a few blocks outside the city limits but in San Leandro’s sphere
                                                          of influence), the historic Oyster beds (at the San Leandro Shoreline),
                                                          and several redwood trees along Juana Street east of Downtown.
                                                     The local register of historic buildings has remained virtually unchanged
                                                     for the last 15 years, despite the aging of the city’s building stock. Given
                                                     the potential for development in and around Downtown during the
                                                     horizon of this General Plan, there may be compelling reasons to expand
                                                     the register in the near future. Particular attention should be given to
                                                     adding public buildings such as City Hall, the Veterans Memorial
                                                     Building, and McKinley and Washington Schools.
                                                     Additional consideration should also be given to the creation of a small
                                                     local historic district in the vicinity of the Casa Peralta and the Daniel
                                                     Best Home. This area already contains several state and national register
                                                     landmarks, the City’s History Museum, and the sites of long-vanished
                                                     landmarks marked with plaques and connected by a “history walk.”
                                                     The Old San Leandro Historic District, if created, should be relatively
                                                     small, with boundaries drawn to contain only the most important
                                                     resources. Designation of such a district could draw visitors, increase
                                                     awareness of local history, and create opportunities for new activities
                                                     such as restaurants, shopping, and public art.
                                                     Elsewhere in San Leandro, design guidelines should be used to protect
                                                     the historic elements of the City’s “pre-war” (e.g., 1900-1940)
                                                                                           neighborhoods and business districts.
                                                                                           Many of these neighborhoods also
                                                                                           have historic street furniture, signs,
                                                                                           and landscape design elements.
                                                                                           Conserving and restoring these
                                                                                           elements can increase property
                                                                                           values, create neighborhood pride,
                                                                                           and enhance the distinct identity of
                                                                                           these areas. While individual homes
                                                                                           in such neighborhoods may not
                                                                                           warrant designation as “historic,”
                                                                                           their characteristic design features
                                                                                           (front porches, large front setbacks,
                                                                                           Craftsman-style rooflines, etc.) may
                                                                                           warrant protection.        Collectively,
8-10

                                                                                       S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                        H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
such features define the ambiance of
the neighborhood and create value. As
such homes are improved and
remodeled in the future, care should be
taken to avoid the “teardown” of
structurally sound homes, as well as
additions that appear to be “tacked on”
or out of scale with the neighborhood.
Design     guidelines      and    zoning
standards for older neighborhoods
should ensure that future changes
reflect the valued features of the
neighborhood.
A critical part of a successful
preservation program is working with the owners of older properties to
ensure that the City’s guidelines and processes do not create a financial
or administrative burden. The City’s intent is not to discourage
alterations or dictate narrow standards for building colors or materials.
Rather, the objective is to maintain the overall character of historic areas,
and promote the sensitive maintenance and continued use of older
buildings.
Preservation is as much about shaping the future as it is about saving the
past. The General Plan advocates bringing back some of the historic
elements that have been lost in San Leandro, such as the Downtown
Plaza and street grid. It also advocates a comprehensive approach to
preservation, looking not only at the built environment, but at the
people, events, and cultures that have shaped local history.
Defining the City’s Role
Presently, the major implementing tool for preservation in San Leandro
is the City’s Historic Preservation Ordinance (Chapter 4-26 of the
Municipal Code). The Ordinance requires that permits for demolition,
removal, or substantial alterations to documented historic structures or
trees be referred to the City’s Library-Historical Commission for a
recommendation. It provides for demolition delay in the event that
buildings of potential historic importance are threatened. The Ordinance
applies only to the structures and trees listed on the City’s historic
registry. Periodic updates to the Ordinance should be considered as
additional buildings are added to the registry.
                                                                                                                              8-11

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                               Historic Preservation Mission Statement
                  In 2002, the City adopted the following mission statement for Historic Preservation as part of the
                  General Plan Update process. The statement remains relevant today:
                   “The mission of San Leandro’s Historic Preservation program is:
                   To preserve and maintain sites and structures that serve as significant, visible reminders of San
                        Leandro’s social and architectural history.
                   To integrate historic preservation more fully into San Leandro’s comprehensive planning process.
                   To increase public awareness of local history.
                   To contribute to the economic development and vitality of the City.
                   To preserve the character and livability of San Leandro’s neighborhoods and strengthen civic
                        pride through neighborhood conservation.”
                                                     San Leandro has yet to be designated as a “Certified Local Government”
                                                     (CLG), a federal program which enables cities to apply for state and
                                                     federal grants, receive technical training and assistance, and implement
                                                     key preservation initiatives. As in the last General Plan, preparation of a
                                                     Historic Preservation Action Plan continues to be a recommended
                                                     follow-up action to obtain CLG status and establish a more detailed
                                                     strategy for implementation.
                                                     The General Plan presumes that the San Leandro Library-Historical
                                                     Commission will continue to take responsibility for implementing some
                                                     of the program recommendations related to historic preservation.
                                                     However, it also envisions a greater focus on partnerships with
                                                     preservation advocacy groups.           While the City fully supports
                                                     preservation initiatives, staff capacity is limited. The City will continue
                                                     to expand staff training in preservation standards and procedures, use
                                                     the Historic Building Code for the review of alterations to historic
                                                     buildings, and improve record keeping and inventories of historic
                                                     structures and sites. It will also use its design review and zoning
                                                     authority to establish appropriate standards not only for historic
                                                     buildings, but for construction on adjacent properties that create the
                                                     context for such buildings.
                                                     Another important City role is to protect archaeological resources
                                                     associated with the period before European settlement. This includes
                                                     following specific procedures in the event that ancient human remains or
                                                     other tribal cultural resources are uncovered during excavation or
8-12

                                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                       H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
construction. It also includes engaging the local Native American
community in planning processes and decisions relating to land use and
cultural resources. San Leandro’s City Code identifies the steps to be
followed to identify, designate, protect, enhance, and perpetuate any
archaeological resources encountered as construction and grading take
place.
Public Awareness of Local History
The loss of many local historic buildings during th e mid-20th Century has
resulted in a diminished awareness of San Leandro history among many
residents. The General Plan proposes a multi-faceted strategy to raise
awareness of the city’s history and historic resources. Such awareness
can build broader community support for preservation, while increasing
civic pride and a sense of community. Policies and actions under Goal
CD-3 propose the use of books, websites, other media, and special events
to inform the public about San Leandro’s history and the significance of
various places and buildings in the city. Continuation of existing
programs, including walking tours, awards programs, plaques and
markers, cultural fairs, and school curricula on San Leandro history, is
also recommended.
It is particularly important that outreach and educational efforts are
culturally inclusive. As San Leandro becomes more diverse, programs
that honor the history of different ethnic groups in the city and the
contributions of individual residents become a more fundamental part of
building “community.” Appreciation of cultural and ethnic history in
San Leandro can provide inspiration for today’s youth and help people
of all backgrounds understand important events in the city’s past.
                                                                                                                             8-13

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     The Economics of Preservation
                                                     The economic benefits of historic preservation are well documented.
                                                     Direct benefits include the tax credits or property tax breaks that may be
                                                     granted for officially designated buildings. A more subtle benefit is the
                                                     economic development boost that comes with the unique ambiance of a
                                                     historic area. In business districts, the special atmosphere of restored
                                                     older buildings can attract customers and act as a catalyst for investment
                                                     in neighboring properties. In residential areas, preservation efforts can
                                                     lead to higher property values and enhance the desirability of a
                                                     neighborhood. Preservation itself may generate jobs, particularly for
                                                     skilled craftspersons. Preservation can also spur the growth of tourism,
                                                     especially where districts of historic buildings have been restored and
                                                     converted to contemporary uses such as cafes and galleries.
                                                     The General Plan also calls for programs which ensure that historic
                                                     preservation makes economic sense for property owners. These
                                                     programs include financial incentives such as loans and reduced fees,
                                                     development incentives such as zoning bonuses and the use of the State
                                                     Historic Building Code, and direct financial aid through the
                                                     Redevelopment Agency. The use of the California Mills Act is also
                                                     recommended, allowing reductions of property taxes for owners who
                                                     agree to preserve and maintain a historic property for at least 10 years.
8-14
                                                                                       S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                        H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
C.       COMMUNITY DESIGN
Overview
San Leandro is set in a physically beautiful location, with picturesque
hills, a scenic shoreline, and superb views and vistas. These natural
features have shaped the City’s development and define many of its
present-day visual qualities. The primary visual impression of the City,
however, is that of a mature suburban community. Features like sound
walls, buildings, and signs define much of the City’s character and
image, particularly for travelers passing through on the freeways or on
BART.
One of the challenges facing San Leandro is to establish a stronger
identity for itself—to more clearly distinguish itself from other cities in
the East Bay and be a place that people remember and want to return to.
Because the City is adjacent to other urban
areas on the north and south, it is difficult to
distinguish where San Leandro “begins” and
“ends.” The City is relatively flat and open,
and there are few strong visual landmarks.
Moreover, many of the City’s major
thoroughfares are not particularly memorable,
and some present an outdated impression.
On the other hand, the individual
neighborhoods that make up the City—and
many of the shopping and business districts—
are well kept and attractive. Older
neighborhoods in the City have an ambiance
that    is    highly    prized,    and    newer
neighborhoods have attractively designed
housing and community spaces. Even the
post-war era subdivision tracts have matured
gracefully and come into their own as
comfortable neighborhoods. The City has
also    invested     heavily    in   streetscape
improvements, tree planting, gateway
signage, and landscaping, transforming some
of its major thoroughfares.
                                                                                                                              8-15

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     The Focus Area Strategies in the General Plan’s Land Use Element
                                                     describe ways to create a stronger and more positive image of the City.
                                                     But image building will take more than simply refurbishing buildings
                                                     and redeveloping individual sites. A concerted effort must be made to
                                                     improve gateways, thoroughfares, public buildings, parks, and the other
                                                     public spaces that define impressions of San Leandro. Policies in the
                                                     Community Design Element not only seek to create a stronger identity
                                                     for the City, they also strive for a more engaging and memorable visual
                                                     image.
                                                     Much of the attention is on the “public realm,” defined as all areas of the
                                                     city in public ownership. Such lands, which include parks, public
                                                     buildings, freeways, and all streets, sidewalks, medians, and rights of
                                                     way, comprise 45 percent of San Leandro’s total land area. The visual
                                                     quality of these areas defines how people experience San Leandro,
                                                     perhaps to an even greater extent than the landscapes and buildings on
                                                     private property. During the next 20 years, continued efforts will be
                                                     made to beautify these areas and maintain them to a standard that
                                                     communicates a positive image. New challenges such as drought and
                                                     climate change will become more critical considerations as the next
                                                     generation of public realm improvements is carried out.
                                                     While the City’s focus is on the public realm, it will also be essential to
                                                     strive for higher aesthetic standards on private property. The City
                                                     strongly encourages the revitalization of commercial strips and shopping
8-16

                                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                       H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
centers, higher quality architecture and design,
high standards for the maintenance of homes and
yards, and cleanup of litter and graffiti. Code
enforcement and compliance is a major component
of this focus. At the same time, the City must be
sensitive to the new aesthetic paradigms that come
with a more international population and a
growing number of large, multi-generational
households. The City will expand education and
outreach on its codes and standards at the same
time it seeks to learn from its residents and be
responsive to the needs of a culturally diverse
population. Strategies for public and private
property should work together to create a more
positive image of the City for residents and
visitors and to present a favorable impression of
San Leandro to the rest of the region.
Building a Sense of Place
Communities with a strong “sense of place” usually share several
qualities, such as interesting or historic architecture, unique shops or
businesses, and lively public spaces. Some of these qualities existed in
San Leandro prior to World War II but were compromised as the City
grew and adapted to modern times. The City is taking steps to create
such spaces in several locations, including Downtown, the BART Station
areas, and its industrial districts. San Leandro has many places with the
potential to become more unique destinations. Each of these areas also
should help create a more distinct image for the City as a whole. The key
factors that contribute to San Leandro’s sense of place are described
below. Each is addressed in the policies and actions under Goal CD-5.
Gateways
One of the most effective ways to distinguish San Leandro from its
neighbors is to enhance the gateways into the City (see Figure 8-2).
Gateways can incorporate monuments, welcome signs, landscaped
medians, pavement changes, and other features that create a sense of
arrival and visual interest. Gateways can also serve this function for
individual neighborhoods, while contributing to neighborhood identity
and pride. Over the years, the City has invested in significant gateway
improvements on East 14th Street, Davis Street, and Marina Boulevard.
                                                                                                                             8-17

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     Some of these gateways serve to formally mark the entrance to the city
                                                     (e.g., the East 14th Street monument at Durant Avenue) while others are
                                                     intended to create a positive first impression and beautify adjacent
                                                     neighborhoods (Davis Street landscaping east of I-880).
                                                     The City has also developed neighborhood gateways for major
                                                     residential areas, such as Halcyon-Foothill, Washington Manor, and
                                                     Broadmoor. Gateways between the Downtown BART station and
                                                     Downtown San Leandro also have been enhanced, restoring portions of
                                                     the street grid to pedestrian circulation in the vicinity of San Leandro
                                                     Plaza. Some neighborhoods presently lack gateway features and would
                                                     benefit from such improvements in the future.
8-18
                               S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                  Figure 8-2
              Community Design Features
                                                                      8-19
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     Several areas have been identified as priorities for future gateway
                                                     improvements. These include:
                                                        Marina Boulevard west of I-880. The segment of Marina Boulevard
                                                         between I-880 and Doolittle Drive is characterized by commercial
                                                         uses around the Merced Street intersection, heavy industrial uses
                                                         westward to the railroad tracks, and a mix of commercial and
                                                         residential uses extending to Doolittle Drive. As the gateway to the
                                                         San Leandro Shoreline and much of the city’s west side, the street
                                                         should be attractive and well maintained. This is also the gateway to
                                                         the new Kaiser Permanente Hospital and a future retail center on the
                                                         parcel to its north. Investment in streetscape improvements,
                                                         landscaping, and signage is recommended for this area.
                                                        East 14th Street/150th Avenue/Hesperian. This gateway includes the
                                                         “five points” intersection just north of Bayfair Center. As the City’s
                                                         southern entrance (and a gateway to the Bay Fair district), the vacant
                                                         triangle at the center of the intersection presents an opportunity for a
                                                                               bold gateway statement including public art.
                                                                                       Downtown BART Station gateways. The
                                                                               Focus Area text for the Downtown BART area
                                                                               (Chapter 3) identifies planned improvements to
                                                                               Downtown gateways, including San Leandro
                                                                               Boulevard and Alvarado Street. Gateways in
                                                                               this area should be designed as much for
                                                                               arriving transit passengers as for motorists, and
                                                                               should facilitate pedestrian movement between
                                                                               the station, the emerging business district on the
                                                                               west, and the established business district four
                                                                               blocks to the east.
                                                                                       Southern San Leandro gateways. A
                                                                               number of gateways into the City exist along its
                                                                               southern boundary, including Hesperian
                                                                               Boulevard,       Lewelling     Boulevard,     and
                                                                               Washington Avenue. A stronger sense of arrival
                                                                               into San Leandro could be created through more
                                                                               prominent signage and landscaping at these
                                                                               locations. Washington Avenue is particularly
                                                                               important, as it is the primary spine connecting
                                                                               southern San Leandro neighborhoods with
                                                                               Downtown.
8-20

                                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                       H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
Activity Centers
Activity centers are the places in a community where people gather.
They can include shopping centers, transit stations, parks, civic
buildings, office buildings, and other places that provide a focus for the
day to day activities that go on in a city. The most successful and
memorable activity centers usually serve multiple functions and are
designed with pedestrians in mind. At one time, the Downtown Plaza
was the major activity center in San Leandro. Although the Plaza’s
appearance has changed substantially during the last 50 years, there are
ongoing efforts to restore some of its original design elements and
function as a civic gathering place.
The Land Use Element sets forth a strategy to more clearly define
activity centers in San Leandro, particularly Downtown and along East
14th Street. Adding amenities such as street trees and wider sidewalks
can make these areas more attractive to visit. Placing parking lots to the
rear of buildings instead of along the street frontage also can improve
visual quality. Meanwhile, encouraging particular uses or promoting
unique architectural themes can lend character and help these areas
stand out from other parts of the City and region.
                                                                                                                             8-21

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     The Land Use and Economic Development Elements also discuss the
                                                     need for activity centers in San Leandro’s industrial districts. The Next
                                                     Generation Workplace Districts Study commissioned by the City in 2013
                                                     concluded that the city’s other older industrial areas had a dearth of
                                                     employee-oriented amenities such as restaurants, hotels, and health
                                                     clubs. The Study recommended creating a central location where dining,
                                                     lodging, and professional and personal service businesses could cluster.
                                                     The logical location for such a center is the area around Merced Street
                                                     near Marina Boulevard, including adjacent segments of each street.
                                                     Focusing employee-oriented commercial activities in this area can create
                                                     a stronger sense of place, enhance real estate values, and make West San
                                                     Leandro more attractive to existing and prospective employers.
                                                     Views and Vistas
                                                     Views are also an important part of San Leandro’s character. The hill
                                                     neighborhoods feature dramatic and panoramic views across the City
                                                     and surrounding region. Many shoreline areas also feature sweeping
                                                     views, taking in the open waters of the Bay and landmarks on the
                                                     western horizon. Elsewhere in the City, the San Leandro Hills form an
                                                     attractive backdrop for many residential areas.
                                                                                             The City has taken steps to
                                                                                             preserve panoramic views within
                                                                                             the San Leandro Hills by limiting
                                                                                             the height of new homes and
                                                                                             additions and soliciting public
                                                                                             input when new homes and
                                                                                             major additions are proposed.
                                                                                             Such measures should help
                                                                                             preserve the defining qualities of
                                                                                             Bay-O-Vista and other hillside
                                                                                             neighborhoods. Elsewhere in the
                                                                                             City, discretionary review is
                                                                                             typically required for large
                                                                                             homes and additions, creating an
                                                                                             opportunity to protect privacy
                                                                                             and preserve important views.
8-22

                                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                       H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
Visual Landmarks
One way to maintain civic identity is to preserve the structures or
landscape features that provide orientation in the City. Visual landmarks
need not be historic structures. For instance, the tallest building in San
Leandro is the Kraft plant—a structure not particularly renowned for its
architectural beauty. The factory is nonetheless a quickly recognized
focal point and hallmark of the San Leandro cityscape. The same might
be said of the Bal Theatre, St. Leander’s Church, some of the vintage
signs along East 14th Street, and even the row of eucalyptus trees that
follow San Leandro Creek.
There are opportunities to create new landmarks in developing parts of
the city. Buildings in these areas can become points of visual interest by
including architectural features (such as clock towers or spires) that can
be appreciated from nearby areas. On a smaller scale, visual landmarks
can be created through accentuated building corners and the use of
elements such as distinctive color, lighting, and outdoor spaces at key
intersections and on key sites. The design of public buildings is
particularly important, and should signal to passers-by that such places
are gathering places and centers of civic life.
Quality Construction and Design
The appearance of local buildings is probably the most obvious aspect of
community design. Design guidelines have been prepared for a number
of areas, such as Downtown San Leandro and East 14 th Street. These
guidelines ensure that new development fits with the surrounding
                                                                                                                             8-23

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     context and enhances the area’s overall appearance. In each case, the
                                                     guidelines reflect the City’s aspirations for how each area should look,
                                                     noting the qualities to be preserved or created as development takes
                                                     place.
                                                     San Leandro’s design review program may be expanded during the
                                                     coming years to place a greater emphasis on older residential
                                                     neighborhoods, corridor streets, city gateways, and employment
                                                     districts. The objective of design review may vary from area to area. In
                                                     older areas with a strong sense of architectural character, neighborhood
                                                     fabric can be easily disrupted by projects that are insensitive to
                                                     neighbors, block views, or are excessively large or bulky. New
                                                     construction in such areas should be compatible with prevailing building
                                                     styles, heights, dimensions, and setbacks. Contemporary architecture is
                                                     not necessarily inappropriate in such areas, but must not diminish the
                                                     architectural integrity of nearby buildings.
                                                     On the other hand, design guidelines should support General Plan
                                                     policies to “reinvent” such areas as Bayfair Center and West San
                                                     Leandro. These areas provide opportunities to define a new, more
                                                     positive identity and set a higher standard for new development.
                                                     Innovative architecture is particularly encouraged in workplace districts,
                                                     and in areas where there is no cohesive architectural theme at this time.
                                                     Building design in such areas can advance the image of the city as bold,
                                                     creative, and forward-thinking. Design guidelines would still need to
                                                     address compatibility with nearby uses, including the need to “step
                                                     down” building heights or establish buffers on parcels abutting
                                                     residential areas.
8-24

                                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
The quality of construction is also an important part of community
design. The most highly regarded buildings in San Leandro tend to be
those that are built of quality materials, with attention to detail and
excellent craftsmanship. The City’s plan checking and building
inspection programs assure that new construction will meet a basic
standard of quality and safety. The City should continue to sponsor an
annual design awards program to recognize those who exceed this
standard and demonstrate exemplary design and construction quality.
At the same time, the City’s zoning regulations and design standards
should recognize the imperative need for housing in the Bay Area, and
the needs of multi-generational families and lower income households.
The City can be a role model for private property owners in the design
and appearance of public facilities and properties. New community
facilities, fire stations, libraries, and other public buildings should set an
example by being attractively designed. Likewise, the school districts
and other public agencies should strive for architectural excellence and a
high level of craftsmanship in new facilities and major remodeling
projects. Some of the most important buildings constructed in San
Leandro during the past decade have been public facilities, including the
Senior Community Center, the Manor Library, and the 9th Grade SLHS
Campus.
Toward a More Visually Attractive City
Perhaps the most deeply ingrained impressions of San Leandro are
formed by those passing through the city on the freeway and its major
thoroughfares. Many Bay Area residents may know San Leandro only as
the “next three exits” on the freeway. Others know the city only from
traveling through on BART or along East 14th Street. Although the
opportunities to influence perceptions from these vantage points may be
limited, the sheer volume of people passing through the city in this
manner each day make it imperative to do whatever can be done to
impart a positive impression. The policies and actions under Goal CD-7
represent a citywide strategy to beautify the city’s streets and public
spaces. Components of this strategy include scenic highway
designations, street trees, public art, utility undergrounding, sign
control, lighting, and the inclusion of urban open spaces in new
development areas.
                                                                                                                                 8-25

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     Scenic Highways
                                                     Nearly 30 years ago, the San Leandro General Plan designated both the
                                                     Nimitz (I-880) and MacArthur (I-580) Freeways as scenic highways.
                                                     Neither of these freeways is formally recognized by the state as such,
                                                     although I-580 has been deemed “eligible” by Caltrans and is formally
                                                     designated a scenic highway north of 98th Avenue in Oakland. The
                                                     City’s designation of its freeways as “scenic” was largely symbolic and
                                                     was intended to encourage Caltrans to invest in landscaping and
                                                     decorative sound walls along both facilities. Although this work has
                                                     largely been completed, the City continues to have a strong interest in
                                                     participating in the design of any changes to the freeways. This includes
                                                     the design of open spaces at the interchanges, state-owned land along
                                                     the freeway edges, and freeway underpasses and overpasses.
                                                     Other San Leandro streets, such as Davis Street, Marina Boulevard, and
                                                     East 14th Street, are not formally designated as “scenic” but remain
                                                     priorities for streetscape improvements due to their high volumes and
                                                     function as gateways. One of the objectives of the “complete streets”
                                                     policies in the Transportation Element of the General Plan is to make
                                                     such streets safer and more comfortable for transit users, pedestrians,
                                                                       and bicyclists. This sometimes involves reducing or
                                                                       narrowing travel lanes, and adding landscaping, street
                                                                       trees, street furniture, and other measures that also
                                                                       enhance the street’s scenic value.
                                                                       Typically, streets feel more “comfortable” when they
                                                                       create a sense of enclosure and are designed with
                                                                       pedestrians and bicyclists in mind. Even on high-volume
                                                                       streets like Marina Boulevard and Doolittle Drive,
                                                                       landscaping and lighting can beautify the street
                                                                       environment. The extent of planting area, width and
                                                                       condition of the pavement, amount and speed of traffic,
                                                                       location of parking, and heights and setbacks of abutting
                                                                       buildings and signs, all determine whether the street is
                                                                       perceived as a comfortable civic space or merely a conduit
                                                                       for cars.
                                                                       Please consult the Transportation Element (Chapter 4) for
                                                                       additional guidelines on improving the visual quality of City
                                                                       streets and making San Leandro more pedestrian friendly. In
                                                                       addition, the Focus Area discussions in Chapter 3 identify ways
                                                                       to improve the appearance of specific thoroughfares in the city
8-26

                                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                       H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
Street Trees
Street trees positively affect the character of many San Leandro
neighborhoods. They provide a source of natural beauty and an
immediate connection to nature. Properly selected and maintained, street
trees can turn a barren street into a park-like environment. Street trees
also provide ecological benefits, such as habitat for wildlife, buffering of
noise, and absorption of runoff and air pollutants.
Street trees are currently required in new subdivisions and are a key
component of most commercial improvement programs in the city.
Trees have helped transform the character of East 14 th Street in
Downtown San Leandro, adding value to adjoining properties and
making the street environment more pleasant. At the same time, a
number of street trees are removed each year because of disease, age,
hazards to nearby structures, and homeowner requests. Replacement of
such trees with new specimens is a high priority, as is increasing the
overall number of trees in the city. Presently, the San Leandro Public
Works Department maintains 20,000 trees on City property, including
trees along streets and in City parks.
Residents may request to have City trees planted or replaced in the right-
of-way in front of their home or business. The City offers a variety of
species to choose from, and emphasizes trees that grow well in San
Leandro, are appropriate for the planting space available, avoid sidewalk
damage, and do not require frequent pruning or excessive water.
Property owners are responsible for watering such trees and maintaining
                                                                                                                             8-27
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     the area beneath the canopy. Tree trimming is conducted according to a
                                                     regular schedule and in response to individual requests. More specific
                                                     direction on tree species and planting guidelines may be included in
                                                     improvement plans for particular areas of the city.
                                                     At the time of General Plan adoption, the City did not regulate the
                                                     removal of trees on private property. However, a number of options are
                                                     being studied and a draft ordinance applying to large native trees is
                                                     under consideration. In the event such an ordinance is adopted, removal
                                                     of certain large trees would require City approval. Regardless of the
                                                     outcome, the City will continue to support expansion of San Leandro’s
                                                     “urban forest” and continued public education on the benefits and
                                                     proper care of trees.
                                                     Public Art
                                                     Public art can include sculpture, statues, monuments, murals, fountains,
                                                     and other forms of art which beautify public and private spaces in the
                                                     City. Good public art can enrich civic spaces and celebrate local culture
                                                     and history. It can capture the imagination of the City, express its
                                                     creative energy and cultural diversity, and showcase the work of local
                                                     artists. San Leandro does not have a public art requirement for private
                                                     development but encourages outdoor sculpture and public gathering
                                                     places in major projects. It may also require public art through
                                                     development agreements, as it did for the San Leandro Tech Campus.
                                                     The City itself has developed or funded a number of notable art pieces
                                                     and recognizes the power of art to connect people and place.
8-28

                                                                                       S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                        H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
Recent years have seen significant investment in public art, including a
butterfly mural at St. Leander’s Gymnasium, the 350-foot long Pulse of
Nature mural at Preferred Freezer, and painted utility boxes throughout
the city. Planned investments include transformative pieces such as
Truth is Beauty adjacent to the San Leandro Tech Campus. The 55-foot
tall metal sculpture will not only enliven an important public space in
the heart of the city, it will symbolize San Leandro’s emergence as a
place where technology and art intersect. Technology and art are also
coming together at the Living Innovation Zone on Joaquin Avenue at
East 14th Street and at the Interactive Urban Lighting project on West
Estudillo Avenue.
Many more opportunities exist for public art in San Leandro, particularly
Downtown, in the BART Station areas, along the shoreline, and in the
major activity centers along East 14th Street. Art would also be a
welcome addition in the city’s industrial areas, particularly where the
city’s industrial heritage, emerging innovation businesses, and local
artistic talent can be showcased. The City is in the process of preparing a
Public Arts Master Plan that will provide strategic direction for the
expansion of the public arts program, including financing strategies and
new initiatives. These initiatives could include a development fee for art
and programs for temporary as well as permanent installations. The
Master Plan should also address selection criteria for art, and potential
sites or priority areas for new installations.
                                                                                                                              8-29

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     Utility Undergrounding
                                                     One of the most widespread sources of visual blight along San Leandro’s
                                                     thoroughfares and in its neighborhoods is overhead utility wires. The
                                                     City has worked with local utility companies for more than 45 years to
                                                     place these wires underground, but the costs are very high and progress
                                                     has been slow. An Undergrounding Master Plan, including a project
                                                     priority list, has been developed by the City. East 14th Street has been
                                                     identified as the top priority for undergrounding for more than 15 years.
                                                     A Utility Assessment District has been created for the portion of the
                                                     corridor between Thornton and 150th Avenue and undergrounding of
                                                     conduits is projected to take place in late 2016.
                                                     Sign Control
                                                     Signs in San Leandro are regulated by Article 18 of the Zoning Code.
                                                     Administration of these regulations helps to avoid visual clutter along
                                                     the City’s thoroughfares and encourages more attractive and tasteful
                                                     signage. It is important to regularly update the sign regulations to keep
                                                     pace w ith changes in the types of signs and methods of advertising that
                                                     are being used. Moreover, there is ongoing interest in developing more
                                                                            high quality signage, particularly for retail
                                                                            businesses and shopping centers. At the same time,
                                                                            there is interest in maintaining exemptions for
                                                                            vintage signs that contribute to community
                                                                            character. Design guidelines for major shopping
                                                                            streets and business districts should include
                                                                            provisions for signage which consider both business
                                                                            needs and aesthetic objectives.
                                                                            Wireless Facilities
                                                                            Wireless Facilities such as cell phone towers can
                                                                            have visual impacts and become a source of blight if
                                                                            not carefully regulated. At the same time, the
                                                                            federal government limits the City’s land use
                                                                            authority over such facilities. San Leandro has
                                                                            adopted a Wireless Telecommunications Ordinance
                                                                            that establishes guidelines for wireless facilities
                                                                            while recognizing the limits of local control. The
                                                                            ordinance seeks to direct towers to non-residential
                                                                            areas, limit their total extent and reduce their visual
8-30

                                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                       H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
impacts, and encourage the co-location of equipment on existing towers
wherever possible.
Lighting
The lighting of streets and buildings should serve an aesthetic purpose
as well as functional and safety purposes. Vintage lighting fixtures are an
important part of the ambiance of older San Leandro neighborhoods
such as Broadmoor. In commercial areas, lighting can define the mood
along the street by night and enhance its appearance during the day.
The lighting of buildings is similarly important. Lighting should be an
integral part of a building’s architecture, particularly in pedestrian-
oriented commercial districts. Uplighting of noteworthy structures and
landscaping can showcase some of the City’s best visual qualities. The
way that signage is illuminated also can define an area’s character and
affect its overall appeal. In pursuing appropriate lighting for streets and
public spaces, the City must balance aesthetic and design considerations
with issues such as security, traffic safety, energy conservation, and
maintenance costs.
Urban Open Space
San Leandro should promote urban open spaces such as plazas and
courtyards wherever the opportunities present themselves. Fountains,
trees, sculpture, seating areas, parklets, and other amenities should be
included in large development areas and in major public projects to
enhance their appeal and visual interest. Where the spaces are large
enough, street vendors, special events, art fairs, farmers markets, and
similar events should be encouraged to create active street life and places
where the public can gather. For larger buildings and structures such as
parking garages, opportunities for rooftop open space should be
explored. The areas around the Downtown BART station, the Downtown
Plaza, and the streets between BART and Downtown provide the most
immediate opportunities for new urban open spaces. Opportunities for
special paving, exhibit space, vendors and food carts, street furniture,
and landscaping can enhance such spaces, while reinforcing the image of
Downtown as the city center.
                                                                                                                             8-31

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y  D E S I G N
                                                     D.        GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
                                                     H ISTORIC P RESERVATION P ROGRAM
                                                     GOAL CD-1               Identify, preserve, and maintain San Leandro’s
                                                                             historic resources and recognize these resources as an
                                                                             essential part of the City’s character and heritage.
                                                     Policy CD-1.1        Broad Approach to Preservation. Take a broad and
                                                                          comprehensive approach to historic preservation in San
                                                                          Leandro. Preservation efforts should recognize the City’s
                                                                          cultural history as well as its architectural history, its
                                                                          neighborhoods as well as individual buildings, its
                                                                          natural landscape as well as its built environment, and
                                                                          its archaeology as \well as its living history.
                                                     Policy CD-1.2        Enhancing Local Identity. Recognize the potential for
                                                                          publicly sponsored historic preservation programs and
                                                                          privately initiated historic preservation efforts to
                                                                          enhance San Leandro’s identity as an attractive and
                                                                          distinct community.
                                                     Policy CD-1.3        Program Development.              Develop and maintain
                                                                          programs that recognize and protect historic sites,
                                                                          structures, trees, and other landscape features.
                                                                          Action CD-1.3.A: Downtown Plaza Revitalization
                                                                          Continue efforts to restore elements of historic Downtown San
                                                                          Leandro, such as the Plaza at Washington and East 14th
                                                                          Street and the original street grid in the vicinity of the
                                                                          Downtown (Safeway) shopping plaza.
                                                     Policy CD-1.4        Historic Districts. Encourage the formation of local
                                                                          historic districts in areas where historic sites and
                                                                          structures are concentrated. Such districts should
                                                                          provide for the preservation, restoration, and public
                                                                          recognition of the resources contained therein. Historic
                                                                          districts should be structured to minimize costs and
                                                                          administrative burdens for property owners. Historic
                                                                          designations should include incentives to adaptively
8-32

                                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
              reuse older structures and avoid the demolition of
              historically important buildings.
              Action CD-1.4.A: Old San Leandro Historic District
              Create an “Old San Leandro” Historic District in the vicinity
              of the Casa Peralta and Daniel Best House, and consider the
              eligibility of this district to be listed at the state or national
              levels. The boundaries of the district should be established
              through an evaluation process that is based on the significance
              and historic integrity of the sites, structures, buildings, and
              objects making up the district. Following establishment of the
              historic district, programs should be implemented for
              improvement and restoration of historic structures.
              Development and design standards for the District should
              ensure that the area’s historic ambiance and pedestrian scale is
              maintained as future development takes place in the
              surrounding transit-oriented development area.
Policy CD-1.5 Historic Neighborhoods. Promote the conservation of
              historic neighborhoods and the restoration of historic
              features in such neighborhoods, including structures,
              street lamps, signage, landscaping, and architectural
              elements.
              Action CD-1.5.A: Design Guidelines for Older
              Neighborhoods
              Adopt residential design guidelines and incorporate those
              guidelines in the review of proposed infill development,
              additions, and major alterations. The guidelines should
              recognize the characteristic scale and architectural styles of
              San Leandro's older neighborhoods, and help to preserve those
              features in the future.
Policy CD-1.6 Historic Resource Surveys. Update, expand, and
              maintain inventories of San Leandro’s historic resources,
              using criteria and survey methods that are consistent
              with state and federal guidelines.
                                                                                                                                 8-33

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y  D E S I G N
                                                                          Action CD-1.6.A: Expansion of the Historic Registry
                                                                          Support efforts by local historic organizations to maintain and
                                                                          update inventories of local historic resources, and present
                                                                          proposals to the City for additions to the local register. The
                                                                          City should consider the addition of Veterans Memorial
                                                                          Auditorium, McKinley and Washington Elementary Schools,
                                                                          and San Leandro City Hall to its current register.
                                                     Policy CD-1.7        Protecting Resource Integrity.             Ensure that new
                                                                          development, alterations, and remodeling projects on or
                                                                          adjacent to historic properties are sensitive to historic
                                                                          resources and are compatible with the surrounding
                                                                          historic context. Ensure that the San Leandro Zoning
                                                                          Ordinance and any future design guidelines include the
                                                                          necessary standards and guidelines to implement this
                                                                          policy.
                                                     Policy CD-1.8         Relocation of Historic Structures.            Encourage the
                                                                          relocation of older structures into designated historic
                                                                          districts as an alternative to demolition and an incentive
                                                                          for restoration.
                                                     Policy CD-1.9        Maintenance and Rehabilitation. Strongly encourage
                                                                          the maintenance and upkeep of historic properties to
                                                                          avoid the need for costly rehabilitation and demolition.
                                                                          Demolition should only be allowed if the City
                                                                          determines that it is necessary to protect health, safety,
                                                                          and welfare, and that the structure has no reasonable
                                                                          economic use.
                                                     Policy CD-1.10       Seismic Upgrades.           Promote the upgrading and
                                                                          restoration of historic structures to meet current seismic
                                                                          safety codes, thereby reducing the potential for damage
                                                                          in an earthquake. Seismic rehabilitation projects should
                                                                          be sympathetic to the architectural character of the
                                                                          structure.
                                                     Policy CD-1.11       Post-Disaster Replacement. In the event that a historic
                                                                          structure is damaged by fire, earthquake, or other
                                                                          natural disaster or catastrophic event to the point where
                                                                          demolition is necessary, encourage the new structure to
                                                                          respect the historic architectural character and form of
                                                                          the building it replaces.
8-34
                                                                                           S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           H I S T O R I C  P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
Policy CD-1.12 Archaeological Resources. Recognize the potential for
               paleontological, prehistoric, historic, archaeological, and
               tribal cultural resources and ensure that future
               development takes the measures necessary to identify
               and preserve such resources.
               Action CD-1.12.A: Archaeological Site Inventory
               Maintain standard conditions of approval for new
               development which require consultation with a professional
               archaeologist in the event that any subsurface paleontological,
               prehistoric, archaeological, or tribal cultural resource remains
               are discovered during any construction or preconstruction
               activities on a development site. This includes consultation
               with Native American organizations prior to continued site
               work in the event such remains are discovered.
               Action CD-1.12.B: AB 52 Compliance
               Implement the provisions of AB 52                regarding tribal
               consultation.     The City will provide         opportunities for
               meaningful input regarding the protection       of tribal resources
               from Native American representatives in         the planning and
               development review processes.
Policy CD-1.13 Protecting the Recent Past.                Ensure that local
               preservation programs include structures from the
               recent past (after 1945) that represent unique or
               noteworthy examples of the architectural styles and
               trends of the time.
               See Goals OSC-7 and -8 for policies on green building and
               sustainable design
                                                                                                                                  8-35
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     D EFINING THE C ITY ' S R OLE
                                                     GOAL CD-2             Make protection of historic resources a high City
                                                                           priority, to be implemented through improved
                                                                           record keeping, adequately funded programs, and
                                                                           more effective regulatory measures.
                                                     Policy CD-2.1       Preservation and City Planning.                Recognize the
                                                                         importance of local historic and cultural resources in the
                                                                         City’s long-range planning activities, including the
                                                                         General Plan, specific plans, and neighborhood or area
                                                                         plans. Maintain a historic preservation component in the
                                                                         General Plan, with periodic updates to reflect changing
                                                                         conditions, additional listings, and new preservation
                                                                         programs.
                                                                         Action CD-2.1.A: Preservation Action Plan
                                                                         Prepare a Historic Preservation Action Plan, which outlines
                                                                         in greater detail how General Plan historic preservation
                                                                         programs will be implemented and funded.
                                                                         Action CD-2.1.B: Certified Local Government Designation
                                                                         Take the steps necessary to have San Leandro designated as a
                                                                         Certified Local Government (CLG) for historic preservation
                                                                         purposes, thereby making the City eligible for State historic
                                                                         preservation fund grants. These steps include an updated
                                                                         survey of historic buildings, as described in Action CD-1.6.A.
                                                     Policy CD-2.2       Planning and Building Decisions. Ensure that day-to-
                                                                         day planning and building activities, including the
                                                                         issuance of building permits, demolition permits, zoning
                                                                         approvals, site plan approvals, and use permits, are
                                                                         consistent with and further the achievement of local
                                                                         historic preservation goals. The City's zoning and
                                                                         building codes should support the reuse and restoration
                                                                         of historic buildings.
                                                                         Action CD-2.2.A: Historic Preservation Staff
                                                                         Create and maintain a part-time staff or volunteer position
                                                                         through the San Leandro Library to implement the Mills Act,
                                                                         research grant funding for preservation activities, and
                                                                         implement other historic preservation initiatives.
8-36

                                                                                        S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                         H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
              Action CD-2.2.B: Training Program
              Establish an on-going training program for City Staff on local
              historic preservation standards and procedures.
Policy CD-2.3 Historic Preservation Ordinance. Maintain a City
              Historic Preservation Ordinance that provides for the
              protection of historic resources within the City of San
              Leandro.
              Action CD-2.3.A: Preservation Ordinance Update
              Periodically review, and if necessary update, the City's
              Historic Preservation Ordinance (Municipal Code Chapter 4-
              26) to ensure that the policies in the General Plan are being
              effectively implemented.
              Action CD-2.3.B: Downtown Design Guidelines
              Expand the Downtown Design Guidelines to more effectively
              address the preservation of historic buildings. Such guidelines
              should continue to address features such as lighting, signage,
              windows, awnings, and building materials, but with a greater
              emphasis on preservation and restoration when they are
              applied to historic structures.
Policy CD-2.4 Review Board Authority.              Ensure that the City
              commissions and departments assigned to implement
              historic preservation programs are given the resources,
              tools, and authority needed to carry out these programs.
              Action CD-2.4.A: Role of the Library-Historical
              Commission
              Continue to provide City support for the Library-Historical
              Commission so that it may effectively implement the General
              Plan’s historic preservation policies and actions. The
              Commission shall be provided with the necessary resources, as
              determined by the City Council, to make historic preservation
              a major focus of their efforts.
                                                                                                                               8-37

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     Policy CD-2.5       Improved Record Keeping. Continue to update and
                                                                         expand GIS data on historic resources as such resources
                                                                         are identified. Such data should be linked to property
                                                                         records such that historic properties can be readily
                                                                         identified when planning and building permit
                                                                         applications for these properties are submitted.
                                                     Policy CD-2.6       Historic Public Buildings. Take a leadership role in
                                                                         historic preservation by maintaining and reinvesting in
                                                                         older public buildings, and by working with the local
                                                                         school districts to maintain and enhance historic school
                                                                         buildings.
                                                     Policy CD-2.7       Community Partnerships.            Promote partnerships
                                                                         between the City of San Leandro, Alameda County,
                                                                         community groups, non-profits, and the private sector to
                                                                         advance historic preservation activities in the City and
                                                                         its sphere of influence.
                                                      Policy CD-2.8      Citizen-Led Preservation Efforts.        Encourage and
                                                                         support grass roots preservation efforts initiated by
                                                                         neighborhoods and community organizations. Provide
                                                                         technical support to such groups and encourage their
                                                                         participation in City-sponsored preservation surveys
                                                                         and activities.
8-38
                                                                                       S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                        H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
P UBLIC A WARENESS OF L OCAL H ISTORY
GOAL CD-3       Heighten public awareness of San Leandro’s history
                and historic resources, both locally and throughout
                the Bay Area.
Policy CD-3.1 Media Development. Encourage the development of
              websites, books, videos, pamphlets, exhibits, displays,
              and other media that commemorate San Leandro history
              and historic resources.
              Action CD-3.1.A: A Garden Grows in Eden
              Support the update of “A Garden Grows in Eden,” the 1972
              book on San Leandro’s history, so that it adequately covers the
              second half of the 20th century. Pursue funding to update the
              centennial film that was produced to accompany the book prior
              to the 2022 sesquicentennial.
              Action CD-3.1.B: History Education and Outreach
              Collaborate with the San Leandro Historical Society in
              expanding education, outreach, and awareness of San Leandro
              History. New means of outreach, such as YouTube videos and
              social media pages or user groups, should be utilized.
Policy CD-3.2 Special Events. Promote festivals, walking tours, and
              special events that celebrate San Leandro history and
              culture.
              Action CD-3.2.A: Volunteer Docent Program
              Continue the volunteer docent program on San Leandro
              history, including speakers and walking tour leaders.
              Action CD-3.2.B: Heritage Festivals
              Support special events sponsored by the San Leandro
              Historical Society, and other local organizations involved in
              commemorating San Leandro history.
              Action CD-3.2.C: Self-Guided Tour
              Expand web-based information on San Leandro history and
              historic buildings and sites, including a self-guided walking
              tour highlighting major landmarks.
                                                                                                                              8-39

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     Policy CD-3.3       Site Plaques. Encourage the identification of historic
                                                                         resources with plaques and markers.
                                                                         Action CD-3.3.A: Marker and Plaque Program
                                                                         Expand the City’s historic marker and plaque program, and
                                                                         develop a priority list for marking additional sites and
                                                                         structures.
                                                     Policy CD-3.4       Commemorative Art. Promote murals, monuments,
                                                                         statues, and other forms of public art that commemorate
                                                                         San Leandro history and culture. Such projects should
                                                                         be incorporated in public buildings and major public
                                                                         works projects wherever feasible.
                                                     Policy CD-3.5       Coordination of Preservation Groups.                  Encourage
                                                                         communication and collaboration among the different
                                                                         groups and organizations in the City that promote
                                                                         historic preservation, and among those groups that have
                                                                         an institutional knowledge of the City’s history or
                                                                         historic resources. Support efforts by the San Leandro
                                                                         Historical Society and other preservation groups to play
                                                                         a greater role in public education and advocacy
                                                                         regarding the City’s historic resources.
                                                                         Action CD-3.5.A: Preservation Design Awards
                                                                         Encourage local design awards programs to include design
                                                                         categories for preservation-related activities such as
                                                                         rehabilitation and adaptive reuse.
                                                                         Action CD-3.5.B: Expansion of Archives
                                                                         Support the continued efforts of local historic preservation
                                                                         groups to collect photos and other archival materials on the
                                                                         City’s history. Such efforts should consider not only the City’s
                                                                         early history, but also events, sites, and structures through the
                                                                         Mid-20th Century.
                                                     Policy CD-3.6       School Curricula. Continue collaborative efforts by the
                                                                         City, the school districts, the State of California, and
                                                                         local historic preservation groups to integrate San
                                                                         Leandro history lessons and field trips into local teacher
                                                                         training and educational curricula.
8-40

                                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                          H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
Policy CD-3.7  Cultural Inclusiveness. Ensure that San Leandro’s
               historic preservation efforts are culturally inclusive and
               recognize the contributions of the City’s many racial and
               ethnic groups to its development. Programs that trace
               the roots and celebrate the history of different ethnic
               groups should be strongly encouraged, along with
               outreach to minorities, youth and under-represented
               groups.
Policy CD-3.8  Use of Historic Buildings. Encourage the use of historic
               buildings for community events and the acquisition of
               important historic buildings for public use as a means of
               increasing awareness of local history.
               Action CD-3.8.A: San Leandro History Room
               Maintain the San Leandro History Room in the Main Library
               as a central repository for historic books, photos, records, and
               other materials associated with the City’s history and expand
               these archives.
               Action CD-3.8.B: San Leandro Historic Museum
               Maintain the San Leandro Historic Museum and Art Gallery
               as a cultural and educational resource and space for sharing
               San Leandro's historic legacy with residents, especially
               students.
Policy CD-3.9  Famous Sons and Daughters. Encourage programs that
               honor San Leandro residents who have made significant
               contributions to local history.
Policy CD-3.10 Historic Industry and Commerce. Expand awareness
               and recognition of the history of industry and commerce
               in San Leandro, and ensure that the local business
               community is fully engaged in discussions about
               preservation.
                                                                                                                                8-41

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     E CONOMICS OF P RESERVATION
                                                     GOAL CD-4             Recognize historic preservation as an economic
                                                                           development tool, while ensuring that preservation
                                                                           activities make economic sense for residents and
                                                                           businesses.
                                                     Policy CD-4.1       Funding Sources. Pursue a wide variety of grants and
                                                                         funds for future preservation efforts. Local benefactor
                                                                         programs, including corporate sponsorship, should be
                                                                         encouraged as a means of raising funds for preservation
                                                                         activities.
                                                                         Action CD-4.1.A: State and Federal Funds
                                                                         Apply for state and federal funding to implement local historic
                                                                         preservation programs, including the California Heritage
                                                                         Fund and the National Trust for Historic Preservation’s Main
                                                                         Street Program Fund.
                                                     Policy CD-4.2       Tax Credits and Incentives. Encourage the use of
                                                                         federal and state historic preservation financial
                                                                         incentives, including historic preservation tax credit and
                                                                         tax relief programs.
                                                                         Action CD-4.2.A: Mills Act
                                                                         Seek opportunities to use the California Mills Act and federal
                                                                         rehabilitation tax credit programs as financial incentives for
                                                                         historic building owners. Provide sufficient staffing to
                                                                         administer the Mills Act program at the local level.
                                                     Policy CD-4.3       Economic Assistance.            Promote local economic
                                                                         incentives and assistance programs for preservation.
                                                                         Explore the feasibility of other local programs that
                                                                         provide financial, technical, or legal assistance to those
                                                                         undertaking preservation activities in the City.
                                                     Policy CD-4.4       Planning and Building Codes.             Ensure that local
                                                                         planning and building codes and procedures facilitate
                                                                         historic preservation.
8-42

                                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                       H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
Policy CD-4.5 Preservation and Tourism. Promote San Leandro’s
              history and historic buildings in the City’s business
              development efforts, and pursue opportunities for
              additional historic visitor attractions in the City.
S ENSE OF P LACE
Goal CD-5        Promote a stronger “sense of place” in San Leandro.
Policy CD-5.1 Gateways. Develop landscaped gateway features to
              identify neighborhoods, business districts, and major
              city entryways. Gateways should incorporate design and
              graphic themes that help define a unique identity for
              each neighborhood and district.
              Action CD-5.1.A: Gateway Improvement Program
              Develop additional City gateway features along major
              thoroughfares and around the BART Stations. A particular
              emphasis should be put on improving the East 14 th Street,
              MacArthur Boulevard and Doolittle Drive as gateways, and
              the Marina Boulevard corridor as the gateway to the shoreline
              area.
              Action CD-5.1.B: 150th/ Hesperian Triangle
              Undertake a public improvement project for the “triangle” at
              Hesperian/Bancroft, 150th Avenue, and East 14th Street. This
              should include public art and landscaping on the triangle
              itself, so it serves as a memorable and attractive southern
              gateway to San Leandro.
              Action CD-5.1.C: Neighborhood Gateway Signs
              Expand neighborhood gateway signage and explore funding
              sources, potential sites, and potential designs for additional
              gateway signs.
Policy CD-5.2 Graphics and Signage. Use citywide graphics and
              signage standards that help provide a better sense of
              municipal boundaries. An example might be the
              consistent use of the City logo (or the use of distinctive
              lettering and color schemes) on City street and
              directional signs.
                                                                                                                             8-43

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                                         Action CD-5.2.A: Wayfinding Programs
                                                                         Provide coordinated wayfinding signage in subareas of the
                                                                         city such as Downtown, Bayfair Center, and the Shoreline.
                                                                         Directional signs should be used not only to orient travelers
                                                                         but also to provide a sense of continuity within the City.
                                                     Policy CD-5.3       Urban Design Improvements.                Use urban design
                                                                         elements such as bollards, pavers, fountains, signage,
                                                                         tree lighting, and street furniture (newspaper racks,
                                                                         benches, bus stops, planters, trash receptacles, bike
                                                                         racks, etc.) to establish a stronger design identity for San
                                                                         Leandro’s commercial areas and make the street
                                                                         environment more inviting for pedestrians.
                                                                         Action CD-5.3.A:     Industrial      Area    Urban       Design
                                                                         Improvements
                                                                         Develop and implement urban design improvements for the
                                                                         Marina corridor between Doolittle Drive and the Shoreline,
                                                                         and the Merced Corridor between Williams Street and
                                                                         Fairway Drive, consistent with the recommendations of the
                                                                         Next Generation Workplace Districts Study. The intent of
                                                                         these improvements is to improve aesthetics, create a stronger
                                                                         sense of place, and facilitate walking, bicycling, and transit
                                                                         use in this area.
                                                                         See the Land Use and Economic Development Elements for
                                                                         additional policies on this topic
                                                     Policy CD-5.4       Architectural Consistency. In established neighbor-
                                                                         hoods, protect architectural integrity by requiring infill
                                                                         housing, replacement housing, and major additions or
                                                                         remodels to be sensitive to and compatible with the
                                                                         prevailing scale and appearance of adjacent
                                                                         development.
                                                                         Action CD-5.4.A: Design Guidelines for Infill Housing
                                                                         Create residential design guidelines for infill development.
                                                                         These guidelines should ensure that new homes and multi-
                                                                         family developments are compatible with neighborhood
                                                                         character and address issues such as privacy, shade, and
                                                                         compatibility with surrounding properties. Design guidelines
                                                                         should avoid excessively prescriptive standards and focus on
                                                                         respecting the prevailing scale of development and avoiding
8-44

                                                                                       S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                        H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
              the use of inappropriate exterior materials or improvements
              that could adversely affect nearby properties.
              Action CD-5.4.B: Neighborhood and Business Profiles
              Develop web-based profiles, maps, and informational materials
              that reinforce the sense of San Leandro as a City of distinct
              neighborhoods. Support Chamber of Commerce efforts to
              develop directories for merchants and local shopping districts.
Policy CD-5.5 Shopping Districts. Encourage the development of
              well-defined shopping districts along the City’s
              commercial streets. Development within each district
              should meld together existing uses, establish greater
              design continuity, and improve the connections to
              nearby neighborhoods. Shopping centers should help
              define the character of the neighborhoods they serve,
              and be an important element of place-making and
              walkability in the city.
              Action CD-5.5.A: District Streetscape Improvements
              Expand the use of banners and other streetscape
              improvements to define shopping districts on San Leandro’s
              major thoroughfares.
Policy CD-5.6 Visual Arts and Placemaking. Use the visual arts (such
              as painted utility boxes and murals) as a way of creating
              a stronger sense of place in San Leandro, and means of
              connecting residents to their community while
              showcasing the work of local artists.
              See the Economic Development Element for additional actions
              on visual arts and placemaking.
Policy CD-5.7 Streetscape Improvements. Where appropriate, require
              new development to implement streetscape improve-
              ments that promote the use of the street by pedestrians
              and bicyclists and support the use of street spaces for
              public uses such as outdoor seating and “parklets.”
                                                                                                                              8-45

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                                         Action CD-5.7.A: Redesign of Commercial Streets
                                                                         Explore the redesign of select streets in commercial districts
                                                                         (including Downtown) to reduce the number of travel lanes
                                                                         and create amenities such as wider sidewalks, crosswalk
                                                                         pavers, landscaped medians, and street trees within parking
                                                                         lanes.
                                                                         See also Transportation Element Goal T-1 on Complete
                                                                         Streets.
                                                     Policy CD-5.8       Programmed Activities.            Encourage programmed
                                                                         activities, such as farmers markets and outdoor
                                                                         performances, within commercial centers and civic
                                                                         areas.
                                                     Policy CD-5.9       Visual Landmarks.          Promote the development of
                                                                         “signature” buildings and monuments that provide
                                                                         visual landmarks and create a more distinctive and
                                                                         positive impression of San Leandro within the greater
                                                                         Bay Area. Local design guidelines should ensure that
                                                                         such buildings and monuments respect the character,
                                                                         scale, and context of the surrounding area.
                                                     Policy CD-5.10      Community Involvement. Encourage the involvement
                                                                         of the community in the development of urban design
                                                                         plans and improvement programs.
                                                                         see also Goal LU-5 on Citizen Participation
8-46

                                                                                        S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                         H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
Q UALITY C ONSTRUCTION AND D ESIGN
GOAL CD-6       Ensure that new construction and renovation
                contributes to the quality and overall image of the
                community.
Policy CD-6.1 Promoting Quality Design.             Use the development
              review, zoning, and permitting processes to promote
              high quality architecture and site design. Design review
              guidelines and zoning standards should ensure that the
              mass and scale of new structures are compatible with
              adjacent structures.
              Action CD-6.1.A: Design Guidance in Area Plans
              Include design guidelines or form-based zoning regulations as
              a component of future area plans, specific plans, or other sub-
              area plans guiding change in specific parts of the city.
              Action CD-6.1.B: Incentives for Design Amenities
              Develop zoning incentives (such as floor area bonuses) for
              projects that incorporate special architectural design features,
              such as landscaped courtyards or plazas.
Policy CD-6.2 Recognizing Architectural Context. In areas without a
              well-established architectural aesthetic or consistent
              design palette, encourage contemporary and cutting
              edge design. In areas which have an established or more
              traditional design theme or rhythm, encourage infill
              development that increases architectural cohesion and
              reinforces the prevalent style or styles.
Policy CD-6.3 Multi-Family Design. Establish high standards of
              architectural and landscape design for multi-family
              housing development. Boxy or massive building designs
              should be avoided, ample open space and landscaping
              should be provided, and high quality construction
              materials should be used.
              Action CD-6.3.A: Daylight Plane Regulations
              Maintain daylight plane regulations in the Zoning Code, or
              equivalent provisions, to ensure that development along
              transit corridors and in transit oriented development areas is
                                                                                                                               8-47
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                                         required to "step down" in height as it approaches zoning
                                                                         boundaries associated with lower density development,
                                                                         especially single family homes.
                                                     Policy CD-6.4       Permitting and Inspection.           Maintain building
                                                                         inspection and code enforcement procedures that ensure
                                                                         that all construction is properly permitted, and that
                                                                         construction is completed as approved.
                                                     Policy CD-6.5       Craftsmanship.           Encourage a high level of
                                                                         craftsmanship in new construction, and the use of
                                                                         exterior materials and façade designs that enhance the
                                                                         appearance of the City.
                                                     Policy CD-6.6       Garage Door Visibility. Minimize the visibility of
                                                                         garage doors in new single family and multi-family
                                                                         residential construction.
                                                     Policy CD-6.7       Architectural Interest. Encourage     new structures to
                                                                         incorporate architectural elements    that create visual
                                                                         interest such as trellises, awnings,  overhangs, patios,
                                                                         and window bays. Avoid solid or       blank street-facing
                                                                         walls.
                                                     Policy CD-6.8       Commercial and Industrial Standards. Improve the
                                                                         visual appearance of the City’s commercial and
                                                                         industrial areas by applying high standards of
                                                                         architectural design and landscaping for new
                                                                         commercial and industrial development and the re-use
                                                                         or remodeling of existing commercial and industrial
                                                                         buildings.
                                                                         See also Action LU-### regarding commercial and industrial
                                                                         design guidelines
                                                     Policy CD-6.9       Siting of Parking Lots. Encourage the placement of
                                                                         parking lots to the rear of businesses rather than along
                                                                         the street frontage so that they become a secondary
                                                                         feature of commercial development rather than the
                                                                         dominant feature. Where large surface parking lots must
                                                                         be provided, require screening and landscaping to
                                                                         improve and soften their appearance.
8-48

                                                                                          S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                           H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                Action CD-6.9.A: Parking Lot Design
                Develop design standards and code enforcement procedures for
                parking lots which ensure that parking is attractively
                landscaped, well maintained, and contributes positively to the
                overall character of the street and neighborhood.
Policy CD-6.10: Signage.       Encourage commercial signage that is
                compatible with the building and streetscape, enhances
                the character of the surrounding area, and is not
                intrusive to nearby residential areas.
Policy CD-6.11  Commercial Reinvestment.                  Provide incentive
                programs that encourage reinvestment in the City’s
                commercial properties, especially older shopping
                centers, vacant businesses, and outdated or blighted
                structures.
                Action CD-6.11.A: Design Assistance Program
                Continue programs to assist business owners with exterior
                upgrades to commercial buildings, including design
                assistance, awning improvement, façade improvements,
                landscaping, and painting.
Policy CD-6.12  Business Outreach. Encourage communication and
                outreach to the business community in the development
                of strategies to upgrade commercial and industrial
                properties.
                Action CD-6.12.A: Annual Design Awards
                Continue annual awards programs and other forms of public
                recognition for projects of merit in architecture, landscape
                architecture, and planning. Ensure that these programs are
                well publicized and covered by the media.
                Action CD-6.12.B: San Leandro By Design
                Support a robust dialogue among local business groups,
                neighborhood associations, and interest groups on community
                design, including events such as San Leandro by Design.
                                                                                                                                 8-49

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                     A M ORE V ISUALLY A TTRACTIVE C ITY
                                                     GOAL CD-7             Create a more visually attractive City, with well-
                                                                           landscaped and maintained streets, open spaces, and
                                                                           gathering places.
                                                     Policy CD-7.1       Greening San Leandro.            Promote drought-tolerant
                                                                         landscaping, tree planting, and tree preservation along
                                                                         San Leandro streets as a means of improving aesthetics,
                                                                         making neighborhoods more pedestrian-friendly,
                                                                         providing environmental benefits, and creating or
                                                                         maintaining a park-like setting.
                                                                         Action CD-7.1.A: Street Tree Master Plan
                                                                         Seek grant opportunities to create a Street Tree Master Plan
                                                                         that includes planting guidelines and palettes and a program
                                                                         to increase the number of trees along San Leandro streets.
                                                                         Once the Master Plan is adopted, establish a citywide
                                                                         neighborhood beautification strategy in which specific areas
                                                                         are targeted each year for street tree planting, landscaping,
                                                                         and other public improvements.
                                                                         Action CD-7.1.B: Funding for Tree Planting and Care
                                                                         Regularly apply for grants, low interest loans, and other
                                                                         funding sources for landscaping, street tree planting, urban
                                                                         forestry, and neighborhood beautification.
                                                     Policy CD-7.2       Tree Maintenance.            Encourage tree maintenance
                                                                         practices that contribute to the long-term health and
                                                                         appearance of the City’s urban forest.
                                                                         Action CD-7.2.A: Public Education on Tree Issues
                                                                         Promote public education and awareness of tree planting,
                                                                         removal and care issues.
                                                     Policy CD-7.3       Tree Removal and Replacement.               Discourage the
                                                                         removal of healthy trees and require replacements for
                                                                         any trees that are removed from street rights-of-way.
                                                                         Where healthy trees must be removed, consider their
                                                                         relocation to other suitable sites instead of their disposal.
                                                                         Encourage the preservation and proper care of mature
                                                                         trees throughout the City, particularly those which may
8-50

                                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                          H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
               have historic importance or contribute substantially to
               neighborhood character.
               Action CD-7.3.A: Tree Preservation
               Investigate alternatives for the protection of heritage trees and
               other large specimen trees on public and private property.
Policy CD-7.4  Urban Open Space. Encourage the incorporation of
               drought-tolerant landscaped open spaces, such as
               plazas, courtyards and pocket parks, within new
               development and redevelopment projects.
               Action CD-7.4.A: Paving of Planter Strips
               Consider an ordinance or zoning amendment to prohibit the
               paving of planter strips along City streets, except where these
               strips are narrow and such a prohibition would be impractical
               or conflict with the City’s water conservation goals.
               Action CD-7.4.B: Bio-Swales in Planter Strips
               Consider a program wherein, at the request of the homeowner,
               the City would remove existing planter strips so that they may
               be replaced with Bay-friendly landscaping, or converted to bio-
               swales that support the City's stormwater management and
               green infrastructure plans. If initiated, such a program would
               need to be grant-funded or funded by property owners, with
               on-gong maintenance provided by property owners rather
               than the City.
 Policy CD-7.5 Street Beautification. Upgrade the City’s commercial
               thoroughfares by building upon their existing strengths
               and improving their aesthetic qualities. The City should
               implement programs to underground utilities, abate
               weeds and graffiti, eliminate litter, improve facades,
               improve buffers to adjacent residential uses, prohibit
               excessive or out-of-scale signage, remove billboards, and
               provide streetscape amenities and landscaping along
               these thoroughfares.
               Action CD-7.5.A: Sign Ordinance Updates
               Periodically update the City’s sign ordinance to address
               design issues, changing priorities, trends in sign regulation,
               and current case law.
                                                                                                                                8-51

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
                                                                         Action CD-7.5.B: Billboard Removal
                                                                         Reduce the visual and aesthetic impact of billboards, and allow
                                                                         no net gain in the number of billboards in areas subject to the
                                                                         City's land use authority.
                                                                         Action CD-7.5.C: Landscaping in Industrial Zones
                                                                         Consistent with the Next Generation Workplace Districts
                                                                         Study, develop drought-tolerant landscaping and streetscape
                                                                         improvements in the City's industrial areas, particularly in
                                                                         high visibility locations such as the Marina corridor, Doolittle
                                                                         Drive, and Merced Street. Such programs should address
                                                                         pedestrian and bicycle improvements, undergrounding of
                                                                         utility lines, signage, façade improvements, public art, and
                                                                         projects which enhance and humanize public spaces.
                                                                         Action CD-7.5.D: Undergrounding of Utility Wires
                                                                         Continue programs to underground overhead utility wires,
                                                                         especially along East 14th Street. Seek additional funding for
                                                                         such projects as it becomes available.
                                                                         Action CD-7.5.E: East 14th Streetscape Improvements
                                                                         Evaluate potential funding sources and other methods to
                                                                         accelerate streetscape improvement and capital investments in
                                                                         the East 14th Street corridor, particularly in the South Area
                                                                         between Sybil and 150th Avenue.
                                                     Policy CD-7.6.      Public Art. Encourage the siting of public art in civic
                                                                         open spaces, around public buildings, and within new
                                                                         development areas. Public art should be recognized as
                                                                         an economic development tool and should reflect and
                                                                         express the diversity of the City.
                                                                         See the Community Services and Facilities Element for actions
                                                                         to undertake a cultural arts master plan, including public art.
                                                                         Action CD-7.6.A: Utility Box Painting
                                                                         Support community beautification activities such as the
                                                                         painting of utility boxes and murals by local artists.
8-52

                                                                                     S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                      H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
Policy CD-7.7 Lighting. Encourage street and parking lot lighting that
              creates a sense of security, complements building and
              landscape design, is energy-efficient, considers night sky
              visibility impacts (e.g., “dark skies”), and avoids
              conflicts with nearby residential uses.
Policy CD-7.8 Neighborhood Clean-ups. Support and encourage
              neighborhood clean-up and beautification projects.
              Action CD-7.8.A: Penalties for Dumping
              Strengthen local ordinances, fines, and penalties for illegal
              dumping and littering. Sufficient funds should be allocated
              for enforcement of such ordinances.
Policy CD-7.9 Perimeter Areas. Encourage cooperative efforts with
              Alameda County and the City of Oakland to beautify
              nearby areas outside the San Leandro City limits.
              Action CD-7.9.A: East Bay Corridors
              Participate in ABAG's East Bay Corridors Planning effort,
              and recognize opportunities to enhance San Leandro's image
              along regional corridors (such as East 14th Street) through
              such efforts.
                                                                                                                            8-53

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
H I S T O R I C P R E S E R V A T I O N A N D C O M M U N I T Y D E S I G N
8-54
                                                                                     9
                                                                            AND FACILITIES
                                                                                             COMMUNITY SERVICES
A.      OVERVIEW
This Element of the General Plan addresses the provision of community
services and public facilities. Although the Community Services Element
is not explicitly required by State law, the topics addressed here are an
integral part of the City’s overall planning strategy and a basic
consideration in setting growth and development policy. Policies
supporting quality schools and libraries, excellent police and fire
services, and well maintained infrastructure are essential to supporting
the kind of growth envisioned by the General Plan.
San Leandro’s population is projected to increase by approximately 17
percent during the next 20 years. Continued investment in public
facilities will be necessary to sustain existing services and respond to
changing needs in the community. Services must be regularly adapted
to respond to demographic changes, new technologies and
communication methods, and evolving service models. Ultra-high speed
internet may transform the way that local services are provided, and has
the potential to improve performance and effectiveness. Ongoing
investment in public facilities will also be needed to update or replace
deteriorating facilities and ensure efficient operations.
The City is only one of the entities providing public services to San
Leandro residents and businesses. San Leandro is also served by two
school districts, a County Fire Department, two sanitary districts, a
regional water agency, a County Flood Control agency, and a myriad of
social service agencies, including public agencies, non-profit
corporations, and private businesses. The City also has an active faith
community, and a variety of fraternal and civic organizations that
supplement public service delivery. Coordinating these agencies and
                                                                                                                  9-1

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      organizations is an important part of community building in San
                                                      Leandro. The General Plan aims to build partnerships between the City,
                                                      other agencies, and the private and non-profit sectors to reach the
                                                      greatest number of persons possible.
                                                      This chapter divides community services into five major categories:
                                                      public safety (law enforcement and fire), education, library and
                                                      information services, recreation and human services (child care, youth,
                                                      seniors, and cultural arts), and infrastructure (water, sanitary sewer, and
                                                      drainage). The first part of the chapter profiles each service category and
                                                      presents the major planning issues; the second part presents goals,
                                                      policies, and actions.
                                                      Please consult Chapter 6 for a discussion of park and recreational
                                                      services.
                                                      B.       PUBLIC SAFETY
                                                      Law Enforcement
                                                      Law enforcement in San Leandro is provided by the City’s Police
                                                      Department. The Department’s headquarters are located at 901 East 14th
                                                      Street in the Civic Center complex. San Leandro is divided into seven
                                                      “beats” for patrol functions. Each beat is patrolled by at least one officer
                                                      on a 24-hour basis. In 2015, personnel included 137 employees, including
                                                      one chief, two captains, 13 sergeants, and 71 officers. There are
                                                      approximately 0.8 sworn officers per 1,000 residents, which is lower than
                                                      the Department’s desired ratio of 1.04 per 1,000.
                                                      Crime in San Leandro has generally decreased since the 1990s, with
                                                      recent year statistics showing relatively minor variations from year to
                                                      year. Chart 9-1 indicates the “Part One” crime totals in the city from
                                                      1990 to 2015. Part One crimes include homicides, rape, robbery,
                                                      aggravated and simple assault, burglary, larceny, stolen vehicles, and
                                                      arson. The vast majority of reported crimes were crimes against
                                                      property rather than individuals. During the last six years (2010-2015),
                                                      some categories of crime have trended downward while others have
                                                      trended upward. The number of calls for service has increased since
                                                      2010, with nearly 92,292 calls received in 2015 compared to 78,553 in
                                                      2010.
9-2

                                                                                                                                                                         S A N L E A N D R O                          G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                                                                                                                C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S                     A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                               CHART 9-1: TOTAL PART ONE CRIMES IN SAN LEANDRO, 1990-2015
                                      7000
                                      6000
Number of Reported Part One Crimes
                                      5000
                                      4000
                                      3000
                                      2000
                                      1000
                                         0
                                              1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
                                     Source: FBI Uniform Crime Report, 2016
                               The high priority assigned to public safety in the community will require
                               continued investment in police services in the coming years. The City is
                               about to undertake a major remodel of the Department headquarters,
                               creating additional office space and improving technology. Regular
                               upgrading and replacement of outdated equipment, vehicles, and
                               communication facilities will be needed as the city grows. Additional
                               sworn officers will be needed as the city’s population increases, enabling
                               the Department to continue its long-standing tradition of community
                               policing. Partnerships between the Police Department, neighborhood
                               groups, businesses, and schools are a critical part of maintaining a safe
                               community.
                               San Leandro will continue to assist residents in organizing neighborhood
                               watch and local crime prevention programs. The Department is currently
                               leading efforts to improve the City’s emergency preparedness programs,
                               including community-based programs. San Leandro will also continue to
                               apply for youth program grants to fund school officers, gang
                               intervention efforts, the Teen Academy, and other programs offering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9-3

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      outreach and assistance to local youth. Through participation in
                                                      community events and liaison to local homeowners associations and
                                                      civic groups, the Police Department will continue to work toward
                                                      building a sense of safety and security in the city. It also strive to
                                                      maintain high professional standards, promote diversity in recruitment,
                                                      and undertake training and mentorship programs which maximize
                                                      officer effectiveness.
                                                      Public information and media relations are an important part of this
                                                      effort, both to advise the community about local resources and to
                                                      address public concerns about crime. The Police Department implements
                                                      community events such as National Night Out and Coffee with the Cops.
                                                      It has an active social media presence, participates in programs to assist
                                                      seniors and homeless residents, and partners with local organizations
                                                      and employers to improve community safety. Many of the non-core
                                                      services provided by the Department, such as the bicycle patrol program,
                                                      the school crossing guard program, crime prevention training, and
                                                      animal control are also an important part of this effort. These programs
                                                      all contribute to the Department’s role as an integral part of the San
                                                      Leandro community and create a stronger alliance between the Police
                                                      Department and the public at large.
9-4

                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                      C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
Fire Protection
The City of San Leandro Fire Department was consolidated with the
Alameda County Fire Department in 1995. The County has a contractual
agreement with the City to provide fire protection services, which
includes fire suppression, hazardous materials mitigation, paramedic
response, urban search and rescue, fire prevention, and public education.
Alameda County Fire maintains offices at San Leandro City Hall and
staffs fire stations at the following five locations in San Leandro:
    450 Estudillo Avenue (Station 9)
    2194 Williams Street (Station 10)
    14903 Catalina Street (Station 11)
    1065 143rd Avenue (Station 12)
    637 Fargo Avenue (Station 13)
The location of these facilities is shown in Figure 9-1. In addition to its
facilities in San Leandro, the County Fire Department has 24 other
stations and also serves Dublin, Emeryville, Newark, Union City,
unincorporated Alameda County, and the Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.                The
Department also maintains mutual aid agreements with the Oakland
Fire Department and other fire departments in the County to provide
assistance in the event of a major emergency.
                                                                                                                             9-5

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      Response time to calls is typically under five minutes and there are few
                                                      fire-fighting constraints. This enables the City to maintain a favorable
                                                      Insurance Service Office (ISO) rating. The Department has adopted a
                                                      service standard indicating that the first unit will arrive within five
                                                      minutes or less for 90 percent of all emergency incidents, excluding
                                                      freeway responses, and within ten minutes or less for 90 percent of full
                                                      first fire alarm assignments. During Fiscal Year 2014-15, fire stations in
                                                      the City of San Leandro responded to 10,001 calls. Approximately 75
                                                      percent of these calls were for emergency medical service. Only 104
                                                      calls, or about one percent of the total, were for structure fires.
                                                      As a nearly built out City, San Leandro’s principal fire protection
                                                      objective is to maintain and enhance the high level of service now
                                                      provided to residents and businesses. This will require replacement of
                                                      aging fire-fighting equipment, improvements to fire stations, and
                                                      upgrades to the water supply and hydrant system in cooperation with
                                                      the East Bay Municipal Utility District. Station 13 (in the Washington
                                                      Manor neighborhood) will need to be updated to meet seismic
                                                      standards. The other stations are relatively new or are in good
                                                      condition. The Fire Department has developed a schedule for the
                                                      retirement of specific pieces of equipment and regularly funds new
                                                      vehicle acquisitions. Although there are no major water service
                                                      constraints in the city, the Department’s goal is to ensure that water
                                                      service is adequate for fire-fighting purposes wherever land is developed
                                                      or redeveloped.
                                                                                      Like the City’s Police Department, Alameda
                                                                                      County Fire rec ognizes the importance of
                                                                                      building a close working relationship with
                                                                                      the community. Fire Department personnel
                                                                                      and equipment are a regular presence at
                                                                                      community events and other public forums.
                                                                                      The Department provides day-to-day
                                                                                      contact with the public by maintaining
                                                                                      active public education, CPR training,
                                                                                      paramedic services, weed abatement, and
                                                                                      emergency preparedness programs. The
                                                                                      Department also works closely with City
                                                                                      staff to review building permits and
                                                                                      development applications, to ensure that
                                                                                      adequate provisions are made for fire
                                                                                      protection and emergency access before
                                                                                      new projects are approved.
9-6

         S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                              Figure 9-1
    Community Facilities
                                                       9-7
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                                                    C.                  EDUCATION
                                                                                    San Leandro is served by two school districts. The San Leandro Unified
                                                                                    School District serves about three-quarters of the City’s students, and the
                                                                                    San Lorenzo Unified School District serves the remaining one-quarter.
                                                                                    The boundaries of the two districts and locations of schools in San
                                                                                    Leandro are shown in Figure 9-1. Most of the San Lorenzo Unified
                                                                                    School District is beyond San Leandro’s boundaries, as that District also
                                                                                    includes the unincorporated communities of San Lorenzo, Ashland,
                                                                                    Cherryland, and parts of the City of Hayward.
                                                                                    Chart 9-2 shows total enrollment at the two school districts between 1996
                                                                                    and 2015.
                                      CHART 9-2: ENROLLMENT IN SAN LEANDRO AND SAN LORENZO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICTS,
                                                                      1996 TO 2015
                                      14000
                                                                                                                                                                         11996                         12123     12270     12288     12070
                                                                                                             11684                                   11858     11821               11879     11879                                             11965
                                                                                         11528     11564               11547     11544     11613
                                                                     11042     11302
                                                           10815
                                                 10436
                                      12000
                                      10000                                                                8749      8653      8894      8724      8729      8719      8795      8801      8822      8878      8704      8673      8617
                                                                             8256      8338      8558                                                                                                                                        8560
                                                                   8023
                   Total Enrollment
                                               7417      7682
                                       8000
                                       6000
                                       4000
                                       2000
                                          0
                                                                                                                        SLUSD                   SLZUSD
                                      Source: California Department of Education DataQuest, 2016
9-8

                                                                               S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                      C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
San Leandro Unified School District (San Leandro
USD)
The San Leandro USD operates eight elementary schools, two middle
schools, and three high schools, as well as four other facilities that
include administrative offices, a community education center, and an
athletic field complex. The District also provides educational services to
San Leandro residents through an independent study program for
Grades 9-12 and a variety of adult education programs.
Enrollment at San Leandro USD schools declined steeply during the
1970s but began rising again in the mid-1980s. This trend mirrored
nationwide trends and was the result of a number of factors, including a
larger number of persons of childbearing age, an increasing birth rate,
housing construction, and demographic changes within the community.
The increase in enrollment was compounded by the closure (and sale) of
several schools during the 1970s and 1980s followed by the construction
of housing on these sites, leading to capacity constraints at a number of
facilities by the late 1990s.
Enrollment in 2015-2016 was 8,560 students. This represents a decrease
of 300 students from 2011-2012 and is virtually the same number of
students that were enrolled 14 years ago in 2001-02. However, current
enrollment is more than 45 percent higher than it was in the mid-1980s.
While the District indicated a total capacity for 10,339 students in its
most recent demographic study, the gap between capacity and
                                                                                                                             9-9
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      enrollment varies from school to school. Some facilities are at capacity
                                                      while others have capacity remaining.
                                                      The District has undergone several major cycles of renovation and
                                                      facility improvement. In 2006, San Leandro voters approved Measure B,
                                                      allowing for expansion of San Leandro High School, improvements to
                                                      Bancroft Middle School athletic fields, development of a Career
                                                      Technical Education Center, modernization of elementary schools, and
                                                      other improvements. In 2010, voters approved Measure M, the $50.1
                                                      million bond which enabled field improvements at Muir Middle School,
                                                      renovation of Burrell Field, a par course at Bancroft Middle School, new
                                                      athletic facilities at San Leandro High School, and additional elementary
                                                      school renovations. The District is in the process of development a
                                                      Master Facility Plan to identify additional needs. Future bond measures
                                                      will be considered to fund projects identified in this Plan. The focus will
                                                      continue to be on rehabilitation, safety, modernization, technology, and
                                                      energy efficiency.
                                                      The most recent five-year enrollment forecasts for the San Leandro
                                                      Unified School District show slight growth (2 percent) at the elementary
                                                      school level, and a slight decline (4 percent) at the middle and high
                                                      school levels. Actual enrollment will depend on a number of factors,
                                                      including the pace of housing construction in the City. The District
                                                      anticipates 0.35 students per new housing unit, which suggests that the
                                                                                                20-year growth forecast for the
                                                                                                General Plan could produce
                                                                                                more than 1,800 new students.
                                                                                                Additional classroom capacity,
                                                                                                and potentially new school
                                                                                                campuses, would be needed to
                                                                                                meet that level of demand.
                                                                                                Non-traditional        classroom
                                                                                                models such as public “magnet”
                                                                                                schools and academies (focused
                                                                                                on technology, medical sciences,
                                                                                                hospitality, etc.) could be
                                                                                                considered        an  alternative
                                                                                                educational option as future
                                                                                                school     facility  plans    are
                                                                                                prepared.
9-10

                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
Under the Government Code, school districts are responsible for
implementing the specific measures needed to mitigate school impacts.
The Government Code also limits the amount of any fees that may be
collected from developers to offset the cost of constructing new facilities.
The San Leandro Unified School District currently collects development
impact fees in the amount of $3.36 per square foot for residential
development and $0.54 per square foot for commercial development. In
other words, the developer of a new 2,000 square foot home would pay a
one-time fee of roughly $6,700 toward school facility improvements. The
City will work closely with the School District to address any funding
gaps in the future, and will monitor changes in enrollment attributable to
development, demographic changes, inter-district transfers, and other
sources.
San Lorenzo Unified School District (San Lorenzo
USD)
The San Lorenzo USD serves K-5 students at Corvallis and Dayton
Elementary Schools and Grades 6-8 students at Washington Manor
Middle School. The District also owns the former Lewelling Elementary
School, which was leased to the privately-owned K-12 Chinese Christian
School (CCS) until 2015. CCS has relocated its operations to Alameda
and the Lewelling campus is now vacant and for lease. The District does
not operate a high school within the San Leandro City limits; most 9-12
students attend Arroyo High School in San Lorenzo. Students in the
southern part of the Bal District (near 150th Avenue) also are located
within the San Lorenzo USD, attending Hillside Elementary School in
the Ashland area.
Although the San Lorenzo Unified School District has a larger number of
students than San Leandro Unified, San Leandro represents just one-
quarter of the District’s population. Most of the District’s campuses are
located in unincorporated Ashland and San Lorenzo. Overall enrollment
in the San Lorenzo USD generally increased between 1996 and 2012, but
has been declining since 2012. Data for the three San Leandro campuses
indicates a total of about 1,970 students in 2015-16, which is virtually
unchanged from 2010.
The San Lorenzo Unified School District’s enrollment forecasts indicate a
slight decline during the next five years. The facilities serving San
Leandro, including Arroyo High School in San Lorenzo and Hillside
Elementary in Ashland, have sufficient capacity to absorb additional
                                                                                                                            9-11

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      growth. The portion of the District within San Leandro is mostly built
                                                      out, with roughly 300 units of housing forecast during the next 20 years.
                                                      The student generation rates used by San Lorenzo Unified suggest this
                                                      development would produce fewer than 100 students.
                                                      Shared Issues and Concerns
                                                      Public education is a top priority in San Leandro. Although the School
                                                      Districts are independently governed agencies, collaborative efforts
                                                      between the City and the Districts are important to ensure that a quality
                                                      educational system is sustained. Participation of residents and the
                                                      business community is needed to fully realize the General Plan Vision of
                                                      a “commitment to excellence in education.”
                                                      Looking ahead 20 years, the potential need for new facilities within the
                                                      San Leandro Unified School District remains a concern shared by many
                                                      residents. Capacity issues may be further complicated by class size
                                                      reduction programs, which establish maximum numbers of students per
                                                      classroom. Possible solutions are also complicated by the lack of
                                                      potential school sites, limited funding, and State restrictions on
                                                      development impact fees. Portable classrooms may be effective as a
                                                      short-term solution but are not sustainable in the long-run. Reducing
                                                      inter-district transfers (e.g., students in other cities attending San
                                                      Leandro schools) could free up capacity at some schools. Increasing
                                                      inter-district transfers to San Lorenzo Unified also could be explored.
                                                      The City and School Board will continue to look for new funding sources
                                                                                               and other ways to alleviate
                                                                                               overcrowding,        and      will
                                                                                               continue to lobby the State of
                                                                                               California      for     additional
                                                                                               support for local education.
                                                                                               The quality of education offered
                                                                                               to San Leandro students is
                                                                                               another      issue     of    great
                                                                                               importance and a key element
                                                                                               of    the     City’s     Economic
                                                                                               Development Strategy. Policies
                                                                                               and actions in this General Plan
                                                                                               emphasize the value and
                                                                                               importance of a great school
                                                                                               system     in    attracting   and
                                                                                               retaining new businesses and
9-12

                                                                                      S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                             C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
investment. Economic development programs, such as Lit San Leandro
also create potential benefits for the City’s schools. The City and School
Districts will continue to work with the private sector to advance the
concept of “career pathways,” preparing students for careers in
emerging sectors of the economy and creating local employment
opportunities for youth. The City will also support partnerships with
community colleges and local universities to create educational ladders
for graduating students. Other types of partnerships, such as mentoring
and internship programs, can help encourage investment in local schools
and build the physical and social infrastructure necessary to improve
student performance.
Physical plant issues also require ongoing communication between the
City and the schools. Issues such as traffic and parking around school
campuses, crossing guards and student safety, and the use of school
fields for City recreation programs, require a close working relationship
between City and School District staff. A Committee of City Council and
School Board members exists to address these and other issues of mutual
concern.
Please consult the Open Space, Conservation, and Parks Element (Chapter 6)
for a discussion of school recreational facilities and joint use agreements.
D.        LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SERVICES
San Leandro encourages the free exchange of ideas and information
through its library system. The City has a long tradition of treating its
libraries as neighborhood and community gathering places. The Main
Library is the site of frequent open houses, fairs, performances, and
community events. Its programs provide opportunities for life-long
learning and skill development among all residents.
San Leandro’s 70,000 square foot Main Library is located at 300 Estudillo
Avenue. The library is staffed by 17 full-time employees and 40
volunteers. In 2013, the Library reported nearly 800,000 visitors and
90,000 reference transactions. The facility has approximately 300,000
books, 27,000 audio and video materials, and 478 serial print
subscriptions. San Leandro’s Main Library includes a History Room, a
Children’s Area, an Electronic Learning Center, community meeting
rooms, and two floors of books, sitting areas, and work stations. While
the facility is relatively new, funding must continuously be secured for
new technology and equipment.
                                                                                                                                  9-13

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      The City’s three branch libraries are located at 1241 Manor Boulevard
                                                      (Manor Branch), 13699 Aurora Drive (Mulford-Marina Branch), and
                                                      14799 East 14th Street (South Branch). The Manor Branch was recons
                                                      tructed in 2006 and is a popular community facility. The Mulford-
                                                      Marina Branch and the South Branch are both aging and undersized
                                                      facilities in need of replacement. Both facilities are only open three days
                                                      a week, creating a gap in service for nearby residents. Reconstruction of
                                                      the Mulford-Marina Library is being considered as part of the Shoreline
                                                      Development project. Although there are no plans to replace the South
                                                      Branch Library, its location on a relatively large site along East 14 th Street
                                                      creates the opportunity for a public-private partnership to develop a new
                                                      library. For example, a new library could be constructed on the ground
                                                      floor of a future mixed use development on the site. The library could
                                                      also be relocated to an area with higher pedestrian traffic such as Bayfair
                                                      Center.
                                                      Technology is changing the role of libraries in the community, as well as
                                                      their physical needs. With the ascendance of the internet, libraries have
                                                      become places to access technology and increase digital literacy. Free
                                                      access to computers and high-speed internet is as important as access to
                                                      printed materials and books.          With the advent of e-books and
                                                      smartphones, library patrons may soon be able to download digital
                                                      reading materials at kiosks on BART platforms or in shopping centers as
                                                      well as in the library itself. Despite the decentralization of the library’s
                                                      traditional functions, the buildings themselves remain essential
                                                      institutions. Their role as a place to learn and participate in community
                                                      life remains invaluable.
9-14

                                                                                S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                       C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
E.       RECREATION AND HUMAN SERVICES
San Leandro’s Recreation and Human Services Department provides
services to enrich the lives of San Leandro residents and to meet the
special needs of children, youth, seniors, and lower-income households.
The Department also assists non-profit organizations such as Girls Inc.,
the Boys and Girls Club, and the Davis Street Family Resource Center in
meeting the needs of their clients, both through policy and program
guidance and through the disbursal of local, state, and federal funds.
Recreational services are discussed in Chapter 6 of the General Plan. The
section below focuses on human services, including child care, youth
services, senior services, and cultural arts. Future policy direction on
these topics will be provided by several plans that were in progress at
the time of General Plan adoption, including a gap analysis for human
services and a Cultural Arts Master Plan.
Cultural competency is a major focus of the City’s Human Service
Delivery system. In 2010, nearly half of the City’s residents spoke a
language other than English in their homes. While Spanish and Chinese
were the primary other languages spoken, the Census Bureau indicates
that at least 30 other languages are spoken in the city. San Leandro’s
diversity is one of its greatest strengths. This should be reflected in the
way that staff communicates with the public and the way that human
service programs are designed and delivered. The City is committed to
working with local organizations and partners representing different
cultures and communities, both in the delivery of services and in
providing outreach to ensure that all voices may be heard and all needs
addressed.
                                                                                                                            9-15

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      Child Care
                                                      The City recognizes child care not only as an essential social service, but
                                                      as an important part of the local economy. Child care enables greater
                                                      participation in the workforce by parents, and creates opportunities for
                                                      career development and income advancement among young San
                                                      Leandro families. Affordable, reliable child care is particularly important
                                                      for single parent and lower income households.
                                                      San Leandro has a number of programs which assist parents with child
                                                      care and after school care responsibilities. These include Library
                                                      programs, a “Kids Club” program run in cooperation with the School
                                                      District, “Kiddie Kollege” and “Tiny Tots” programs, Chabot Day Camp,
                                                      and various child-focused recreation programs. The last comprehensive
                                                      inventory of child care facilities in San Leandro by Alameda County
                                                      indicated the city had capacity for 2,156 children in center-based child
                                                      care facilities and 984 children in family (in-home) child care facilities.
                                                      While most of the capacity is in center-based facilities (such as
                                                      Montessori Schools), the small in-home facilities are far more numerous.
                                                      The Alameda County Early Care and Education Planning Council
                                                      indicates that San Leandro faces a significant gap in school-age child care
                                                      and a notable gap in infant and toddler care.
9-16

                                                                                   S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
In-home child care businesses are regulated by the State, in part to
ensure that local zoning regulations do not preclude their development.
In San Leandro, as in other cities throughout the state, facilities
providing care for 8 children or less are allowed by right in residential
areas. In-home facilities providing care for up to 14 children may be
subject to conditional use permit requirements, but the approval
considerations may relate to density, traffic control, parking, and noise
control only.
The City’s policies establish a commitment to creating new opportunities
for quality, licensed child care facilities in the City. The participation of
the private sector in addressing this need is critical. Incentives to include
on-site child care facilities in major employment centers should be
continued, and private investment in child care services is encouraged.
Marea Alta, a 200-unit housing development now under construction,
provides a good example of such partnerships. The development
includes a ground floor child care center across the street from the
Downtown BART Station. Such collaborative initiatives can be repeated
in similar developments elsewhere in the city.
                                                                                                                               9-17

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      Youth
                                                      The 2010 census reported that about 10,600 San Leandro residents, or
                                                      12.5 percent of the City’s population, is between the ages of 10 and 19.
                                                      This is a 17 percent increase in just ten years, and more than double the
                                                      growth rate for the population as a whole. The rise in youth population
                                                      has created an increased demand for youth services and activities in the
                                                      city. Many parents and younger participants in the 2035 General Plan
                                                      Update expressed interest in creating more places where local youth
                                                      were welcome, and could engage in fun, creative, and educational
                                                      activities.
                                                      The Recreation and Human Services Department has a number of
                                                      programs specifically oriented to pre-teens, teens, and young adults.
                                                      These include sports, fitness, creative arts, environmental studies,
                                                      personal enrichment, and other recreational activities. The City has
                                                      worked to ensure that such activities are culturally appropriate and
                                                      responsive to the diverse interests and backgrounds of all potential
                                                      participants.
                                                      Looking to the future, new academic and job-training initiatives for
                                                      young adults will be supported. Greater youth engagement in the City’s
                                                      economic development and conservation initiatives can build self-worth,
                                                      self-reliance, and a sense of civic responsibility. Youth input in local
                                                      government is also encouraged, particularly in the shaping of programs
                                                      and services targeted to teens. The City has established a Youth
                                                      Advisory Commission (YAC) to provide policy direction and liaison to
                                                      young people throughout San Leandro.
9-18

                                                                                 S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                        C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
Seniors
San Leandro once had the highest median age of any city in Alameda
County. Although the percentage of residents over 65 has declined since
1990, the City still has nearly 11,700 residents over 65. Moreover, there
are at least 2,200 residents over 85, a 26 percent increase since 2000. The
number of seniors is expected to increase dramatically in the next 20
years due to retiring baby boomers. ABAG projects that 22 percent of
the region’s population will be over 65 by 2040, creating increased
demand for senior services.
The City’s Recreation and Human Services Department coordinates
senior programs and provides advocacy and technical assistance to
senior service providers in the community. Many of the City’s
recreational programs are specifically oriented toward seniors. An $11
million senior community center was opened in 2011, providing a central
location for senior fitness programs, meal programs, computer classes,
movies, and leisure activities. The City also provides funding and
technical assistance to a number of non-profit agencies who offer direct
assistance and services to seniors. It also coordinates senior
transportation services, including a FLEX Shuttle service, East Bay
Paratransit, and a taxi voucher program.
                                                                                                                             9-19

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      San Leandro can take other steps to meet the needs of seniors in the
                                                      community. One step is to encourage private businesses and services
                                                      that serve seniors, such as assisted living facilities, senior housing, and
                                                      skilled nursing and medical care facilities. Another step is to encourage
                                                      the active involvement of seniors in community life, including public
                                                      affairs, senior activities and classes, and multi-generational activities
                                                      involving youth and families. The City also provides technical and
                                                      financial assistance to non-profits and social service agencies that are
                                                      dedicated to meeting the needs of its senior residents, particularly those
                                                      with limited income and mobility.
                                                      Other Special Needs Populations
                                                      The City of San Leandro provides federal Community Development
                                                      Block Grant (CDBG) funding to non-profits offering social services to
                                                      special needs groups and the lower income community at large. Each
                                                      year, the City allocates a portion of its General Fund, as well as other
                                                      available state and federal program funds, for this purpose. The City also
                                                      is home to a number of organizations that are specifically oriented to
                                                      persons with disabilities, working both as advocates and as service
                                                      providers to San Leandro residents. Coordination among the many
                                                      agencies and organizations serving special needs populations is critical
                                                      to stretch limited financial resources as far as possible.
                                                      The Housing Element of the General Plan may be consulted for
                                                      additional discussion of special needs populations in the city, including
                                                      extremely low income households and persons experiencing or at risk of
                                                      homelessness.
                                                      Cultural Arts
                                                      Cultural arts are an important aspect of the quality of life in San
                                                      Leandro. They can enrich, educate, empower, enlighten, and entertain.
                                                      The arts provide a way to share cultural histories, provide common
                                                      ground, and provide an outlet for creative expression. Successful arts
                                                      programs can also have significant economic and place-making benefits.
                                                      San Leandro has a vibrant and expanding arts community. The City
                                                      itself operates cultural venues such as the Casa Peralta and San Leandro
                                                      History Museum. Other cultural institutions include the San Leandro
                                                      Performing Arts Center, and movie and special event venues such as the
                                                      Bal Theatre. Organizations such as the Arts Council of San Leandro
9-20
                                                                              S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                     C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
provide advocacy and organize special events, exhibits, and
performances. The City also has a growing community of artists,
sculptors, wood and metal workers, and others in the “maker”
industries, in some cases transforming older industrial buildings and
adding a creative edge to the City’s employment districts.
Many of the City’s recreation programs are specifically oriented toward
the cultural arts, including crafts, sculpture, ceramics, photography,
dance, and painting. The City also has an Arts Commission which
makes recommendations to the City Council on the development,
promotion, and placement of visual and performing arts. As noted
earlier, policy direction to expand the arts in San Leandro should be
provided by a Cultural Arts Master Plan and a Public Arts Master Plan
in the coming years. One likely area of focus is the need for additional
arts and entertainment venues in the city, particularly in Downtown San
Leandro.
                                                                                                                          9-21

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      F.       INFRASTRUCTURE
                                                      Water
                                                      Water service to San Leandro is provided by the East Bay Municipal
                                                      Utility District (EBMUD), a publicly-owned utility serving a 332 square
                                                      mile area in Alameda and Contra Costa Counties. San Leandro
                                                      comprises 6.6 percent of EBMUD’s customer base and uses about 5
                                                      percent of its water. About 90 percent of the EBMUD water supply
                                                      originates in the Mokelumne River watershed, which is fed primarily
                                                      from the melting snowpack of the Sierra Nevada. The remaining 10
                                                      percent comes from protected watershed lands and reservoirs in the East
                                                      Bay Hills. There are also about 800 private wells in San Leandro, many of
                                                      which were originally used for agriculture. Most of these wells are
                                                      dormant, and those that are still active are used for landscape irrigation
                                                      and industry.
                                                      EBMUD has water rights that allow for delivery of a maximum of 325
                                                      million gallons per day from the Mokelumne River, subject to a variety
                                                      of conditions including fishery flow requirements and the senior rights
                                                      of other users. Drought conditions can trigger limits on the availability
                                                      of this supply. As a result, EBMUD has obtained and continues to seek
                                                      supplemental supplies, including water from the Sacramento River and
                                                      groundwater. Mokelumne River water is stored in Pardee Reservoir in
                                                      the Sierra foothills and is then transported to terminal reservoirs located
                                                      in the East Bay Hills.
                                                      EBMUD distributes its water from the terminal reservoirs to customers
                                                      using a system of pipelines, storage tanks, pumping plants, and
                                                      distribution mains. There are more than 120 pressure zones in the service
                                                      area, ranging in elevation from sea level to 1,450 feet. The utility
                                                      operates and maintains all storage, pumping, and distribution facilities
                                                      within its service area and is responsible for all facilities up to the
                                                      location of the water meter. Pipelines in San Leandro range from 4 to 36
                                                      inches in diameter.
                                                      Long-range water supply and demand management plans are laid out in
                                                      EBMUD’s Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP). The Plan includes
                                                      provisions for water rationing during drought periods, as well as
                                                      aggressive measures for conservation and wastewater recycling. The
                                                      UWMP also addresses system maintenance and replacement, including
                                                      projects to protect the reliability of the water supply in the event of an
9-22

                                                                             S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                    C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
earthquake or fire. Among its upcoming seismic improvement projects is
strengthening of the Lake Chabot Dam just east of San Leandro.
The City of San Leandro and EBMUD are jointly implementing a number
of programs to conserve water and use water more efficiently. These
programs are addressed in the Open Space, Parks, and Conservation
chapter of the General Plan.
Wastewater
San Leandro is served by two different sanitary sewer systems. About
two-thirds of the City, including most of northern and central San
Leandro, is served by a City-owned and operated system. The remainder
of the City, including Washington Manor and most of southeastern San
Leandro, is served by the Oro Loma Sanitary District. The Oro Loma
District also includes a large portion of unincorporated Alameda County
encompassing Ashland, Cherryland, and San Lorenzo. Most of San
Leandro’s commercial and industrial land uses are served by the City of
San Leandro system.
                                                                                                                         9-23

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      City of San Leandro System
                                                      The City of San Leandro constructed its initial wastewater treatment
                                                      plant—referred to as the Water Pollution Control Plant (WPCP)—at the
                                                      west en d of Davis Street in 1939. The plant has been upgraded
                                                      substantially over the last 75 years in response to changes in demand
                                                      and more stringent state and federal water quality standards.
                                                      Wastewater is delivered to the plant via a collection system comprised of
                                                      13 sewage lift stations and 130 miles of sanitary sewers ranging in
                                                      diameter from 4 to 33 inches.
                                                      The WPCP treats about 5 million gallons per day, with peak flows up to
                                                      23 million gallons per day during wet weather flow. The facility
                                                      provides secondary treatment through physical, biological, and chemical
                                                      processes. This includes grinding, grit removal, sedimentation, filtering,
                                                      activated sludge, secondary clarification, and disinfection by sodium
                                                      hypochlorite. Most of the treated effluent is transported to a large
                                                      pipeline shared by multiple treatment plants in Alameda County and is
                                                      then discharged approximately seven miles offshore. Sludge from the
                                                      plant is treated and dried, and then disposed at an authorized site. Some
                                                      of the effluent is directed to a recycled water system and is used to
                                                      irrigate local golf courses.
9-24

                                                                                  S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                         C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
Facilities and equipment at the WPCP are regularly upgraded to
improve efficiency, increase services, and comply with state and federal
regulations. A major rehabilitation of the plant was initiated in 2011.
Replacement of many components has taken place to meet health and
environmental goals, avoid future costly emergency repairs, improve
operations, and add redundancy to improve safety and reliability. The
City has also worked to improve the sewage collection system, replacing
aging pipes in order to reduce infiltration and inflow into the system and
avoid water pollution caused by leaking pipes.
Oro Loma Sanitary District
The Oro Loma Sanitary District was formed in 1911 and today provides
wastewater collection and treatment services for a 13 square mile service
area. Approximately 20 percent of the District’s customers are located
within the City of San Leandro. The wastewater treatment plant is
jointly owned by the Oro Loma and Castro Valley Sanitary Districts. It
has an average dry weather flow of 12.2 million gallons per day, with a
design flow of 20 million gallons per day. Wet weather flows may
occasionally exceed design capacity due to infiltration and inflow along
the collection system. The collection system consists of 273 miles of
sanitary sewer lines, 6,015 manholes, 14 pump stations, and other
components. The District’s treatment plant is located at the end of Grant
Avenue in San Lorenzo, just south of the San Leandro City limits.
As at the San Leandro plant, wastewater is treated to a secondary level
through an activated sludge process. Most of the treated effluent is
disposed to the deep waters of San Francisc o Bay through the
collectively owned East Bay Dischargers Authority pipeline. A portion of
the treated effluent is used for irrigation on the Skywest Golf Course in
Hayward. The District prepares a two-year Operating and Capital
Budget which covers ongoing repair and replacement of system
components. Revenues for this program are generated through sewer
connection fees and user fees.
Please consult the Open Space, Parks, and Conservation Element for additional
discussion of recycled water.
Storm Drainage
The City of San Leandro Department of Public Works owns and
maintains 175 miles of storm drainage conduits. The City’s storm drain
system feeds into a larger system owned and operated by the Alameda
                                                                                                                              9-25

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      County Flood Control and Water Conservation District (ACFCWCD).
                                                      This system includes the lower reaches of San Leandro and San Lorenzo
                                                      Creeks, as well as a number of channels extending into San Leandro
                                                      neighborhoods west of I-880. The District’s drainage facilities include
                                                      levees, pump stations, erosion control devices, and culverts.
                                                      The drainage improvements undertaken by the ACFCWCD were
                                                      designed to reduce the threat of overbank flooding from streams in San
                                                      Leandro. The County maintains these facilities to prevent unplanned and
                                                      unauthorized obstructions of the channels. Their activities include fence
                                                      repair, vegetation removal, preventive maintenance of pump stations,
                                                                              silt removal from channels, inspection of pipes,
                                                                              spill prevention and clean-up, and investigation
                                                                              of inquiries and clean water concerns.
                                                                              City of San Leandro storm drains are maintained
                                                                              by the Department of Public Works. Catch basins
                                                                              and conduits are cleaned annually. Debris is
                                                                              removed from the tops of storm drain inlets and
                                                                              the insides of the basins are cleaned. Prior to
                                                                              winter rains, City crews inspect problem areas
                                                                              and clear debris to minimize storm drain
                                                                              blockages.
                                                                              Major development proposals are reviewed to
                                                                              assess drainage impacts and determine
                                                                              mitigation measures. As appropriate, the City
                                                                              requires stormwater detention ponds or
                                                                              improvements to the City storm drain system.
                                                                              Additional measures help ensure that runoff
                                                                              from development sites does not degrade local
                                                                              creeks. These measures are related to the
                                                                              Alameda County Clean Water Program and are
                                                                              discussed in the Environmental Hazards
                                                                              Element of the General Plan.
9-26

                                                                                 S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                        C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
G.       GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS
P OLICE AND F IRE
GOAL CSF-1 Provide and maintain high-quality police, fire, and
                  emergency medical services.
Policy CSF-1.1  Levels of Service. Maintain high-quality police and fire
               protection services through the most efficient and
               effective possible means. The following minimum level
               of service standards for police and fire response time
               (exclusive of dispatch time) shall be maintained: (a)
               Police Services: 5 minute response time for 90 percent of
               all Priority One calls; (b) Fire Services: 5 minute response
               time for first due company for 90 percent of all
               emergency incidents, excluding freeway responses (3
               firefighters including at least one paramedic); 10 minute
               response time for 90 percent for a full first alarm
               assignment response (17 firefighters).
               Action CSF-1.1.A: Fire Station Renovations
               Pursue the comprehensive renovation or upgrading of Fire
               Stations 9, 12, and 13 to respond to modern technology,
               energy efficiency, new equipment, administrative space, and
               gender-neutral facility needs, and to ensure the functionality
               of the facility following a natural disaster. Periodically
               evaluate the need to replace, renovate, or expand other fire
               protection facilities.
               Action CSF-1.1.B: Water Service Improvements
               Work with EBMUD to improve water service to those areas of
               the City which currently do not meet standard fire flow
               requirements. The City will evaluate the need for replacing
               aging water mains and other improvements that increase the
               volume and pressure of water that can be provided.
                                                                                                                             9-27
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                                     Action CSF-1.1.C: Weed Abatement Programs
                                                                     Continue to implement weed abatement and vegetation
                                                                     management programs which reduce the risk of fire, including
                                                                     clearance of overgrowth along the railroads, San Leandro
                                                                     Creek, and in Very High Fire Hazard severity zones
                                                                     designated by the State of California.
                                                      Policy CSF-1.2 Community Policing. Support a community-based
                                                                     approach to police and fire services. This approach
                                                                     should emphasize a high level of communication and
                                                                     interaction       between      officers,  local    residents,
                                                                     neighborhood groups, schools, and businesses.
                                                                     Action CSF-1.2.A: Bicycle Patrol Officers
                                                                     Continue to maintain a strong visible presence of bicycle
                                                                     patrol officers, particularly in the Downtown area. Ongoing
                                                                     funding for at least two bicycle patrol officers, plus Police
                                                                     Service Technicians, should be provided, with an emphasis on
                                                                     the Downtown Community Benefit District area.
                                                                     Action CSF-1.2.B: Community Safety Programs
                                                                     Implement community-oriented programs such as National
                                                                     Night Out, surveillance camera registration, the multi-family
                                                                     apartment safety program, the Safety Summit, the Citizen
                                                                     Police Academy, the Chief's Advisory Board, and social media
                                                                     apps to support a safer community.
                                                      Policy CSF-1.3 Positive Public Image. Promote a positive image of the
                                                                     local Police and Fire Departments through public
                                                                     information and outreach, effective media relations, and
                                                                     active participation of the Police and Fire departments in
                                                                     community events.
                                                                     Action CSF-1.3.A: Public Information Program
                                                                     Implement public information, education, and outreach
                                                                     programs to improve community safety and provide data on
                                                                     crime, including the Police Department's United for Safety
                                                                     Program.
9-28
                                                                                    S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                           C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
Policy CSF-1.4  Safe Environment for Youth. Support the proactive
                involvement of the Police Department in creating a safe
                and healthy environment for youth in San Leandro.
                Partnerships between the Police Department, School
                Districts, and private schools should be maintained
                through such programs as the Teen Police Academy, the
                Ashland REACH Center, and the assignment of student
                school resource officers to the local high and middle
                Schools. Active participation by students and their
                parents in these programs will be strongly encouraged.
                Action CSF-1.4.A: Youth Safety Programs
                Utilize grants for the implementation of such programs as Cal
                Grip (Gang Reduction Intervention and Prevention), GREAT
                (Gang Resistance Education and Training), Recess with the
                Cops, COPS grant for School Resource Officers, and efforts to
                reduce underage drinking. In the event that grants expire, seek
                funding through additional grant programs or other sources to
                carry out comparable future programs.
Policy CSF-1.5  Review of Development Plans. Require Police and Fire
                Department review of proposed development plans to
                ensure that sufficient provisions for emergency access
                and response are made, fire code requirements are
                satisfied, and adequate levels of service can be provided.
 Policy CSF-1.6 Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design.
                Incorporate Crime Prevention Through Environmental
                Design (CPTED) principles in the design of new
                development and City facilities. This includes the use of
                lighting, landscaping, site planning, and design features
                to reduce the potential for crime.
Policy CSF-1.7  Mutual Aid. Maintain mutual aid agreements for police
                and fire service with other jurisdictions to ensure that
                the capacity exists to adequately respond to local
                emergencies.
Policy CSF-1.8  Staffing Diversity. Strive to maintain Police and Fire
                Department staffing which ensures high quality service
                while reflecting the gender and ethnic diversity of the
                community.
                                                                                                                                9-29
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      Policy CSF-1.9  Paramedic Services. Continue to maintain a high level
                                                                      of emergency medical services within the local Fire
                                                                      Department.
                                                      Policy CSF-1.10 Neighborhood Watch. Promote a neighborhood-based
                                                                      approach to crime prevention and emergency
                                                                      preparedness, including the formation of neighborhood
                                                                      watch groups and neighborhood emergency response
                                                                      teams.
                                                                      Action CSF-1.10.A: Neighborhood Watch Promotional
                                                                      Campaign
                                                                      Encourage residents and businesses to become involved in
                                                                      neighborhood/ and business watch programs.
                                                                      See the Environmental Hazards Element for policies on
                                                                      vegetation management, defensible space, and wildfire hazard
                                                                      reduction.
                                                      S CHOOLS
                                                      GOAL CSF-2 Encourage and support high-quality educational
                                                                         facilities and services in San Leandro.
                                                      Policy CSF-2.1  Partnerships. Promote coordination and partnerships
                                                                      between the City, the School Districts, and the business
                                                                      community which emphasize the importance of
                                                                      education to the social and economic vitality of the City.
                                                                      Action CSF-2.1.A: Future Bond Measures
                                                                      Support School District bond initiatives to expand school
                                                                      capacity, modernize and renovate facilities, and provide
                                                                      additional facilities, including facilities with the potential to be
                                                                      jointly used by the City and School District.
                                                      Policy CSF-2.2  Mitigation of Development Impacts
                                                                      When new residential development is approved, require
                                                                      mitigation of school impacts to the full extent permitted
                                                                      by law. Work collaboratively with the San Leandro and
                                                                      San Lorenzo Unified School Districts to ensure that
                                                                      appropriate fees are collected and other allowable
                                                                      mitigation measures are taken.
9-30
                                                                                     S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                            C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                Action CSF-2.2.A: New Revenue Sources
                Support School District and State of California initiatives
                aimed at generating additional revenue to meet public school
                demand and construction needs.
                Action CSF-2.2.B: New Facility Planning
                Support efforts by both School Districts to develop new
                facilities and/or expand existing facilities in response to
                increases in enrollment. Provide the necessary assistance in
                project planning and permitting for future projects,
                particularly if a new school site is proposed. The City and the
                School Districts will work together to conduct joint planning
                activities to meet anticipated needs.
                See Goal LU-4 (Land Use Element) for additional policies on
                the mitigation of development impacts.
 Policy CSF-2.3 School Traffic and Parking Issues. Encourage joint
                efforts between the City, parent organizations, and the
                School Districts to address circulation, traffic, and
                parking issues in the vicinity of school campuses, and to
                ensure the safety of students traveling to and from
                school.
                Action CSF-2.3.A: Safe Routes to School
                Work with the School Districts to develop and implement Safe
                Routes to School programs around local school campuses.
                Action CSF-2.3.B: AC Transit Coordination
                Work with AC Transit to promote transit service
                improvements between residential areas and local high and
                middle schools, and to provide suitable transit facilities such
                as bus shelters near school campuses.
Policy CSF-2.4  Technology Advances.                Support the on-going
                application and use of new information technology by
                both School Districts. To the extent feasible, assist the
                Districts in obtaining the infrastructure needed to
                support such technology.
                Action CSF-2.4.A: Lit San Leandro
                Continue efforts to extend the Lit San Leandro fiber optics
                loop to school campuses throughout San Leandro.
                                                                                                                                 9-31
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      Policy CSF-2.5 Private Schools. Encourage the involvement of private
                                                                     schools and other learning institutions in City
                                                                     discussions relating to education and school facilities.
                                                      Policy CSF-2.6 City-School Coordination. Promote coordination
                                                                     between City-sponsored recreational, educational, pre-
                                                                     school, and after-school programs and similar programs
                                                                     sponsored by the School Districts.
                                                                     Action CSF-2.6.A: Shared Maintenance Facilities
                                                                     Explore the potential for the City and the San Leandro Unified
                                                                     School District to share maintenance facilities as a way to free
                                                                     up land for additional school or recreational facilities.
                                                      Policy CSF-2.7 Academic Standards. Encourage both School Districts
                                                                     to implement programs which ensure that students meet
                                                                     and exceed state and national academic achievement
                                                                     standards.
                                                                     See the Economic Development Element for additional
                                                                     programs on linking schools to the local economy, and
                                                                     providing career pathways for local students
                                                      L IBRARY S ERVICES
                                                      GOAL CSF-3 Sustain and expand a public library system that
                                                                        provides a destination for exploration and discovery,
                                                                        knowledge and information, leisure and cultural
                                                                        enrichment, and life-long learning opportunities for
                                                                        persons of all ages.
                                                      Policy CSF-3.1 Library Expansion and Upgrades.                   Support the
                                                                     expansion and upgrading of public library facilities and
                                                                     services to keep pace with changes in information
                                                                     technology and community needs.
                                                                     Action CSF-3.1.A: Library Modernization
                                                                     Continue to pursue the modernization of San Leandro's
                                                                     libraries to incorporate emerging technology and best practices
                                                                     in library design.
9-32
                                                                                   S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
               Action CSF-3.1.B: Library Master Plan
               Consider the development of a Citywide Library System
               Master Plan.
               Action CSF-3.1.C: Equipment Acquisition
               On an ongoing basis, secure funding for technology
               improvements, hardware, building furnishings, and other
               upgrades to ensure that the City’s libraries remain cutting edge
               and responsive to public needs.
Policy CSF-3.2 Library Innovation. Consider innovative approaches to
               generating funds or space for new or upgraded library
               facilities, including public-private partnerships, co-
               location with other public facilities, and joint
               development.,
               Action CSF-3.2.A: Mulford and South Branch Replacement
               Continue to explore options for replacing or modernizing the
               Mulford Branch and South Branch libraries. Opportunities to
               incorporate modern new branch library facilities as part of
               future mixed use development at the Shoreline and in the Bay
               Fair area should be encouraged and supported.
Policy CSF-3.3 Adequate Funding.            Ensure that library funding
               remains adequate to sustain or increase existing service
               levels, including staffing, programming, and technology
               upgrades.       Maintain or exceed American Library
               Association standards throughout the City’s library
               system.
               Action CSF-3.3.A: Use of New Technology
               Invest in new technology such as Radio Frequency
               Identification (RFID) and automated return sorters to
               improve service for patrons and encourage library use.
               Action CSF-3.3.B: Library Kiosks
               Explore electronic library kiosks with downloadable ("e-book")
               materials in high-volume pedestrian areas such as the BART
               stations, Downtown, and Bay Fair Center, and in areas
               without easy access to the Main Library or branch libraries.
                                                                                                                               9-33

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      Policy CSF-3.4 Libraries as Neighborhood Centers. Promote programs
                                                                     and events that affirm the role of the City’s libraries as
                                                                     community and neighborhood gathering places and that
                                                                     reflect the City’s diverse population.
                                                      Policy CSF-3.5 Resources for Self-Improvement. Ensure that San
                                                                     Leandro’s libraries and other community institutions
                                                                     provide a setting for the open exchange of ideas and
                                                                     information and provide an opportunity for residents of
                                                                     all backgrounds to improve their skills and knowledge.
                                                      I NFORMATION T ECHNOLOGY
                                                      GOAL CSF-4 Maximize access to information and communication
                                                                        services for San Leandro residents and businesses.
                                                      Policy CSF-4.1 Telecommunications. Collaborate with telecommunica-
                                                                     tion service providers, the business community, and
                                                                     investors to foster access to emerging information and
                                                                     communication technology.
                                                      Policy CSF-4.2 Information Technology. Encourage the use of the
                                                                     Internet, cable TV, and other forms of information and
                                                                     communication technology as a way to widely disburse
                                                                     information about City and community services, events,
                                                                     and resources.
                                                                     Action CSF-4.2.A: Web-Based Resources
                                                                     Maintain and expand the City of San Leandro's website and
                                                                     web-based communication platforms, including social media,
                                                                     streaming video, and two-way information channels.
                                                                     Technology should be used to provide outreach and education,
                                                                     and to engage the community in meaningful dialogue about
                                                                     key issues.
                                                      Policy CSF-4.3 Computer Training and Digital Literacy. Support
                                                                     continuing education and computer training programs
                                                                     to increase computer literacy and skill levels among San
                                                                     Leandro residents.
9-34

                                                                                   S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
Policy CSF-4.4   Fiber Optic Expansion. Continue investment and
                expansion of the Lit San Leandro high-speed fiber optic
                network, and leverage this investment to create jobs,
                generate economic development and improve the
                quality of life for residents.
Policy CSF-4.5  Language and Media Diversity. Ensure access to
                information among those persons without easy access to
                electronic media, and those persons whose primary
                language is not English. Information on City facilities
                and activities, including sports, events, resources, and
                programs, should be provided in a variety of mediums
                and languages.
Policy CSF-4.6: Neighborhood-Based Communication. Support and
                encourage       the    development      of    neighborhood
                newsletters, websites, social media, and other forms of
                electronic and print media to inform residents of current
                issues and facilitate resident feedback to City officials
                and staff.
                Action CSF-4.6.A: Outreach Materials
                Prepare and update printed and web-based materials that
                summarize City processes and procedures on a wide variety of
                topics, such as planning and building requirements, tree care,
                and emergency preparedness.
R ECREATION AND H UMAN S ERVICES
GOAL CSF-5 Provide recreation and human service programs and
                  activities commensurate with identified community
                  needs.
Policy CSF-5.1  Equitable and Affordable Access.               Work with
                appropriate agencies to provide equal and affordable
                access to recreation and human services. Programs
                should be flexible and responsive to the community’s
                changing needs.
                                                                                                                               9-35

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                                       Action CSF-5.1.A: Community-Based Needs Assessment
                                                                       Engage the community in the assessment of recreation and
                                                                       human service program needs for programs that are funded by
                                                                       all sources, including the City, County, State, and federal
                                                                       governments, and donations from charitable organizations.
                                                                       Action CSF-5.1.B.: Human Services Initiative
                                                                       Continue to fund San Leandro Human Services programs and
                                                                       implement the recommendations of future human services gap
                                                                       assessments.
                                                        Policy CSF-5.2 Child and Family Services. Support the development
                                                                       of child and family services and programs that
                                                                       encourage safe and healthy environments for children
                                                                       and families.
                                                                       Action CSF-5.2.A: Child Care Incentives
                                                                       Explore incentives to provide on-site child care in major
                                                                       employment centers.
                                                                       Action CSF-5.2.B: Coordination with Service Providers
                                                                       Work with social service agencies, non-profits, the School
                                                                       Districts, and businesses to pursue creative and effective
                                                                       solutions to address child care needs in the community.
                                                      Policy CSF-5.3    Youth and Teen Services. Support the development of
                                                                       services and programs that foster youth development
                                                                       and self-sufficiency, such as the Barbara Lee Wellness
                                                                       Center, REACH, and non-profits that serve San
                                                                       Leandrans.
                                                                       Action CSF-5.3.A: Youth Advisory Commission
                                                                       Create opportunities for youth participation in local
                                                                       government affairs, including a Youth Advisory Commission.
                                                                       Aspire to achieve a membership balance on City-sponsored
                                                                       youth organizations which mirrors the diverse social,
                                                                       economic, and cultural backgrounds of San Leandro’s youth.
                                                      Policy CSF-5.4   Inclusive Approach. Promote an inclusive approach to
                                                                       youth services, soliciting participation by individuals as
                                                                       well as the diverse range of organizations serving youth
                                                                       and young adults in the community.
9-36

                                                                                   S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
Policy CSF-5.5 Youth-Oriented Business/ Facilities.              Encourage
               additional local businesses, services, public facilities, and
               entertainment places that are focused on San Leandro
               youth and consistent with the objective of providing a
               safe, positive environment for youth.
Policy CSF-5.6 Coordination with Schools. Coordinate with the School
               Districts to provide and assist with meeting the
               recreational and human service needs of young people.
Policy CSF-5.7 Meeting Diverse Youth Needs. Ensure that community
               recreation and human services programs respond to the
               diverse range of youth interests and are culturally
               competent.
               Action CSF-5.7.A: Awareness of Programs
               Increase awareness of youth programs and activities among
               San Leandro youth. Provide outreach to youth through public
               and private schools.
               See the Economic Development Element for policies and
               actions on technical education programs, career pathways,
               internships, mentorship programs, and partnerships with the
               business community, School Districts, and community
               colleges which create diverse career opportunities for San
               Leandro youth.
Policy CSF-5.8 Services for Older Adults. Support the expansion of
               older adult services and programs to improve access to
               critical resources and maintain quality-of-life standards.
               Access to senior services should be improved through
               planning, advocacy, and the use of City and other
               resources to address identified needs.
               Action CSF-5.8.A: Senior Facilities
               On an ongoing basis, evaluate the need for additional facilities
               serving seniors, and pursue opportunities to develop such
               facilities as they arise.
               Action CSF-5.8.B: Older Adult Activities and Programs
               Continue to ensure that programming meets the needs of the
               growing number of older adults in the city.
                                                                                                                               9-37
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                                      Action CSF-5.8.C: Public Information
                                                                      Develop resource guides, outreach materials, and web-based
                                                                      information on senior services.
                                                      Policy CSF-5.9  Multi-Generational Activities.                Promote multi-
                                                                      generational activities to ensure that seniors remain an
                                                                      integral part of community life.
                                                      Policy CSF-5.10 Non-Profit Entities Serving Older Adults. Support and
                                                                      promote the efforts of non-profit groups and
                                                                      foundations to advocate on behalf of the City’s senior
                                                                      population and improve services for seniors in the
                                                                      community. Special emphasis should be placed on
                                                                      closing the gaps that currently exist in senior services,
                                                                      including      legal     assistance,      case   management,
                                                                      employment, homebound services, and housing.
                                                      Policy CSF-5.11 Special Needs Services and Facilities. Support special
                                                                      needs services that foster independence for older adults,
                                                                      people with disabilities and those facing physical or
                                                                      mental health challenges.
                                                                      Action CSF-5.11.A: Adult Care Facilities
                                                                      Support the development of additional high-quality, affordable
                                                                      assisted living, nursing, adult day care, and other health care
                                                                      and special needs facilities in the city.
                                                      Policy CSF-5.12 Outreach. Continue broad‐based public outreach
                                                                      activities that inform residents of all available recreation
                                                                      and human service programs.
                                                                      Action CSF-5.12.A: Recreation and Human Services
                                                                      Outreach
                                                                      Develop and implement a comprehensive outreach plan to
                                                                      identify and inform targeted groups about all available
                                                                      recreation and human service programs in San Leandro.
                                                                      Action CSF-5.12.B: Program Organization and Funding
                                                                      Continue organizing and funding City‐sponsored recreation
                                                                      and human enrichment programs with particular attention
                                                                      being paid to the needs of youth and seniors.
9-38

                                                                                    S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                           C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                Action CSF-5.12.C: Faith Community Outreach
                Work with local non-profits and the faith community to
                maximize outreach to individuals or groups who may be
                unaware of City programs and services.
                Action CSF-5.12.D: Demographic Reports
                Collect and evaluate information regarding the demographic
                composition of San Leandro’s residents, including data from
                the U.S. Census, to improve the effectiveness of City programs
                and outreach efforts. The City should set a target of assessing
                this information at least once every five to ten years and
                should use the findings to make program changes and grant
                applications as needed.
Policy CSF-5.13 Multi-Lingual Information and Cultural Competency.
                Encourage public agencies to provide services, classes,
                outreach materials and information to San Leandro
                residents in multiple formats and languages. Cultural
                competency is equally important as language access.
Policy CSF-5.14 Volunteers.        Support and encourage the active
                involvement of local residents as volunteers in the
                delivery of community services.
                Action CSF-5.14.A: Volunteer Service Programs
                Continue to implement volunteer services programs through
                the Recreation and Human Services Department and other
                City departments.
I NFRASTRUCTURE
GOAL CSF-6 Ensure that local water, sewer, storm drainage, solid
                  waste, energy, and telecommunication facilities are
                  well maintained; improvements meet existing and
                  future needs; and land use decisions are contingent
                  on the adequacy and maintenance of such facilities.
Policy CSF-6.1  Development Impacts. Permit new development only
                when infrastructure and utilities can be provided to that
                development without diminishing the quality of service
                provided to the rest of the City.
                                                                                                                                9-39

S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
                                                      Policy CSF-6.2 Fair Share Costs. Require future development to pay its
                                                                     fair share of the cost of improving the water, sewer,
                                                                     storm drainage, and other infrastructure systems needed
                                                                     to serve that development. Development impact fees,
                                                                     development agreements, and other appropriate forms
                                                                     of mitigation should be used to cover the costs of
                                                                     upgrading or expanding public infrastructure.
                                                                     Action CSF-6.2.A: Infrastructure Impact Fee and Rate
                                                                     Updates
                                                                     Regularly update fees and rates for sewer, solid waste, and
                                                                     other public services to ensure that revenues are sufficient to
                                                                     cover operating and maintenance costs.
                                                      Policy CSF-6.3 Coordination. Coordinate local infrastructure planning
                                                                     with EBMUD, the Oro Loma Sanitary District, Alameda
                                                                     County, and other service providers to ensure that
                                                                     infrastructure remains adequate to serve existing and
                                                                     planned development.
                                                      Policy CSF-6.4 Wastewater Collection and Treatment.                Maintain
                                                                     efficient, environmentally sound, and cost-effective
                                                                     wastewater collection and treatment services in San
                                                                     Leandro.
                                                                     Action     CSF-6.4.A:    Infiltration/     Inflow     Capital
                                                                     Improvements
                                                                     Continue improvements to the City’s wastewater collection
                                                                     system to correct infiltration and inflow problems and expand
                                                                     the reclaimed water delivery system. Ensure that high
                                                                     operating efficiency is retained in both the wastewater
                                                                     collection and treatment systems.
                                                      Policy CSF-6.5 Capacity. Maintain adequate capacity at the San
                                                                     Leandro wastewater treatment plant to accommodate
                                                                     projected levels of growth within the service area and
                                                                     encourage the Oro Loma Sanitary District to do the
                                                                     same. Support efforts to maintain and/or improve the
                                                                     high quality of treated effluent at both plants and
                                                                     increase the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of using
                                                                     recycled wastewater for non-potable purposes.
9-40

                                                                                   S A N L E A N D R O      G E N E R A L P L A N
                                                                          C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
Policy CSF-6.6 Reclaimed Water System. Continue the expansion of
               the reclaimed water system, and the delivery of high-
               quality reclaimed water for landscaping, industrial use,
               and other non-potable applications as they become
               financially feasible. Employ advanced technology so
               that reclaimed water can eventually be made available to
               all households.
               See the Open Space, Parks, and Conservation Element for
               additional policies on water conservation and reclaimed water
               use.
Policy CSF-6.7 Storm Drainage. Require storm drainage improvements
               for new development which ensure that stormwater
               runoff is adequately handled both on-site and off-site.
               Such regulations should fully implement state and
               federal clean water requirements. The City will also
               support legislation to increase funding for local storm
               drainage improvements, including improvements aimed
               at water quality.
               See the Environmental Hazards Element for additional
               policies on water quality.
Policy CSF-6.8 Maintenance. Ensure that sufficient funding is provided
               for the ongoing maintenance of City-owned facilities,
               including streets, street lights, traffic signals,
               landscaping, street trees, storm drains, public buildings
               and other infrastructure.
               Action CSF-6.8.A: Financing and Assessment Districts
               Explore the use of special assessment districts, community
               benefit districts, enhanced infrastructure financing districts,
               and other financing tools to create reliable funding streams for
               the development, maintenance and operation of infrastructure
               in high growth areas of the city.
                                                                                                                               9-41
S A N L E A N D R O G E N E R A L P L A N
C O M M U N I T Y S E R V I C E S A N D F A C I L I T I E S
9-42
